
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: OA/08023/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Determination Promulgated |
|On 25 July 2014                        |On 7 August 2014          |
|Prepared on 26 July 2014               |                          |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    B. M.
                            (ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER NAIROBI

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Eluwa, Solicitor, Phil Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant is a citizen of Uganda (born 2.2.95)  who  applied
           on 3 September 2012 at the age of  seventeen  and  a  half,  for
           entry clearance for settlement as the son of  the  sponsor,  his
           mother, who had been granted LLR in the UK as  a  refugee  on  3
           August 2011. Her  claim  to  asylum  had  been  based  upon  her
           homosexuality, and the risk of persecutory  harm  she  faced  in
           Uganda as a result.
        2. By decision made on 17 January 2013 the Respondent refused  that
           application by reference to  paragraph  and  352D  (iv)  of  the
           Immigration Rules. He was not satisfied that the sponsor and the
           Appellant were members of the same family unit at the  date  the
           sponsor had left Uganda in order to seek asylum.
        3. The Appellants lodged an appeal with  the  First  Tier  Tribunal
           against that decision, and as a  result  the  decision  was  the
           subject of review by the ECM on 8 August 2013.  The  ECM  upheld
           the decision, noting  that  it  was  not  in  dispute  that  the
           Appellant had lived with his aunt since birth and had  continued
           to do so until the date the sponsor left Uganda.
        4. The  appeal  was  heard  and  dismissed  by  Judge  Black  in  a
           Determination promulgated on 17 April 2014. He had  the  benefit
           of hearing evidence from the sponsor. He noted that it  was  not
           in dispute before him that "the  Appellant  was  taken  forcibly
           from the sponsor by her husband  shortly  after  the  child  was
           born. Her husband took the baby to her father who placed him  in
           the charge of the sponsor's sister. The Appellant says he  lived
           with his aunt until her death in April 2012  when  he  moved  to
           live with a friend of  his  aunt.  The  sponsor  tells  me  that
           throughout the period the Appellant with her sister,  his  aunt,
           the Appellant and sponsor kept in contact and  the  sponsor  was
           able to visit her son in secret. She says  that  they  formed  a
           family unit albeit they did not live permanently together." [13]


        5. The  Judge  went  on  to  find  that  there  were  a  number  of
           inconsistencies in the sponsor's evidence, and  concluded  that;
           (i) her account of contact with the  Appellant  until  she  left
           Uganda in 2011 was not credible, (ii) that a letter said to have
           been written by the sponsor on 2/12/12 was a fabrication created
           to bolster the  Appellant's  application  for  entry  clearance,
           (iii) that the sponsor did not have sole parental responsibility
           for the Appellant as claimed. The Judge did however accept  that
           she "had a degree of contact with the Appellant over  the  years
           before her flight, but I do not accept the Appellant was part of
           the sponsor's family unit at the time she left Uganda  in  order
           to seek asylum in the UK." [22]
        6. The Appellant applied to the First Tier Tribunal for  permission
           to appeal, and permission was granted by Designated Judge Zucker
           on 7 May 2014. Although four grounds were advanced, the  reality
           of the complaint was that the relevant provision  needed  to  be
           read purposively, and that a child taken forcibly from a  parent
           as part of persecutory conduct of the parent would  not  thereby
           automatically cease to be a member of the "family unit"  of  the
           parent.
        7. The Respondent filed  a  Rule  24  Notice  dated  12  June  2014
           complaining that the necessary documents had not  been  provided
           to her by the Tribunal, and that she  was  therefore  unable  to
           comment substantively upon the criticisms of  the  Determination
           made by the Appellant.
        8. Neither party  made  a  Rule  15(2A)  application  to  introduce
           further evidence. I note that there has been no application  for
           any witness to give evidence either to the First Tier  Tribunal,
           or to this Tribunal,  from  abroad  by  electronic  means;  Nare
           (evidence by electronic means) Zimbabwe [2011] UKUT 443, ML (use
           of skype technology) [2013] EWHC 2091 (Fam).
        9. Thus the matter comes before me.
       10. I accept as Ouseley J did in CJ (on  the  application  of  R)  v
           Cardiff County Council [2011] EWHC 23,  the  importance  of  the
           approach in Tanveer Ahmed v SSHD [2002] Imm AR 318.  Documentary
           evidence along with its provenance needs to be  weighed  in  the
           light of all the evidence in the case. Documentary evidence does
           not carry with it a presumption of authenticity, which  specific
           evidence must  disprove,  failing  which  its  content  must  be
           accepted. What is required is its appraisal in the light of  the
           evidence about its nature,  provenance,  timing  and  background
           evidence and in the light of all the other evidence in the case,
           especially that given by the claimant. The same can properly  be
           said for a witness' oral evidence.


      Error of Law?
       11. The grounds do not challenge the Judge's finding that the letter
           dated 2/12/12 was  a  fabrication,  nor  the  rejection  of  the
           sponsor's claim that she had sole  parental  responsibility  for
           the Appellant, nor indeed the general rejection of the sponsor's
           evidence as unreliable. Those findings must therefore stand.
       12. The grounds argue that nonetheless the Judge did accept that the
           sponsor and the  Appellant  were  separated  in  the  course  of
           persecutory  conduct  by  family  members  consequent  upon  the
           discovery of the sponsor's sexuality.  Moreover  the  Judge  did
           accept that the sponsor maintained a degree of contact with  the
           Appellant thereafter - even if she had not told the truth  about
           its  true  extent,  or  the  circumstances  in  which  that  was
           maintained. Accordingly it is argued that the Appellant  was  on
           any view a member of the sponsor's family unit upon  his  birth,
           that he did not automatically cease to be a member of  it  as  a
           result of their forced separation in the course  of  persecutory
           conduct by others, and that the sponsor by maintaining a  degree
           of contact with him thereafter  had  demonstrated  an  intention
           that he should remain a member of her family  unit  even  though
           their circumstances forced them to live apart.
       13. It would not appear that either party referred the Judge to  any
           policy guidance, or jurisprudence, issued by the  Respondent  in
           relation to the proper scope, or application, of paragraph  352D
           of the Immigration Rules. Whether they did, or not, it is  plain
           that the Determination does  not  make  any  reference  to  such
           guidance or jurisprudence; which the parties  accept  before  me
           must constitute an error of law. Although the issue at the heart
           of the appeal is one of fact, it is an issue of secondary  fact,
           which can only be properly determined  once  the  primary  facts
           have been established and  the  correct  principles  applied  to
           them. Although the challenge before me does not  extend  to  the
           primary facts as found by the Judge,  I  am  satisfied,  and  Mr
           Deller agrees, that the Judge did fall into a material error  of
           law in his approach to the issue of secondary fact. I  therefore
           set aside his decision, and remake it, there is no need to  hear
           further evidence in order to do so.


      The decision remade
       14. Although the former API on Family Reunion  has  been  withdrawn,
           there is no evidence before me to suggest that  the  Ministerial
           statement  of  17.3.95  has  been  withdrawn;  Other   dependent
           relatives may be admitted if there are compelling  compassionate
           circumstances. On the face of the  evidence  this  would  appear
           however to add nothing to  the  Appellant's  case,  because  the
           sponsor did not claim (and the Judge  did  not  find)  that  the
           Appellant was dependent upon her after their enforced separation
           in his infancy.
       15. I note that the Court of Appeal in MS (Somalia) [2010] EWCA  Civ
           1236, summarised the policy behind the provisions  made  in  the
           Immigration Rules for the reunion of the  families  of  refugees
           as;
           The policy is to allow the refugee to bring in  family  members,
           for sound humanitarian reasons. There may be  further  ancillary
           reasons to do with the State's own convenience; but  essentially
           this is a humanitarian policy arising from the circumstances  in
           which a Convention refugee finds himself.
       16. I note the definition of "family members"  to  be  found  within
           Article 2 of the Council Directive 2004/83;
           Article 2(h);    "family members" means, insofar as  the  family
           already existed in the country of origin, the following  members
           of the family of the beneficiary of the refugee;
           .......
           the minor children .........or of the  beneficiary  of  refugee.
           .....status, on condition that they are unmarried and  dependent
           and regardless of whether they were born in or out of wedlock or
           adopted as defined under the national law
              and  Article  9(2)  of  the  Family  Reunification  Directive
           2003/86 which (although it does not apply to the United Kingdom)
           seeks to limit the right to family reunification to,
           "refugees whose family relationships predate their entry".
       17. In BM and AL  (352D(iv);  meaning  of  "family  unit")  Colombia
           [2007] UKAIT  55,  reference  was  made  to  the  current  UNHCR
           handbook [23-28]. The Court of Appeal also referred to the terms
           of the UNHCR handbook in MS (Somalia). They considered the scope
           and application of paragraphs 352A and 352D of  the  Immigration
           Rules when the issue before them was whether  a  member  of  the
           "family unit" of a refugee, could in turn bring into the  United
           Kingdom members of his own "family unit".
       18. I note the guidance to be found in BM (Colombia) as to the  true
           nature of the test inherent in the phrase "a family unit"  where
           it is used in paragraph 352D(iv), and the commentary to be found
           in McDonald 8th Ed #12.196-7. In BM the test was said  to  be  a
           question of fact;
          1. We accept that if the phrase "family unit" were to  be  limited
             to children who were living in the same household as an  asylum
             seeker prior to his leaving his country of  habitual  residence
             then the Rules could have said  so.  We  acknowledge  that  the
             concept of a family is very wide and depends crucially  on  the
             context in which the word  is  used.  Ascendant  or  descendant
             relatives, uncles, aunts and cousins are always  likely  to  be
             regarded as members of the same family. Whether they form  part
             of a family unit will depend very much  on  the  facts.  A  so-
             called nuclear family is highly likely to be a family unit. The
             child of divorced parents who spends the bulk of his time  with
             his mother and otherwise has regular contact with his father is
             certain to be part of the mother's family unit. Whether at  the
             same time he can be regarded as part  of  the  father's  family
             unit will depend very much on the particular facts of the case.


          1. In this  case  the  purpose  of  preserving  family  unity  was
             promoted and implemented by the decision at the request of  the
             sponsor father to allow Maria Naomi and her son Jans with  whom
             the appellant had co-habited in Colombia to come to the  United
             Kingdom  as  part  of  his  family  unit.  There  was  no  such
             application at that time in respect of the two  appellants  who
             were held by the Immigration Judge to  have  lived  with  their
             mothers. The Immigration Rules  are  understandably  silent  on
             whether it is right to promote a position where a child  leaves
             one undeniable family unit with his mother to join  his  father
             in the United Kingdom simply on the basis that the child  is  a
             minor. Wide ranging child care and child protection issues  are
             likely to arise where  a  decision  to  grant  entry  clearance
             potentially lead to the break up of  a  different  pre-existing
             family unit in the country of origin.
          1. We regard the issue as to what  is  a  "family  unit"  for  the
             purposes of para 352D(iv) as a question of fact. In many  cases
             it will be clear that a child was part of a family unit with an
             asylum seeker in his country of habitual residence.  The  child
             will have lived with the  asylum  seeker  and  perhaps  another
             partner. Alternatively if there has been separation the  reason
             for that separation may well be associated with  the  claim  of
             persecution and a child might still remain part of  the  family
             unit from which the  potential  refugee  had  been  temporarily
             separated. Here no such claim is made.
          1. If on the other hand the separation is  the  result  of  social
             choice by the parties and a separate family unit based upon the
             mother  is  created,  it  will  be  correspondingly  harder  to
             establish that a child is in reality a part  of  two  different
             family units. This will be especially so if the child is  young
             and the consequence will be separation from the  mother  rather
             than family unity as envisaged by the UNHCR handbook.
    19. The editors of MacDonald consider (#12.196 footnote 11) that in  BM
        the Tribunal accepted that a purposive approach was required to the
        terms of paragraph 352D(iv). Certainly the  Tribunal  rejected  the
        suggestion that a child could only succeed under paragraph 352D(iv)
        if he had actually lived with  the  sponsor  as  a  member  of  his
        household, at the date he left his country of habitual residence.
    20. Whether the child of divorced parents who spends the  bulk  of  his
        time with his mother, and otherwise has regular  contact  with  his
        father, could be said to be a member of his father's "family  unit"
        was said in BM to depend very much upon the particular facts of the
        case. Why there should be room for much dispute as  to  whether  or
        not the factual test was met  in  the  event  of  this  commonplace
        factual scenario was not however explained. On the face of it there
        is no obvious reason why the  "family  unit"  test  should  not  be
        capable of easy, and consistent application, one way or the  other,
        particularly to such a commonplace scenario.
    21.  The  Tribunal  in  BM  were  plainly  concerned  about  the  child
        protection and child welfare issues that could arise in  the  event
        of an application for entry clearance by a child  who  would  leave
        the home in which he had lived with one parent, in order to make  a
        new life with the other. They did not  however  identify  how  they
        were to be addressed, or why (if at all) such concerns would be any
        stronger in relation  to  a  paragraph  352D  application,  than  a
        paragraph 297 application.
    22. The Tribunal considered however that  in  the  commonplace  factual
        scenario of the separation of parents,  this  would  have  resulted
        from a "social choice" that had been made by those parents. Thus it
        was  considered  that  it  would  be  "correspondingly  harder   to
        establish that a child is in reality a part of two different family
        units." This was said to be "especially so if the  child  is  young
        and the consequence will be separation from the mother rather  than
        family unity as envisaged by the UNHCR handbook".
    23. It is unlikely the Tribunal intended this to be read too literally.
        Not all couples separate as a result of a mutual decision.  Nor  is
        there any obvious reason why  a  child  post  separation  of  their
        parents should be regarded as a member of the "family unit" of  one
        parent to the exclusion of  the  ability  to  simultaneously  be  a
        member  of  the  "family  unit"  of  the   other.   Joint   custody
        arrangements, whether formal, or informal, are not uncommon.
    24. In my judgement, unless the "family unit" test is to be regarded as
        more restrictive than the ordinary  meaning  of  the  phrase  would
        usually carry, then there is no obvious reason why a  child  should
        not be able to  say,  quite  accurately,  that  he  was  after  the
        separation of his parents, a member of the "family units"  of  each
        of his parents. Nor is there any obvious reason why  such  a  child
        should not also be able to say, quite accurately, that he was  also
        a member of the "family units" of his grandparents, if the strength
        of his relationships with them permitted  him  to  do  so.  As  the
        Tribunal said in BM the issue in any given set of circumstances  is
        simply a question of fact.
    25. On the other hand the term  "family  unit  of  the  person  granted
        asylum" must have been intended by Parliament to require more of an
        applicant  than  that  he  demonstrate  that  the  sponsor  is  his
        biological parent. It must in my  judgement  import  a  requirement
        that he demonstrate that the sponsor had accepted responsibility as
        a parent for him as their child. Different parents can no doubt  be
        expected  to  see  that  responsibility  differently,   and   their
        circumstances may  mean  that  they  are  obliged  in  practice  to
        discharge that responsibility in  many  different  ways.  Like  the
        proverbial elephant, that responsibility may be easier for a  third
        party to recognise than to describe, but one would expect  them  to
        include the provision of the basic needs of shelter, and  security.
        To go too far however in terms of prescription would run  the  risk
        of  shutting  out  a  child  from  reliance  upon  a  feckless,  or
        previously immature parent.
    26. In my judgement some positive assistance  can  usually  be  derived
        from whether the "sole responsibility" test is met at the date  the
        sponsor parent leaves the country of origin. If it is, then that is
        a strong indicator that the child forms part of his "family  unit".
        However in this case, the Judge rejected the claim that the sponsor
        had sole parental responsibility for the Appellant at any stage, or
        at the date of decision. That is not in my judgement  determinative
        of the appeal. The very nature of that test does not mean  that  if
        it is not met, the "family unit" test is not made out.
    27. How then should the relevant question of fact  be  approached?  The
        editors of MacDonald suggest the Tribunal's approach in BM  was  to
        adopt a purposive approach. That must be right. The  multitude  and
        variety of different factual scenarios with which the Tribunal must
        grapple on  paragraph  352D  applications,  can  only  sensibly  be
        approached in such a way. The Tribunal must also have regard to the
        fact that it is not  uncommon  for  a  parent  to  be  required  by
        circumstances to work away from their home, visiting their  partner
        and children when they can, and using  their  earnings  to  support
        them. The decision to do so does not mean of itself that the parent
        living away from those children has abandoned the children,  or  is
        severing their past relationship with them, or that  in  any  sense
        those children should be regarded as ceasing to  be  part  of  that
        parent's family unit. Those principles must in my judgement  inform
        the approach to be taken in a situation such as this, where  it  is
        accepted the physical separation of parent and child has been  part
        of persecutory conduct of the sponsor. In making that  finding  the
        Judge accepted that the separation  when  the  Appellant  was  aged
        eighteen months, has always been against the wishes of the sponsor,
        and in accepting that she sought to maintain, and  did  maintain  a
        "degree of contact" with the Appellant he must  be  taken  to  have
        accepted that despite that  enforced  separation  she  had  at  all
        material times sought to maintain a parental relationship with  the
        Appellant.
    28. In  the  circumstances  I  am  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  has
        established that on the balance of probabilities he was a member of
        the sponsor's "family unit" at the  date  in  2011  that  she  left
        Uganda to seek  asylum.  In  those  circumstances,  the  appeal  is
        allowed under the Immigration  Rules  because  that  was  the  sole
        ground for the refusal by the Respondent  of  the  application  for
        entry clearance.





   DECISION


      The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated  on
      17 April 2014 did contain an error of law in the decision  to  dismiss
      the Appellant's appeal, which requires that decision to be  set  aside
      and remade. I remake that decision so as to allow the appeal under the
      Immigration Rules.

Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 26 July 2014

Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
      Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
        granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of  these
        proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.   This
        direction applies both to the  Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.
        Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to  proceedings
        being brought for contempt of court.





   Signed


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes


Dated 26 July 2014





