
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
OA/08744/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 4 February 2016                        | On 29 February 2016              |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before


                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Mrs Isatou Jarju
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Parkin, Solicitor, UK Law Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   This is an appeal by Miss Jarju who is in a long-term relationship,  it
    has been accepted, with the UK sponsor Mr  Lamin  Camara.   Miss  Jarju
    made an application for entry clearance, which was  considered  by  the
    Entry Clearance Officer on 25 June 2014.  The Entry  Clearance  Officer
    was not satisfied that the relationship was a  genuine  and  subsisting
    one.  Moreover,  he  was  not  satisfied  that  she  had  met  all  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules including the financial and other
    requirements which had to be met. These included the  English  language
    requirements.

2.   The appellant appealed that refusal  and  it  came  before  Immigration
    Judge Hunter on 17 June 2015. There appears to have been some delay  in
    the FTT reaching a decision, which was promulgated on  4  August  2015.
    Having found the appellant to have "narrowly missed"  the  requirements
    for entry clearance the  Immigration  Judge  nevertheless  allowed  the
    appeal "on human rights grounds",  finding  that  the  decision  was  a
    disproportionate one  for  the  ECO  to  reach  having  regard  to  his
    obligations under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human  Rights
    (ECHR).

Discussion

3.   It is clear that the appellant came close to meeting  the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules but clearly did not meet the requirements  for
    valid leave to enter the UK as the partner of Mr Camara, who is present
    and  settled  here.  Whilst  this  tribunal  is  sympathetic   to   the
    predicament  which  faced  the  appellant,  who  has   since   acquired
    additional qualifications which would have  assisted  her  application,
    the Immigration Judge should have asked whether this was a  case  which
    fell within the "exceptional" or "compelling"  category.  It  is  clear
    from the recent decisions of the Court of Appeal in Singh  v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2015]  EWCA  Civ  74  or  SS  (Congo)
    [2016] 1 All ER 706 that there was  likely  to  be  only  a  small  gap
    between the requirements of the Rules and the requirements  of  Article
    8. The rules make comprehensive provision for family like  in  Appendix
    FM  and  it  is  clear  that  the  appellant  here  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of that Appendix of the Immigration Rules  in  this  case.
    The  respondent  is  entitled  to  a  wide  margin   of   appreciation,
    particularly in entry clearance cases, but exceptionally cases  may  be
    found where the circumstances are compelling.  It  is  clear  therefore
    that  the  Rules  ought  to  have  been  the  starting  point  for  the
    Immigration Judge's consideration of the case and that the  Immigration
    Judge should then have asked whether there was  any  proper  basis  for
    departing from the requirements of those Rules.

Conclusions

4.   I am not satisfied that  that  there  were  compelling  or  exceptional
    circumstances where which justified the Immigration Judge treating  the
    decision to refuse entry clearance as disproportionate.  The  Secretary
    of State must apply the Rules fairly across a range  of  circumstances.
    With respect, it was not open to the  Immigration  Judge  to  speculate
    over the quality of the appellant's spoken English.  The  circumstances
    do not appear to have been exceptional. "Near  miss"  situations  often
    arise but do not make the case exceptional. If the threshold  were  set
    so low a high proportion of applicants would succeed  under  Article  8
    where they would fail under the Rules.

5.   The appellant does have the benefit of a finding that it is  a  genuine
    and subsisting relationship and may well be able to make  a  successful
    fresh  application  for  entry  clearance.  However,  as  far  as   the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules at the date  of  the  appellant's
    application were concerned, the ECO was right to find they were not met
    at the date of the decision.

6.   Accordingly, I will allow the respondent's appeal against the  decision
    of Immigration  Judge  Hunter  and  substitute  the  decision  of  this
    Tribunal which is to dismiss the appellant's appeal against the refusal
    of entry clearance.

Notice of Decision

The present appeal  is  allowed  and  the  respondent's  decision  to  entry
clearance stands.

No anonymity direction  was  made  by  the  FTT  and  I  make  no  anonymity
direction.


Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury


