
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/09245/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 21 March 2014                              |On 27th March 2014           |
|Prepared 21 March 2014                        |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISLAMABAD

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                          mrs palwasha arghandiwal

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    The sponsor, Mr Davood Arghandiwal


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The  Entry  clearance  Officer,  Islamabad  appeals,  with  permission,
    against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Pirotta who in a
    decision dated 29 January 2014 dismissed the  appeal  of  Mrs  Palwasha
    Arghandiwal against a decision of the Entry Clearance Officer to refuse
    her entry clearance as a spouse on immigration grounds but allowed  the
    appeal on human rights grounds under Article 8 of the ECHR.

2.   Although the Entry Clearance Officer is the appellant before me I  will
    for ease of reference refer to him as the  respondent  as  he  was  the
    respondent in the First-tier.  Similarly I will refer to  Mrs  Palwasha
    Arghandiwal as the appellant as she was the appellant before the First-
    tier Judge.

3.   The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on 27 April  1992.   She
    applied for  leave  to  enter  as  a  spouse  in  December  2012.   Her
    application was refused on the basis that it was not accepted that  her
    husband's  earnings were sufficient to meet the financial  requirements
    of the Rules.  It appears to have been accepted that this is a  genuine
    and subsisting marriage and that the accommodation requirements of  the
    Rules were met.

4.   Judge Pirotta heard the appeal and in a brief  determination  concluded
    that the correct documentation relating to the sponsor's  business  had
    not been produced and  had  not  covered  the  correct  period  of  the
    application.

5.   From paragraph 16 through to 20 of the determination the judge set  out
    her findings of facts and law as follows:-

         "16.  The  Appellant  submitted  some  of  the  Sponsor's  business
             documents in the application but she and the Sponsor  did  not
             submit the correct documents, sufficient of them or cover  the
             correct period of the application.  The  Sponsor  acknowledged
             that he  had  not  had  the  documents  at  the  date  of  the
             application.  As  the  Appellant  made  the  application  when
             accurate  and  complete  documentary  evidence  to  meet   the
             criteria  of  the  mandatory  specified  documents  were   not
             available, it is not  surprising  that  the  ECO  refused  the
             application.  There is no discretion to overlook  the  absence
             of specified documents listed in the FM-SE Appendix.  The  ECO
             had not refused the  application  because  the  Appellant  and
             Sponsor had not shown that he had income, but because  he  had
             not met the criteria and could never have hoped to succeed  on
             the documents submitted.  The ECO had considered the documents
             submitted but they did not meet the Rules.  The submission  of
             documents is the responsibility of the Appellant  and  as  she
             chose not to submit the correct evidence of  bank  statements,
             employment or income, certified trading accounts,  profit  and
             loss  accounts,  business  bank  statements,  tax  return,  NI
             contributions or tax paid,  the  Secretary  of  State  had  to
             refuse the application.  Any other decision  would  have  been
             unlawful and the Decision made was the only one  available  to
             the Secretary of State.


         17.  The Appellant and Sponsor now have submitted  documents  which
             would have complied with the specified evidence for  the  year
             2012-2013, had that been the period for the  application.  But
             still have not submitted all the mandatory documents  for  the
             year covered in the application (2011-2012).


         18.  The Appellant and Sponsor  have  shown  that  they  are  in  a
             genuine and subsisting marriage, have  recently  had  a  child
             together and  have  demonstrated  that  they  intend  to  live
             together permanently as husband and wife.  There was  evidence
             that they have maintained contact and that the  Appellant  has
             suffered poor health during her pregnancy and that  the  child
             was delivered by caesarean section before the due date.


         19.  The Sponsor showed appropriate concern about the delay in  the
             appeal being listed, intended date was  15.4.2013,  almost  13
             months since the date of decision, and caused the  hearing  to
             be brought forward


         20.  I conclude that the delay has caused  avoidable  complications
             in the private and family lives of the Appellant and  Sponsor,
             which could have been avoided by a more  efficient  management
             of  the  appeal.   I  consider  this  is   material   to   the
             consideration of the balance of proportionality when assessing
             the rights of the Appellant and Sponsor to Article 8 rights to
             private and family life.  I conclude that  the  Appellant  and
             Sponsor have established a family life which engages Article 8
             and that a further refusal and requirement that  they  make  a
             fresh application to enter supported by the current  financial
             evidence, which would succeed, would be  disproportionate  and
             unnecessarily onerous to them."

6.   The Entry Clearance Officer appealed  arguing  that  the  determination
    Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC)  made  it  clear  that  the  Article  8
    assessment should  only  be  carried  out  when  there  are  compelling
    circumstances  not  recognised  by  the  Rules.   No  such   compelling
    circumstances had  been  identified  and  therefore  the  decision  was
    unsustainable.  Moreover, the determination  in  Gulshan  had  made  it
    clear that an appeal should only be allowed where there are exceptional
    circumstances.  It was argued there was nothing to stop  the  appellant
    making a fresh application and there was nothing to  suggest  therefore
    that the decision to refuse  the  application  had  been  unjustifiably
    harsh.

7.   I put to the sponsor that there were complicated issues  of  law  which
    would have to be considered in the appeal before me but he stated  that
    he had to fly out to Pakistan to see his wife who  had  recently  given
    birth, in the next two weeks and  therefore  he  did  not  wish  me  to
    adjourn the proceedings to a further hearing when he would  have  legal
    representation.

8.   Mr Whitwell then made submissions relying on the grounds of appeal  and
    stating that the judge had identified no  compelling  circumstances  to
    indicate that this was a case which  should  succeed  under  Article  8
    rather than under the  Rules.   Moreover,  the  judge  had  taken  into
    account factors which had arisen after the date of decision  which  was
    clearly contrary to the judgment of the House of Lords in AS  (Somalia)
    [2009] UKHL 32.  The reality was that the appellant's  child  had  been
    born after the date of decision.  Moreover he pointed  out  that  there
    was no indication that there would be  any  delay  in  making  a  fresh
    application - this application had been made in December 2012  and  the
    decision had been made three months later.  Delay had only been  caused
    because of listing before the Tribunal.  He asked me to find there  was
    an error of law in the determination and to go on then to  dismiss  the
    appeal on Article 8 as well as immigration grounds.

9.   I explained to the sponsor the various issues.  He  indicated  that  he
    did now have  documentation  that  was  for  the  relevant  period  and
    emphasised the importance to him of seeing his wife now.

10.  I find that there are material errors of law in  the  determination  of
    the First-tier Judge.  She dealt with the appeal superficially but  was
    correct to find that the necessary documentation  was  not  before  the
    Entry Clearance Officer.  Indeed, she found that  the  application  had
    had to have been refused.  Indeed she found that she still did not have
    before her  the  mandatory  documents  for  the  year  covered  in  the
    application.  The reality is that relevant case law, and in  particular
    the determination in Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach)
    [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC) make it clear that the Immigration Rules should
    certainly be the starting point in any consideration of  the  issue  of
    the rights of the appellant under Article 8 of the ECHR.  Moreover, for
    an Article 8 application to succeed there  must  be  compelling  reason
    which would mean that an appellant could succeed outside the  Rules  on
    Article 8 grounds.  No such compelling reasons have  been  found.   The
    judge does not identify the "avoidable complications"  in  the  private
    and family lives of the appellant or the sponsor let  alone  considered
    the issue  of  insurmountable  obstacles.   She  has  simply  given  no
    adequate reasons for her conclusion that the application of  this  Rule
    in this case is a disproportionate interference with the rights of  the
    appellant.

11.  For these reasons I have set aside the determination of the  First-tier
    Judge and I go on to re-make the decision and dismiss  this  appeal  on
    human rights grounds, the judge having already dismissed the appeal  on
    immigration grounds.

12.  The reality is that if the application is submitted  quickly  and  that
    it is properly prepared with all  the  relevant  documents  then  there
    appears to be  no  reason  why  the  application  should  not  succeed.
    However, it is important that the sponsor  ensures  that  all  relevant
    documents are submitted in the appropriate format  and  therefore  care
    will need to be applied when the documentary evidence is  collated  and
    submitted with the application.



Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

