
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: oa/09995/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28 July 2014                               |On 12 August 2014            |
|Prepared 28 July 2014                         |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                      entry clearance officer - moscow

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          MS RAISA IVANOVNA MALKINA

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Seddon, Counsel of Garden Court Chambers


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The Entry Clearance Officer Moscow appeals, with permission, against  a
    decision of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Devittie  who  in  a
    determination promulgated on 9 April 2014  allowed  the  appeal  of  Ms
    Raisa Ivanovna Malkina  against  a  decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer, Moscow to refuse her entry clearance to come to Britain as the
    dependant of her son, Dr Vadlim Malkin.

2.   Although the Entry Clearance Officer is the appellant before me I  will
    for ease of reference refer to him as the  respondent  as  he  was  the
    respondent in the First-tier Tribunal.  Similarly,  although  Ms  Raisa
    Ivanovna Malkina is the  respondent  before  me  I  will  for  ease  of
    reference refer to her as the appellant as she was the appellant in the
    First-tier Tribunal.

3.   The appellant is a citizen of Russia, born on  11  January  1939.   She
    appealed against a decision of the Entry Clearance Officer  made  on  2
    April 2013 to refuse her entry clearance as a dependent relative.   The
    refusal was under paragraph EC-DR.1.1 of Appendix FM of the Rules  with
    reference to Section S-EC,  the  reason  for  the  refusal  being  that
    taking into account  the money which the sponsor was sending to Russia,
    the appellant's own pension and the fact that she owned a property with
    her son in Moscow, she  had not demonstrated that she would be  unable,
    even with the practical and financial help of the  sponsor,  to  obtain
    the required level of care in the country where she was living.

4.   The judge of the First-tier Tribunal noted the evidence of the  sponsor
    and the witness statement of the appellant and then, in paragraph 8  of
    the determination, having correctly directed himself to the burden  and
    standard of proof, stated that he was satisfied  that  the  appellant's
    medical condition and advancing age was such that she was  in  need  of
    constant care, that she had no close relatives  living  in  Russia  and
    that it would not be reasonable to expect her neighbours  to  care  for
    her nor that it would be reasonable to expect her to accept the care of
    a non-relative.  He went on to say that having  considered  the  income
    and expenditure  figures  prepared  by  the  sponsor  he  accepted  the
    sponsor's current financial circumstances were such that he  could  not
    afford to meet the costs of full-time care  of  the  appellant  without
    compromising his capacity to provide basic care for his wife and  child
    in the United Kingdom.

5.   The judge went on to allow the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

6.   The grounds of appeal appear to argue that the judge had erred  in  his
    assessment of the Article 8 rights of the appellant.  They refer  to  a
    determination of the Tribunal in Gulshan [2013] UKUT  00640  (IAC)  and
    the judgment in Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin).  They  went  on  to  say
    there  were  no  compelling  or  exceptional   circumstances   in   the
    appellant's case.

7.   The second ground of appeal  also  referred  to  the  determination  in
    Gulshan and appear to argue with the conclusion of the judge that  care
    for the appellant by others than family members would be available  and
    affordable in Russia and the matter was merely one of readjusting.

8.   Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the judge had  erred
    in his assessment of the Article 8 rights of the appellant .

9.   In a detailed skeleton argument Mr Seddon pointed out that  the  appeal
    had not been allowed on Article 8 grounds but had  been  allowed  under
    the Immigration Rules.  The grounds of appeal had  not  challenged  the
    conclusions of the judge under the Rules.  Moreover he stated  that  it
    was evident from the evidence before  the  judge  that  the  judge  was
    perfectly entitled to reach the conclusions he did and to conclude that
    the appellant required long-term personal care and that  there  was  no
    one who could reasonably provide it.

10.  Mr Tufan, when preparing the  appeal,  realised  that  the  grounds  of
    appeal did not, in fact, challenge the conclusions of the  judge  under
    the Rules. He stated that this was not an appeal on which it  would  be
    appropriate to address me in any detail.

11.  The judge made findings of fact which I consider were open  to  him  on
    the evidence: they were not in any way perverse.   Having  reached  his
    findings of fact the judge found that  the  appeal  should  be  allowed
    under the Immigration Rules and allowed the appeal on that basis.   The
    grounds of appeal before me do not challenge  the  conclusions  of  the
    judge under the Rules but rather refer to a decision which he  did  not
    make which was that the rights of the appellant under Article 8 of  the
    ECHR would be infringed by the decision.

12.  In these circumstances, having noted  the  detailed  skeleton  argument
    prepared by Mr Seddon and  having  considered  the  statements  of  the
    appellant and the sponsor I have concluded that there  is  no  material
    error  of  law  in  the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Judge  and
    accordingly his decision allowing this appeal  on  immigration  grounds
    shall stand.


Decision

13.  The appeal of the Secretary of State against the decision of the First-
    tier Judge allowing this appeal is dismissed.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy


