
[pic]
IAC-BH-JLS-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/09480/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Bennett House, Stoke                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|28 January 2016                      |On 29 January 2016                   |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between

                            ms joy mundin mercado
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Before the Upper Tribunal the Secretary of State becomes the appellant.
     However, for the avoidance of confusion and the sake of consistency  I
    shall continue to refer to the parties as they were before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 2. As this is a matter which relates to withdrawal of  the  case  applying
    the provisions  of  Paragraph  17  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 on the basis of written  representations  made  by
    the appellant's solicitors, I consider it appropriate for  me  to  deal
    with the matter without a hearing.

 3. In a decision sent out  on  10  August  2015  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    allowed the appeal in this matter on human rights grounds  against  the
    decision of the respondent to  refuse  entry  clearance  as  a  spouse.
    Permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  to  the
    respondent on 9 December 2015.

 4. On  4  January  2016  the  appellant's  representatives,  Raffles  Haig
    Solicitors, wrote to the Upper Tribunal to state that their client  had
    instructed them to withdraw "the appeal".  It was  indicated  that,  as
    the appellant and her spouse had been separated for eighteen months and
    the matter had gone on "too long for both of them", they had decided to
    make a fresh application for  entry  clearance  in  order  to  expedite
    matters.

 5. On 12 January 2016 the  respondent  was  informed  of  the  appellant's
    request to withdraw the appeal and was invited  to  make  any  response
    within 14 days.  No response has been received.

Conclusion

 6. In the circumstances the Upper Tribunal consents to the  withdrawal  of
    the appellant's case under Rule 17.

 7. As there is no longer any opposition to the appeal  by  the  respondent
    before the Upper Tribunal, I allow that appeal so that the respondent's
    refusal decision of 5 August 2014 stands.

Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity  direction  and  such
    was not requested before the Upper Tribunal.  Accordingly, no direction
    is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt
