
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/09669/2014
                                                               OA/09667/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 13 July 2015                      |On 16 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA


                                   Between

                       MOGBONJUBOLA IDOWU KINGSLEY-EMU
                    CHIDER ROSAMOND IBITOMI KINGSLEY-EMU
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms  Sujad, Solicitor
For the respondent:    Ms I Sherwood, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant in this appeal is the Secretary of State for  the  Home
       Department. The appellant are nationals of Nigeria born on 29  August
       1962 and 2 April 2000 respectively. I shall however, for the sake  of
       convenience, refer to the parties as they were referred to before the
       proceedings at the First-tier Tribunal.

    2.  The  respondent  appealed  to  the  Upper   Tribunal   against   the
       determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge  AJ  M  Baldwin  dated  20
       April 2015  allowing  their  appeals  against  the  decision  of  the
       respondent dated 29 July 2014 cancelling the appellants leave on  the
       basis that the respondent was satisfied that there  were  counterfeit
       stamps in the passports which had not been proved by the respondent.

    3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Frankish granted the respondent  permission
       to appeal stating that the  respondent  had  failed  to  satisfy  the
       burden of proof in respect of objections under paragraph 321  and  in
       doing so, he completely overlooked a bundle that the  respondent  had
       filed under s108. The Judge states that if the grounds of application
       are made out, arguable error arises. The respondent therefore at  the
       second stage consideration must demonstrate that those documents were
       filed averred in the application.

    4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found that by the end of the hearing it
       was no clearer why the respondent suspected the  Ghanaian  stamps  in
       the first appellant's passport were false or why Mr Ayel  ticked  the
       box he did on the forgery assessment form.

    5.  The  respondent's  grounds  of  appeal  state  the  following.   The
       appellants were refused leave to remain under paragraph  321  (a)  of
       the Immigration Rules. The respondent served a bundle  in  compliance
       with s108 of the 2002 Act. Although reference is made at paragraph  5
       of the determination to the respondent's bundle, it is clear that the
       Judge did not have regard to this particular bundle. As a result  the
       Judge's decision was not based on the full range of  evidence  behind
       the decision. Therefore the Judge's  conclusion  is  unsafe  and  the
       decision will need to be remade.

    6. The appellant's  Rule  24  response  states  the  following  which  I
       summarise. The grounds of appeal advance no material arguable  errors
       of law that would be considered capable of having a  material  impact
       on the outcome of  the  appeal  and  is  merely  an  attempt  by  the
       respondent to re-argue and submit further evidence under s108 of  the
       2002 Act  for  her  failed  decision.  The  Judge  gave  himself  the
       appropriate  self-direction  and  properly  considered  the  evidence
       before him and  it  was  properly  open  to  him  to  find  that  the
       respondent has failed  to  discharge  the  burden  of  proof  to  the
       requisite standard to show that the appellant's Ghanaian  stamps  are
       forged under s108 of the 2002  Act.  The  appellant's  representative
       enquired from the respondent before the hearing whether  he  will  be
       making an application under s108 but the respondent replied  that  he
       is only arguing the case and he was not  instructed  to  argue  s108.
       This  was  also  mentioned  at  preliminary  hearing  in  which   the
       respondent  maintained  his  decision  that  he  is  not  making   an
       application under s108.

    7.  At  the  hearing,  the  representatives  of  the  parties  presented
       submissions on whether the determination  of  the  Immigration  Judge
       involved the making of an error on a point of law.

    8. Ms Sujad said in her submissions that she was present at the previous
       hearing and The Home Office Presenting Officer said she is not making
       a s108 application. She said that the Judge did not have  before  him
       the fraud report which has been produced by the respondent  today  at
       the hearing. She said that the Judge only had a form where the  fraud
       re-expert Mr Ayel, ticked the box he did on  the  forgery  assessment
       form but there were no explanation because the full  report  was  not
       before the Judge.

    9. Miss I Sherwood said in her submissions  said  she  is  not  able  to
       comment why the Home Office presenting officer did not make  of  s108
       application but nevertheless said that the determination is  a  sound
       and the Judge made appropriate findings.

   10. It is not clear why  the  respondent  did  not  make  an  application
       pursuant to s108. It would appear that the s108 report was not before
       the Judge and therefore he cannot be criticised  for  not  taking  it
       into account and was entitled to say under the circumstances that  no
       reasons have been advanced by the respondent that the stamps  in  the
       appellant's passports are counterfeit.

   11. At the hearing the report was provided that it  gives  clear  reasons
       for why the stamps in the  appellant's  passport  are  deemed  to  be
       counterfeit. I found therefore that the Judge's determination can  no
       longer stand because having had sight of the report,  it  was  proper
       that the matter be considered again to make proper  findings  on  the
       forgery report.

   12. I therefore set aside the determination.

   13. Mr Sujad on behalf of the appellant  said  that  she  would  like  an
       opportunity to provide independent  expert  evidence  about  Ghanaian
       immigration  stamps  and  an  opinion  whether  the  stamps  in   the
       appellant's passports are counterfeit. She asked  that  I  remit  the
       appeal to  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  and  allow  the  appellant  the
       opportunity to  provide  expert  evidence  to  counter  that  of  the
       respondent's expert evidence. In the interests of fairness, I was  of
       the view that the appellant's should have this opportunity given that
       the consequences  of  a  finding  of  fraud  would  have  substantial
       consequences for the appellants.

   14. I therefore direct that the appeal  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal and  be  placed  before  any  Judge  other  than  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge A.J. M.  Baldwin  to  be  heard  again  on  the  first
       available date.

Decision

The appeal be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal



      Dated this 14th day of July 2015

Signed by
.............................................

A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Mrs S Chana

