
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
oa/09156/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 9th November 2017                      |   On 28th November 2017          |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                            Mrs Khadra Jama Yusuf
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms F Allen, Counsel instructed by CNA Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State  I  refer  to  the
    parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant, a  national  of  Somalia,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  of  18th
    September 2014 to refuse her application for entry clearance to the  UK
    as a partner under Appendix FM of the  Immigration  Rules.   First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Obhi allowed the appeal on human  rights  grounds.   The
    Secretary of State now appeals to this Tribunal with permission granted
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchison on 19th September 2017.

 3. The Appellant's husband is a British national who has been  in  the  UK
    since December 1997.  He and the Appellant married on  18th  July  2012
    and she applied for entry clearance as a spouse on  27th  August  2014.
    The reasons given by the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  for  refusing  the
    application were  that  the  Appellant  had  failed  to  provide  a  TB
    certificate and therefore did not meet the suitability entry  clearance
    requirements  under  paragraph  EC-P1.1(c)  of  Appendix  FM   of   the
    Immigration Rules (S-EC1.6).  The second Ground for  Refusal  was  that
    the Entry Clearance Officer was not satisfied that the relationship was
    genuine and subsisting or that the couple intend  to  live  permanently
    together in the UK.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge heard oral evidence from the Sponsor  and
    took into account that and the documentary evidence as well as the fact
    that the couple now have a child born on 10th  January  2017.   On  the
    basis of the evidence the judge  found  that  this  is  a  genuine  and
    subsisting marriage.  There is no challenge to that conclusion.

 5. The other issue before  the  judge  therefore  was  the  issue  of  the
    provision of the necessary TB certificate.  The judge took into account
    the evidence and submissions in relation to this issue and concluded at
    paragraph 17:-

         "There is no evidence that the  Appellant  has  failed  to  provide
         information requested by the ECO and if she fails  to  provide  the
         necessary certificate then she will be denied entry,  but  that  is
         more to do with the practical arrangements than it is  to  do  with
         the legal requirements for granting entry clearance".

 6. In the Grounds of Appeal the Secretary of State set out the  provisions
    of S-EC1.6 of the  Rules  and  submitted  that  there  is  a  mandatory
    requirement  for  the  Appellant  to  produce  a  TB  certificate.  The
    Secretary  of  State  set  out  an  extract  from  Appendix  T  of  the
    Immigration Rules which states that migrants applying to enter  the  UK
    from a number of listed countries for more than six months or  who  are
    applying in a category which may lead to settlement who:-

         "... must present at  the  time  of  application  a  valid  medical
         certificate issued by a medical practitioner listed in  Part  2  of
         this Appendix confirming that they have undergone screening for  an
         active pulmonary tuberculosis and that  such  tuberculosis  is  not
         present in the applicant."

    Somalia is one of the countries listed.

 7. It is contended by the  Secretary  of  State  that  in  light  of  this
    mandatory requirement the ECO  appropriately  refused  the  application
    under S-EC1.6 as the Appellant failed to produce a  TB  certificate  at
    the time of the application.   It  is  contended  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge erred in relation to this issue and  further  failed  to
    carry out a proper assessment under Article 8 and failed  to  have  due
    regard to the public interest which includes the protection  of  public
    health.

 8. In her Rule 24 response and at the hearing Ms Allen accepted  that  the
    decision does not  make  specific  reference  to  the  TB  certificate.
    However she submitted that one had been produced  with  the  Notice  of
    Appeal and appears in the ECO's bundle.  Reference is made to the ECO's
    refusal which indicates that the decision would be reviewed and advises
    Appellants to submit all the relevant  documents  with  the  Notice  of
    Appeal.  It is therefore contended  that  additional  evidence  can  be
    submitted by an Appellant which can be considered by an  ECM  reviewing
    the  decision  and  that  the  Tribunal  is  able   to   consider   the
    circumstances appertaining at the time of the  decision  by  virtue  of
    Section 85(5) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 which
    applied in this case in relation to the application for entry clearance
    and the decision made by the Entry Clearance Officer.   It  is  further
    contended that Section EC1.1(c) provides for a  reasonable  excuse  for
    failing to comply.  Appendix FM-SE S-EC1.6 provides as follows:-

         "S-EC.1.1 The applicant will be refused entry clearance on  grounds
         of suitability if any of paragraphs S-EC1.2 to 1.8 apply.

         ...

         S-EC1.6  The applicant has  failed  without  reasonable  excuse  to
         comply with a requirement to -
         (a)   attend an interview;
         (b)  provide information;
         (c)  provide physical data; or
         (d)  undergo a medical examination or provide a medical report."

 9. It is contended in the Rule 24 notice and by Ms Allen  at  the  hearing
    that the Appellant had provided a TB certificate with  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal which was not taken into account by the Entry Clearance  Manager
    (ECM) on review of the decision.  It is contended  that  the  Appellant
    had a reasonable excuse for failing to provide the TB certificate.   At
    the hearing Ms Allen also referred to page 62 of  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer's bundle which is a checklist submitted  with  an  application.
    She noted that at Section 15 of that checklist applicants are asked  to
    provide  "any  other  documentation.   Such   as:   evidence   of   any
    correspondence/TB certificate".  She submitted that it  was  not  clear
    from this that a TB certificate was required.  She submitted  that  the
    application was submitted on 7th August 2014.  The refusal  was  issued
    on 18th September 2014, although it was not sent to the Appellant until
    2nd May 2015 over six months later.  It was received by  the  Appellant
    on 18th May 2015.  She pointed out that on 26th May 2015 the  Appellant
    undertook a TB test and submitted that to the ECO with  the  Notice  of
    Appeal on 8th June 2015.  She submitted that this was reasonable  given
    that the Appellant was asked to  provide  any  outstanding  information
    with the Notice of Appeal and,  had  the  ECM  realised  this,  in  her
    submission this would have been conceded by  the  ECM.   She  submitted
    that this was the whole purpose of the ECM's review.  In any event  she
    submitted the Appellant had given a reasonable excuse for  the  failure
    to provide the TB certificate with the application.

10. At the hearing Mr Avery accepted that the judge did not fully deal with
    this issue and submitted that he had nothing to add to the  Grounds  of
    Appeal.



Discussion

11. In my view it is  clear  that  from  paragraph  14  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision, which reflects the submissions made  by  Ms  Allen
    who also appeared in the First-tier Tribunal, and at paragraph 17  that
    the judge was aware of the issue of the TB certificate.  The judge  set
    out S-EC1.6 at paragraph 16.   I accept that it is not  entirely  clear
    from paragraph 17 that the judge was referring to the  TB  certificate.
    However looking at the record of the submissions and the issues  before
    the First-tier Tribunal it is sufficiently clear that this is what  the
    judge meant.

12. In any event in my view this is not a material error because it is  not
    in dispute that the Appellant did provide the TB certificate  with  the
    Grounds of Appeal and this appears not to have been considered  by  the
    Entry Clearance Manager.  I accept Ms Allen's submission  that  it  may
    not have been clear to the Appellant that a TB certificate was required
    to be submitted with the application.  I accept that this would  amount
    to a reasonable excuse under Section S-EC1.6.

13. Given the time line and the short period  within  which  the  Appellant
    obtained the TB certificate and submitted it to the ECO I  accept  that
    this amounts to a reasonable excuse.

14. In these circumstances I accept that, although not clearly  articulated
    at paragraph 17, the judge was  aware  if  this  issue  and  reached  a
    conclusion open to her on the evidence.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge did  not  contain  a  material
error of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge stands.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date: 27th November 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I maintain the fee award made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.


Signed                              Date: 27th November 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
