
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number OA/09625/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower,          |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 20th July 2016                    |On 30th August 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                                     S S
                              (ANONYMITY MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms A Bhachu (Counsel, instructed by J M Wilson)
For the Respondent: Mr D Mills (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant's application to enter the UK as a  spouse  was  rejected
    for the reasons given in the Refusal Notice of the 29th of  July  2014.
    The Appellant could not meet the requirements of Appendix FM and/or FM-
    SE. The appeal was heard by Judge Carlin and dismissed  in  a  decision
    promulgated on the 9th of June 2015. It  had  been  accepted  that  the
    Appellant could not meet the financial requirements and the Judge  held
    that he did not succeed under article 8.

 2. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought in grounds of the
    26th of June 2015. It was argued that the Judge had failed to take into
    account  material  in  relation  to  the  financial  requirement  under
    Appendix FM and had erred in failing to give reasons why that  did  not
    form part of the decision and had not considered  section  55.  It  was
    argued that the Judge had not considered why the Sponsor did  not  earn
    sufficient to meet the financial  requirements  being  a  carer.  These
    findings also infected the assessment under section 55.

 3. Permission was granted by Judge Simpson on the basis that the Judge had
    not given sufficient weight to the Sponsor's circumstances in assessing
    proportionality having regard to the Sponsor's caring for her  parents,
    being a new mother and the finding that she could not  be  expected  to
    live in India.

 4. In response the  Secretary  of  State  submitted  that  the  Judge  had
    directed himself appropriately, the findings made at paragraphs 28  and
    29 were open to the Judge and the evidence in  the  witness  statements
    referred to the potential future position. Section 55 was considered at
    paragraph 33 and that was appropriate with the reasons given.

 5. The submissions are set out in full in the Record  of  Proceedings.  It
    was accepted that the case had  always  been  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules. The Sponsor could  not  meet  the  financial  rules.  There  was
    reference to the parents' health and it was submitted  that  there  had
    not been an adequate assessment of the child's best interests.  It  had
    been accepted that family  life  could  not  continue  in  India.  When
    looking at separation welfare had to be considered. This was not a case
    of a near-miss and paragraph 33 did not amount to an assessment of  the
    child's needs.

 6. For the Home Office it was submitted that states have a wide margin  of
    appreciation and this was a case involving entry clearance, not a  case
    where the Appellant was already in the UK. With  regard  to  the  child
    something compelling beyond a simple best interests  finding,  such  as
    disability, would be needed. Reference was  made  to  SS  (Congo).  The
    evidence of  the  Sponsor  in  her  witness  statement  was  that  when
    qualified she would earn enough, the evidence was that she  was  nearly
    there and there was no suggestion of stress.

 7. The Appellant and Sponsor chose  to  have  a  child  in  their  current
    circumstances and so cannot  complain  that  the  situation  they  have
    created is the cause of some difficulties. It was entirely  foreseeable
    that with the Sponsor living in the UK without the Appellant life would
    be more difficult than otherwise. The Judge  noted  that  whatever  the
    health of the Sponsor's parents that did not prevent her from  studying
    and working and they are entitled to treatment under the NHS.

 8. States are not obliged to accept without  qualification  the  preferred
    location of a married couple and is entitled to  set  requirements  for
    the entry of non-nationals for immigration purposes. It is  clear  from
    the case of MM that the financial requirements of Appendix FM have been
    a challenge for many and the fact of having a  child  in  circumstances
    where the rules are not met does not by itself provide a couple with  a
    by-pass to the Immigration Rules that apply to them.

 9. The Judge clearly had the Sponsor's parents' health in  mind,  evidence
    relating to their circumstances is set out  in  paragraph  21.  As  the
    Judge noted their  circumstances  did  not  prevent  the  Sponsor  from
    working, studying or  travelling  to  India  to  visit  the  Appellant.
    Paragraph 33 was based on the evidence. It is trite to say that  it  is
    in the best interests of a child to be brought up in a family with both
    parents but it does not follow that a parent has  to  be  permitted  to
    enter or remain in the UK, states are entitled to set requirements  for
    the entry of non-nationals in for individuals  in  this  situation  the
    rules have been upheld in MM. Miss Bhachu did not point to any specific
    evidence that the Judge had overlooked or ignored that  suggested  that
    the exclusion of her father was disproportionate.

10. The Appellant's case effectively comes down to a submission that having
    a child in circumstances where the financial requirements are  not  met
    is sufficient for a Judge to find that a refusal of entry clearance  is
    almost automatically disproportionate. That life would  be  easier  for
    all concerned if the Appellant was to be permitted to enter the  UK  is
    hardly a startling conclusion but his exclusion under  the  Immigration
    Rules cannot be avoided.

11. To succeed under article 8 outside the rules the Appellant  would  have
    to show that the circumstances were such that his  continued  exclusion
    was disproportionate. The fact that the Appellant and Sponsor had had a
    child knowing what the Immigration Rules required and that  they  could
    not meet them was a highly relevant factor. The Judge was  entitled  to
    find that the Sponsor's parents' health problems were not  so  pressing
    that her presence was permanently required. Ms Bhachu did not point  to
    any evidence that suggested that their child had any needs beyond those
    for any child of her age.

12. This appeal amounts to a disagreement with findings properly  made  and
    open to the Judge for the reasons given. The Appellant and Sponsor find
    themselves in a situation of their  own  making  and  did  not  provide
    evidence to suggest that

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005  and  I  make  no
order.

Fee Award

In dismissing this appeal I make no fee award.


Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)
Dated: 26th August 2016
