
[pic]


Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/09203/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 16 March 2016                     |On 11 April 2016                     |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before


                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                         THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                                     M F
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Price, counsel instructed by Pioneer
Solicitors



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) appeals the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge McCartney, promulgated on 18 September 2015, allowing an
    appeal against a decision to refuse the respondent leave to  enter  the
    United Kingdom as a parent. Permission to appeal was granted by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Frankish on 11 February 2016.



Background

 2. The respondent sought leave to enter the United Kingdom under  EC-PT1.1
    of Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules in order to exercise the  right
    of access to his 7 year daughter  who  was  in  the  care  of  a  local
    authority following the death of  her  mother.   That  application  was
    refused on 10 July 2014 as it was said that the respondent had not  met
    the eligibility, financial or  English  language  requirements  of  the
    Rules.

 3. In relation to eligibility, the ECO  stated  that  the  respondent  had
    provided no evidence  that  he  had  an  active  role  in  the  child's
    upbringing and reference was made to an interim care order obtained  by
    the local authority  concerned.  Concern  was  raised  as  to  why  the
    respondent's three siblings in the United Kingdom had not  assisted  in
    the care of his daughter.

 4. With regard to the financial requirements, these were not  met  because
    the respondent was relying on third party support from his brother. The
    respondent was  said  not  to  be  exempt  from  the  English  language
    requirement and it was noted by the ECO that  he  had  not  passed  the
    required English language test. The ECO considered whether  there  were
    exceptional circumstances but declined to grant leave to enter on  this
    basis, noting that the respondent had never met his daughter and had no
    involvement or contact with her since she was born.

 5. In  appealing  the  ECO's  decision  the  respondent  argued  that  the
    requirements of the Rules were met; raised the  best  interest  of  the
    child concerned and relied on Article 8 ECHR, outside the Rules.

 6. An Entry Clearance Manager (ECM) reviewed the decision to refuse  entry
    on  23  December  2014,  however  the  decision  to  refuse  entry  was
    maintained on all grounds for the same reasons as provided  previously.
    Reference was made to the lack of any additional  documentary  evidence
    or details. In addition, it was not accepted that it was  in  the  best
    interests of  the  respondent's  daughter  that  he  be  granted  entry
    clearance in view of the fact that he had  yet  to  be  assessed  as  a
    suitable parent.

 7. At the hearing before the FTTJ, counsel  for  the  respondent  conceded
    that the requirements of the Rules were not met, as he could not  speak
    English. The FTTJ allowed the appeal under the Rules, finding that  the
    appellant was entitled to rely on third party support  and  that  there
    were exceptional circumstances in  relation  to  the  English  language
    requirement.

Error of law

 8. The grounds of application argue that the FTTJ erred  in  finding  that
    the respondent was in a position to maintain himself owing  to  relying
    on post-decision evidence; inadequate evidence  and  without  assessing
    the sponsor's expenditure. Secondly, it was argued that the FTTJ  erred
    in finding that there were exceptional  circumstances,  which  exempted
    the respondent from having to satisfy the English language requirement.
    It was noted that the respondent's wife had died a year  prior  to  the
    application being made and  that  therefore  there  was  a  significant
    period of time for basic level English to be learnt.

 9. FTTJ Frankish ostensibly granted permission to  appeal,  while  clearly
    stating that no  arguable  error  arose  from  the  FTTJ's  exceptional
    circumstances test, or as to the  finding  that  there  was  sufficient
    maintenance and accommodation.

The hearing

10. At the hearing before me, Mr Bramble conceded that FTTJ  had  meant  to
    refuse permission  rather  than  grant.  Mrs  Price  agreed  with  that
    position.  They both invited me to amend the  grant  of  permission  to
    read, "refused."

11. I agreed that to make the proposed amendment and have done so,  in  the
    capacity of a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal, in the enclosed annexe,
    with reference to the following Rule;

         31.      Clerical mistakes and accidental slips or omissions

         The Tribunal may at any time correct any clerical mistake or  other
         accidental slip  or  omission  in  a  decision,  direction  or  any
         document produced by it, by-

         (a)       providing  notification  of  the  amended   decision   or
         direction, or a copy of the amended document, to all parties; and

         (b)       making  any  necessary  amendment  to   any   information
         published in relation to the decision, direction or document

Decision


  1) Permission to appeal refused.

No application for anonymity was made and I could  see  no  reason  to  make
such a direction.


Signed      Date: 19 March 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara










In the matter of rule 31(b) of The Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal)
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Appellant: [M F]

Respondent: Secretary of State/Entry Clearance Officer

               DECISION TO AMEND GRANT OF PERMISSION TO APPEAL

I hereby amend the decision to grant permission to appeal dated 11  February
2016 of the First-tier Tribunal in this appeal to  read,  "refused"  instead
of "granted".

                                   REASONS

The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal the  decision  of  First-
tier  Tribunal  Judge  McCartney.   First-tier   Tribunal   Judge   Frankish
ostensibly granted permission to appeal, however it is  clear  from  reading
the decision, that  permission  was  in  fact  refused  as  the  said  judge
considered "no arguable error" of law arose from the  decision  and  reasons
concerned.

When this matter came before me in my capacity of a  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
Judge, both representatives  were  in  agreement  that  the  judge  granting
permission made  a  typographical  error  in  stating  that  permission  was
granted and that he ought to have said that it was refused.

I concur that the grant of permission to appeal could not  be  read  in  any
other way;  conclude  that  Judge  Frankish  made  an  accidental  slip  and
accordingly, by way of amending information published  in  relation  to  the
grant of permission, amend the grant of permission under Rule 31(b).




                                        Signed


                                        Judge of the First-tier Tribunal


                                        Dated: 19 March 2016
-----------------------
In the First-tier Tribunal   Case No: OA/09203/2014
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Decision by First-tier Tribunal Judge Kamara




