
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/09580/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Birmingham                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 24 February 2016                    |On 14 March 2016                  |
|                                       |                                  |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA

                                   Between

                          MR Jerome BINUYA PASTORIN
                        (No anonymity directionS made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                THE SECETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:          Mr D Selwood of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.      The appellants' appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  was  against  the
   decision of the respondent dated 5 August 2014 to refuse his  application
   for entry clearance as a partner under Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration
   Rules.



    2.      First-tier Tribunal Judge  Chapman  dismissed  the  appellant's
       appeal in a determination promulgated on 19 March  2015.  Permission
       to appeal was initially refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Heynes
       on 15 June 2015 and subsequently granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
       Coker on 21 August 2015 in respect of ground 2 which was that in the
       Judges article 8  assessment,  there  was  a  failure  to  determine
       whether it was in the interest of the two  stepchildren's  that  the
       appellant reside  with  them  in  the  United  Kingdom,  failure  to
       conclude that the refusal  to  grant  entry  clearance  amounted  to
       permanent separation of the appellant from his family, the  approach
       to  public  interest,  the  approach  to  section  117B  in   giving
       sufficient weight to the requirement to the legitimate aim,  section
       117B does not represent an  override  of  Article  8  case  law,  no
       consideration given to section  117B  (2)  or  (6).  Permission  was
       granted on this ground alone.



3.      Thus the appeal came before me.


       Error of Law

4.        The  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissed   the   appellant's   appeal,
   concluding that:



          "[21] there were no issue of credibility in this appeal.  I  found
          the sponsor to be honest and truthful witness.


          [22] "I was also assisted by the  acknowledgement  by  Mr  Selwood
          that the appellant did not  meet  the  financial  requirements  of
          Appendix FM and that the appeal could not succeed under the Rules.
          On the evidence before me, this was an entirely proper  concession
          to make, and I would have found that appendix FM was not satisfied
          had that been an issue in these proceedings."


          [27] "in respect of article 8: in doing so, I remind  myself  that
          this is now well established jurisprudence that I must  take  into
          account the impact of the decision on anyone affected by it. It is
          also well established by statute in jurisprudence that I must also
          consider the best interests of any child affected by the decision.
          Their  best  interest  must  be  a  primary,  if  not   paramount,
          consideration in reaching my decision. In MM Lebanon and others  v
          SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 985  it  was  said  that  this  consideration
          should not be used as a trump card. I hasten to add that I do  not
          consider that that it is the  appellant's  intention  to  use  the
          children in this way. I find that the love, affection, and concern
          show for the children are genuine and real."


          [28] "in considering the best interests of the  children,  I  take
          into account that all three children are British  nationals.  They
          have spent the whole of their lives in the  United  Kingdom.  They
          are now all being educated here.... The two eldest children have a
          strong relationship with their father, who they see  regularly.  I
          do not consider it would be reasonable that they, or  indeed,  the
          younger brother should relocate to the Philippines.  There  is  no
          evidence of any ties up there apart from the appellant".


          [29] "it is well established jurisprudence in immigration  matters
          and elsewhere, that the best interests of children are  to  remain
          with their parents, in the absence of other factors which  I  have
          variously been described as  countervailing,  compelling  or  very
          strong contraindications, they should  be  no  movement  from  the
          starting point. These are of course general principles and can  be
          affected by specific factors in individual's case".


          [33] "I must in line with section 117B attach  significant  weight
          to the legitimate aim".


          [34] "on the appellant's behalf, Mr Selwood argued that  there  is
          only one barrier to him meeting the rules,  namely  the  financial
          barrier. I do not consider this  to  be  insignificant.  Financial
          independence has been identified as being in the  public  interest
          in the Immigration Act 2014, which  introduced  section  117B.  Mr
          Selwood seeks to overcome this barrier with  evidence  that  third
          parties have offered financial assistance. Third-party funding  is
          specifically excluded by  the  Rules  and,  on  the  side  of  the
          proportionality exercise, is something to which  I  attach  little
          weight".


          [43 ] "in summary, on the one hand I must consider the  weight  to
          be attached to the appellant's immigration history, that  he  does
          not satisfy the financial requirements of the  Immigration  Rules,
          the legitimate aim itself, and the way it is expressed in  section
          1 117B. On the other hand,  I  must  consider  the  weight  to  be
          attached to the best interests of the children, the importance of,
          and the need to promote  the  respect  to  family  life,  and  the
          particular circumstances of the appellant's family life".


          [44] "having carefully weighed all these factors, I  am  satisfied
          that the scales dip in favour of the respondent's legitimate  aim,
          and that, on the evidence before me,  the  decision  made  by  the
          respondent was proportionate."


5.      Mr Selwood argued  in  his  submissions  before  me  said  that  the
   appellant was in the United Kingdom before he returned to the Philippines
   to make an application from there. His passport had  been  taken  by  the
   respondent, pending  some  investigations  which  is  why  the  appellant
   overstayed in the United Kingdom.  If  he  had  remained  in  the  United
   Kingdom, he would have qualified under EX 1 because there would have been
   insurmountable obstacles for him returning to the Philippines.




6.      He further submitted that in  respect  of  paragraph  117B  (6)  the
   appellant would have qualified to remain in the United Kingdom. The Judge
   had perverse reasoning when he said that the appellant's appeal for entry
   clearance must be looked at differently because the appellant is  not  in
   this  country.  The  Judge  also  stated  that  paragraph  117B  is   the
   respondent's understanding  of  proportionality.  He  said  that  in  the
   determination does not have any analysis on paragraph 117B (6).  He  said
   had the Judge considered this section, the outcome in  the  appeal  would
   have been different. He referred to authorities where it was  found  that
   Judges must have regard  to  paragraph  117.  He  said  that  the  public
   interest in the prevention of crime carries  far  more  weight  than  the
   public interest in the economic well-being of the country.




7.       Mr Mills in his submissions said that there is  no  material  error
   of law in the determination. He said  that  paragraphs  117A-D  are  only
   relevant for removal decisions and it is not relevant for entry clearance
   decisions. The Judge did not have to consider 117B (6). The  Judge  found
   that the economic well-being of the country was a  strong  countervailing
   factor in the appeal as stated by the Court of Appeal in MM Lebanon.



8.      Mr Selwood in reply stated the 117B factors must be  determined.  He
   referred to the case of SS Congo [2015] EWCA  Civ  387  at  paragraph  39
   which makes it an exception in cases involving children.




9.       This appeal therefore  involves  two  steps,  the  first  being  to
   determine whether there is an error of law in the determination of First-
   tier Tribunal Judge and the second, if I find there was an error of  law,
   to hear evidence or submissions to enable me to remake the decision.




10. I have paid careful attention to the determination to see whether  there
   is a material error of law. The  Judge  having  considered  the  evidence
   concluded that the appellant's children cannot live in the Philippines as
   they are all British citizens. He also concluded that the children cannot
   leave the country because first, they are British  citizens  and  second,
   their biological stepfather lives in this country. He further found  that
   the two eldest children have a strong relationship with their  biological
   father whom they see regularly.  The  Judge  also  found  that  the  best
   interest of the appellant's own child, Rico is to be with the  appellant.
   He said that this factor is not quite the same for the other two children
   because they have their own father here, who is a very much part of their
   life lives. He said that still however, the family unity is  affected  by
   the appellant's absence and to a  lesser  extent,  I  consider  that  the
   appellant's presence in their lives is in their best interests  (emphasis
   mine).

  11. The Judge also found that the children have spent all their  lives  in
      the United  Kingdom  and  they  are  being  educated  here  and  their
      education should not be interrupted. The Judge  also  found  that  the
      children are now starting to develop their ties  and  relationship  in
      the United Kingdom which will set  their  paths  for  the  future  and
      stated that today know nothing else. He also found that it  would  not
      be reasonable for the children's younger brother  should  relocate  to
      Philippines. The Judge found that there is no evidence of any ties for
      the children in the Philippines apart from the appellant.

  12. Having found that the appellant's children's best interests  lie  with
      living with the appellant in the United Kingdom, the Judge went on  to
      find that the respondent's interest in the economic well-being of  the
      country trumps that of the appellant's children's interests.




  13. Paragraph 117B states that in the case of a person who is  not  liable
      to deportation, the public interest  does  not  require  the  person's
      removal where (a) the person has a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
      relationship with  a  qualifying  child  and  (b),  it  would  not  be
      reasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom.




  14.  I  find  that  the  Judge  erred  in  law  materially  after   having
      resoundingly found that the appellant has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
      parental relationship with British citizen children who are qualifying
      children and finding it would be not reasonable to expect the children
      to leave the United Kingdom.




  15. In SS Congo at paragraph 39 iv, it was stated "on the other hand,  the
      fact  that  the  interests  of  a  child  are  an  issue  will  be   a
      countervailing factor which tends to reduce to some degree  the  width
      of the margin  of  appreciation  which  the  State  authorities  would
      otherwise enjoy. Article 8 has to be interpreted and applied in  light
      of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child 1989.... However,  the
      fact that the interests of a  child  are  an  issue  does  not  simply
      provide a trump card so that a child applicant for positive action  to
      be taken by the State in the field of Article 8 (1) must  always  have
      their  application  succeed.....  Under  article  3  (1)  of  the   UN
      Convention on the Rights of the Child, the interests of the child  are
      a primary consideration, i.e.  an  important  matter-not  the  primary
      consideration. It is a factor relevant to the fair balance between the
      individual and the general  community  which  goes  some  way  towards
      tempering the otherwise wide margin of appreciation available  to  the
      State authorities in deciding what to do. The age of  the  child,  the
      closeness of their relationship  with  other  family  members  in  the
      United Kingdom and whether the family could  live  together  elsewhere
      are likely to be important factors which should be borne in mind."




  16. I accept that there are insurmountable obstacles to family  life  been
      enjoyed in the Philippines because  all  the  children  concerned  are
      British citizens. It cannot be expected of them to leave  the  country
      and the benefits of education  here,  to  join  their  father  in  the
      Philippines.  I  take  into  account  that  two  children  have  their
      biological father living in this country and therefore  cannot  leave.
      The biological children both parents are also British citizens. I give
      some credit to the appellant having left this country  voluntarily  to
      make an application for entry clearance from the Philippines.




  17. The Judge made it clear at paragraph 27 of his determination that  the
      children are not being used as a trump card and that hastened  to  add
      that he does not consider that it is the appellant's intention to  use
      the children in this way. He said that he finds love,  affection,  and
      concern shown for the children are genuine and real. I find  that  the
      British citizens children's best interests, which must be  my  primary
      consideration, is to live with their father which can only  happen  in
      this country as their insurmountable obstacles for family life  to  be
      enjoyed elsewhere.



  18. I also find that it is well established jurisprudence  that  the  best
      interests of children are to remain with their parents and absence  of
      other factors which are described as "countervailing", "compelling "or
      "very strong contraindications". There are no  such  factors  in  this
      case which can be so described. Parenting cannot be conducted  from  a
      distance through modern means of communication.



  19. I am in agreement with  Mr  Selwood  that  had  the  Judge  considered
      paragraph 117B (6) and based on his findings about the  appellant  and
      his children circumstances, the outcome would have been  positive  for
      the appellant.




  20. I find that the appellant has demonstrated that his exclusion from the
      United Kingdom will breach his right pursuant  to  Article  8  of  the
      European Convention on Human Rights.



  21. I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  first-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  I
      reconsider it and allow the appellant's appeal.






      DECISION

For the reasons given above, the determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
is set aside.

Appeal allowed pursuant to Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
Rights.

Signed by

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Mrs S Chana
                                                  this 3rd day of March 2016


