
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)                          Appeal  Number:
OA/09937/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard  at  Field  House,  London                                 Decision  &
Reasons Promulgated
On              the              8th               August               2016
On the 12th August 2016

Before:
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY
Between:
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                             Appellant in the Upper Tribunal

                                     And

                                    D.L.
                         (Anonymity Direction made)
                                                                    Claimant
Representation:
For the Secretary  of  State:  Mrs  Ahmad  (Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer)
For the Claimant: No attendance

                            DECISION AND REASONS



   1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Loughridge, promulgated on the 12th February 2016,
      in which he allowed the Claimant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
      decision to refuse his application for entry clearance to  the  United
      Kingdom under the Immigration Rules.

   2. The Secretary of State has sought to appeal against that decision  for
      the reasons fully set out within the Grounds of Appeal.   The  grounds
      are a matter of record, and are therefore not repeated in  full  here,
      but in summary, it is argued that the Judge had failed  to  adequately
      explain what the  circumstances  were  which  meant  that  there  were
      serious and compelling circumstances that made  it  desirable  not  to
      refuse  the  Claimant's  application  under  paragraph  319H  of   the
      Immigration Rules.  It is argued that following the  case  of  Mundeba
      (Section 55 and para 297 (i)(f)) [2013] UKUT88, although  relating  to
      paragraph 297 (i)(f) rather than 319H, it is argued that the  language
      in that paragraph is the same and that at paragraph 37 of the judgment
      in Mundeba, the Upper Tribunal stated that:

      "Family considerations require an evaluation of  the  child's  welfare
      including emotional needs.   'Other  considerations'  come  into  play
      where there are other aspects of a child's life that are  serious  and
      compelling - for example where an applicant is living in an acceptable
      social and economic  environment.   The  focus  needs  to  be  on  the
      circumstances of the  child  in  light  of  his  or  her  age,  social
      background and developmental history and will involve  enquiry  as  to
      whether:-

      (i)   there is evidence of neglect or abuse;

      (ii)  there are unmet needs that should be catered for;

      (iii) there are stable arrangements for the child's physical care.

      The assessment involves consideration as to whether the combination of
      circumstances are  sufficiently  serious  and  compelling  to  require
      admission."

   3. It is argued that the Judge erred in failing  to  take  that  approach
      when considering the Claimant's circumstances and that the  Judge  had
      focussed on the circumstances of the Claimant's mother and whether  or
      not she would be able to complete her PhD.

   4. Permission to appeal has been granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Dineen on the 13th July 2016, when he found that it was arguable  that
      the  Judge  had  erred  by  focussing  on  the  circumstances  of  the
      Claimant's mother, in light of  the  passages  referred  to  in  Upper
      Tribunal decision in Mundeba.

   5. It was on that basis that  the  case  came  before  me  in  the  Upper
      Tribunal.

   6. Although no one attended the appeal on behalf of the  Claimant,  I  am
      satisfied, having considered the  file,  that  notice  of  the  appeal
      hearing was properly sent to the Claimant by airmail on the 19th  July
      2016 to his address is China. Although no  legal  representative  have
      been seemingly instructed or other person asked to attend  the  appeal
      on behalf of the Claimant,  I  am  satisfied  that  despite  the  non-
      attendance of anyone on behalf of the Claimant, it was in the interest
      of justice to proceed with the appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

   7. Given that the Claimant himself is in China, I did not  consider  that
      the failure to attend meant that the appeal was being conceded by  the
      Claimant, and I therefore heard from  Mrs  Ahmad  in  respect  of  her
      submissions on behalf of the Secretary of State, as to  why  she  said
      that the Judge had made a material error of law in his determination.

   8. Mrs Ahmad on behalf of the Secretary of State argued that  she  relied
      upon the Grounds of Appeal and argued that at [15]  of  the  judgment,
      the Judge failed to appreciate the correct test, which  she  said  was
      set out in Mundeba at paragraph 33 of that case. Mrs Ahmad argued that
      there had to be evidence of neglect or  abuse  or  unmet  needs.   She
      argued that the wording of paragraph 297 (i) (f) was the same  as  the
      wording in paragraph 319H and argued that the head note  of  the  case
      made it clear that the Judge also had to consider the child's  welfare
      and best interests.  She argued that the Judge had erred in  focussing
      on whether or not the Claimant's mother could complete her PhD.

   My findings on error of law and materiality

   9. Although it was argued on behalf of the Secretary of  State  that  the
      wording of paragraph 319H (f) (iii) was the same  as  the  wording  in
      paragraph 297 (i) (f), although both paragraphs refer  to  them  being
      "serious and compelling family or other considerations",  the  wording
      of the two paragraphs is not identical.  Paragraph 297 deals with  the
      requirements for indefinite leave to enter the  United  Kingdom  as  a
      child or a parent, parents or a relative present and settled or  being
      admitted for settlement in the United Kingdom, whereas paragraph 319H,
      is dealing with the requirements  for  entry  clearance  or  leave  to
      remain, as a family member of a relevant points based system  migrant.
      The wording of 297 (i) (f) is  that  "one  parent  or  a  relative  is
      present and settled in the United Kingdom or  being  admitted  on  the
      same occasion for settlement and  there  are  serious  and  compelling
      family or other considerations  which  make  exclusion  of  the  child
      undesirable and suitable arrangements have been made for  the  child's
      care."

  10.  Paragraph 319H relates to the requirements  for  entry  clearance  or
      leave to remain for a family member of a points based system  migrant.
      Paragraph 319 (f) is a  requirement  that  "Both  of  the  applicant's
      parents must either be lawfully present in the UK,  or  being  granted
      entry clearance or leave to remain at the same time as  the  applicant
      or one parent must be lawfully present in the  UK  and  the  other  is
      being granted entry clearance or leave to remain at the same  time  as
      the applicant, unless: (i) The Relevant Points Based System Migrant is
      the applicant's sole surviving parent; (ii) The Relevant Points  Based
      System Migrant has and has had sole responsibility for the applicant's
      upbringing, or (iii) there are serious or compelling family  or  other
      considerations which  would  make  it  desirable  not  to  refuse  the
      application and suitable arrangements have been made in the UK for the
      applicant's care."

  11. The  wording  of  the  two  paragraphs,  although  not  identical,  is
      sufficiently similar to mean that guidance can potentially  be  sought
      from the case law regarding paragraph 297.

  12. However, in my judgement, the Upper Tribunal in the  case  of  Mundeba
      that case was considering the application by an appellant, who  was  a
      minor who lived in Kinshasa in the Democratic Republic of  Condo,  who
      had been living with the Girl Guides Association since 2009,  and  who
      had applied for leave to enter the country to join his  adult  sister,
      who had never actually cared for him in the DRC.  At paragraph  37  of
      the judgement, the Upper Tribunal stated that  "Family  considerations
      require an evaluation  of  the  child's  welfare  including  emotional
      needs.  'Other considerations' come into play where  there  are  other
      aspects of a child's life  that  are  serious  and  compelling  -  for
      example where an applicant is living in  an  unacceptable  social  and
      economic environment.  The focus needs to be on the  circumstances  of
      the child in the light of  his  or  her  age,  social  background  and
      developmental history and would involve enquiry as to whether:-

      (i)   there is evidence of neglect of abuse;

      (ii)  there are unmet needs that should be catered for;

      (iii) there are stable arrangements for the child's physical care.

      The assessment involves consideration as to whether the combination of
      the circumstances are sufficiently serious and compelling  to  require
      admission."

  13. The Tribunal went on at [38] to say that "As a starting point the best
      interest of a child are usually best served by being with both  or  at
      least one of  their  parents.   Continuity  of  residence  is  another
      factor; change in the place of residence where a child  has  grown  up
      for a number of years when socially aware is important."

  14. In my judgement, the submission made by Mrs  Ahmad  that  there  would
      have to be evidence of neglect or abuse, unmet needs that  had  to  be
      catered for and stable arrangements for  the  child's  physical  care,
      before an application could be allowed under paragraph 319H (f)  (iii)
      in terms of  there  being  "serious  or  compelling  family  or  other
      considerations which  would  make  it  desirable  not  to  refuse  the
      application" is entirely misconceived.  The Upper Tribunal in  Mundeba
      at [37] was describing what could amount to "other considerations" and
      had given an example of where an applicant was living in  unacceptable
      socially  economic  environment  where  there   would   need   to   be
      consideration of whether or not there was evidence of neglect or abuse
      or unmet needs that should be catered for.  It  was  not  saying  that
      there had to be actual abuse or unmet needs before it  could  be  said
      there  were  family  or  other  considerations  which  would  make  it
      desirable not to refuse the application under paragraph 319H.  Indeed,
      in terms of "family considerations", all that is said within  [37]  of
      Mundeba is that "this  will  require  an  evaluation  of  the  child's
      welfare including emotional needs".   However,  that  was  clearly  in
      respect  of  a  child  applicant  who  under  paragraph  297   seeking
      indefinite leave to enter where the child would be moved from his home
      country on a permanent  basis,  rather  than  requirements  for  entry
      clearance or leave to remain as a relative of a points based  migrant,
      who has limited period of leave in the United Kingdom, under paragraph
      319H.

  15. When considering whether there are family considerations  which  would
      make it desirable not to refuse the application,  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Loughridge  was  entitled  to  consider  the  situation  of  the
      Claimant's parents, and take into account as he quite properly did  at
      [15], that the Claimant's father has  frequent  absences  on  business
      trips and that in respect of his mother, if she were  not  allowed  to
      bring the Claimant with her to the United Kingdom, she  would  not  be
      able to finish her PhD, in circumstances where his mother had  already
      been granted a visa which allowed  her  to  come  to  the  UK  and  to
      complete her PhD.  The Judge further did consider the  effect  on  the
      Claimant himself in that the Judge found that  he  was  still  such  a
      young age that it was entirely realistic for him to spend 2  years  of
      his life being his mother's final year of  study  and  the  writing-up
      year, in the United Kingdom and then be able to readjust  to  life  in
      his own country upon return.  The Judge also properly considered  that
      the nursery place was likely to be wholly  or  mainly  funded  by  his
      parents so there would not be any significant burden on public  funds.
      The Judge therefore had considered the effect on the Claimant and  his
      emotional needs, and had clearly taken into account the fact that  the
      Claimant was simply not in a position to be able to be  cared  for  by
      his father because of  his  father's  frequent  absences  on  business
      trips. The Judge clearly was of the view  that  it  was  in  the  best
      interests of the child to remain in the care of at least  one  of  his
      parents, and that if he was not granted entry along with  his  mother,
      his mother would not be able to come to the UK and complete  her  PhD,
      when she already had a visa entitling her to do so.

  16.   In my judgement, this was a finding that was perfectly open  to  the
      Judge on the evidence before him, in considering whether or not  there
      were "serious and compelling  family  or  other  considerations  which
      would make it desirable not to refuse the  application,  and  suitable
      arrangements had been made in the UK for the Applicant's care.".   The
      Judge has also adequately and sufficiently set  out  at  paragraph  15
      what those serious and compelling  family  considerations  were  which
      made it desirable not to refuse the application.  Considering  whether
      there are family considerations, an analysis  of  the  effect  on  the
      child's family, has to be carried out.  The findings made by the Judge
      were perfectly open to him on the evidence.  In such circumstances the
      decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Loughridge does not  reveal  any
      material error of law and is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Loughridge does  not  contain  any
material error of law and is maintained.

The Claimant was  granted  anonymity  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  and  I
consider it appropriate for the Claimant to still be  granted  anonymity  in
the Upper Tribunal.  The Claimant is thereby  granted  anonymity  throughout
these proceedings, unless and until a Tribunal or Court  directs  otherwise.
No report of these proceedings shall directly  or  indirectly  identify  the
Claimant.  This direction applies both to the Claimant and to the  Secretary
of State.  Failure to comply with this direction could lead to  contempt  of
Court proceedings.

Signed

[pic]
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal McGinty                             Dated
9th August 2016

