
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/09502/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination issued                 |
|on 5 January 2016                    |On 14 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                SHAZIA BEGUM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, PAKISTAN
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Shoaib, of Shoaib Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born on 20 May 1985.   She  has
    not asked for an anonymity direction, and  none  has  been  made.   The
    respondent refused her application for entry clearance as a spouse  for
    reasons given in a notice dated 9 July 2014.  First-tier Tribunal Judge
    David C Clapham SSC  dismissed  her  appeal  for  reasons  given  in  a
    decision promulgated on 9 June 2015.

 2. The appellant's grounds of appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  are  rather
    diffuse, and in large part are simply narrative and repetition  of  the
    case put to the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The grounds include an insistence that  although  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer thought that one bank statement was missing from  a  12  months
    sequence, all were submitted.  At the hearing in the Upper Tribunal, no
    attempt was made to demonstrate that the application did meet the terms
    of the Immigration Rules in that respect.

 4. The appellant says  in  her  grounds  that  she  made  only  one  prior
    application, not two.  Mr Shoaib tried to demonstrate this by reference
    to copy records.  However, it became clear from the best available copy
    (produced in course of submissions by the Presenting Officer) that  she
    did make two previous applications, in both of which she gave  a  false
    name and false date of birth.  One  application  was  refused  and  the
    other was withdrawn.  Mr Shoaib accepted (a) that a second  application
    had been made and (b) that even if the judge had been  wrong  to  think
    that she ought to have disclosed both applications,  the  point  was  a
    relatively minor one which could not by itself change the outcome.

 5. Mr Shoaib said that the grounds disclosed two substantial  issues.   On
    the first, he submitted that the judge failed to give any, or adequate,
    reasons for finding  the  evidence  for  the  appellant  (mainly  given
    through the sponsor) not credible; that  the  appellant  had  not  been
    given credit for disclosing that she previously used  deception,  which
    was how the decision maker traced the matter; and that  an  there  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal an affidavit  by  the  appellant  and  a
    declaration by the sponsor dealing with the issue.

 6. The second point was that even if the adverse credibility finding  were
    to stand, there was a UK citizen child; the judge  failed  to  consider
    the best interests of that child; and the judge also  failed  to  apply
    the Razgar approach.

 7. Finally, Mr Shoaib submitted that on the basis of  either  or  both  of
    these errors, the determination should be set aside; there should be  a
    finding that the appellant made no false representation; it  should  be
    accepted that the appellant and sponsor established the income required
    under the Rules; and the appeal should be allowed under the  Rules,  or
    alternatively under Article 8, based  on  the  best  interests  of  the
    child.

 8. I enquired what evidence was before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dealing
    with the best interests of the child.  Mr Shoaib indicated  that  large
    bundles of materials both from the respondent and  from  the  appellant
    had been produced.  However, all of that  information  deals  with  the
    immigration history, financial matters and so on.  Mr Shoaib was unable
    to refer to  anything  amongst  it  which  bears  on  how  the  child's
    interests are adversely affected by the refusal of entry clearance.  Mr
    Shoaib advised me that the child has lived since birth with his  mother
    in Pakistan.

 9. Mr Matthews submitted as follows.  Records showed  that  the  appellant
    had indeed made two prior applications.  The  decision  maker  and  the
    judge were correct on that point.  He agreed that it appeared odd  that
    the deceit held against her was the statement that she  had  made  one,
    not two,  prior  applications,  while  the  decision  made  nothing  of
    previous applications being made in a false  identity.   However,  that
    made no difference to the  respondent's  decision  or  to  the  judge's
    finding on failure to disclose material  facts.   The  prior  deceptive
    applications were relevant to the credibility assessment.  Reading  the
    determination as a whole, it was very clear why the evidence  from  the
    sponsor was rejected.  His examination-in-chief  and  cross-examination
    were set out in detail.  The  responses  recorded  were  self-evidently
    unsatisfactory and evasive, which amply justified the  judge's  finding
    at paragraph 29 that he was  not  impressed  by  the  evidence  of  the
    sponsor.  The judge was  entitled  to  find  that  there  was  no  good
    explanation for the  prior  deceptive  applications.   The  grounds  of
    appeal also contain criticism of the interpretation  of  the  sponsor's
    evidence at the hearing (although Mr Shoaib had made no submissions  to
    the Upper tribunal on that point).  These alleged difficulties had  not
    been raised at the hearing and  were  not  supported  by  any  proposed
    evidence.  The sponsor now complained about giving evidence in Urdu (to
    which he agreed on the day) although  a  Pushtu  interpreter  had  been
    asked for.  The appellant said in the application form that the sponsor
    spoke Urdu.  No apparent difficulty had been  recorded  by  the  judge.
    There was no content to the grounds based on  Article  8  on  the  best
    interests of the child.  It was for the appellant to  put  forward  the
    evidence to support any such case and she failed to do so.  The judge's
    resolution of that matter at paragraph 33 showed no legal error.  There
    was no apparent reason why the sponsor might not  join  his  family  in
    Pakistan, and no case to resolve on  how  the  child's  best  interests
    might be adversely affected.

10. Mr Shoaib in response said that the Article 8 issue had been raised  in
    the skeleton argument in the  First-tier  Tribunal.   He  confirmed  in
    response to my question that he is a fluent Urdu speaker.  He said that
    he realised during cross-examination of the sponsor that  there  was  a
    problem, but accepted that he had not mentioned it to the judge.

11. I reserved my determination.

12. There may be unusual cases where an interpretation  problem  arises  in
    course of the hearing but is not apparent to representatives or to  the
    judge, resulting in a constructive error of law even though there is no
    fault  of  the  judge.   This  case  does  not  come  close   to   such
    circumstances.   There  is  a  vague  allegation   of   difficulty   in
    interpretation, but no supporting evidence is offered,  the  point  was
    not raised on the day as it might have been, and there  is  nothing  to
    explain what the sponsor might have said to the Tribunal but was unable
    to convey.

13. It is odd that the Entry Clearance Officer founded  on  the  relatively
    minor point of saying there was only one prior application not two, and
    not on the more substantial issue of use of false  identity.   However,
    there is nothing to disclose legal error in  the  conclusions  on  this
    point reached by the ECO or by the judge.

14. There was no case based on the best  interests  of  the  child  and  on
    Article 8 of the ECHR which required any further consideration.

15. The grounds in essence are no more than repetition of  the  case  which
    was put to the First-tier Tribunal and an expression of dissatisfaction
    with the outcome.

16. No error of law is disclosed.   The  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal shall stand.




           [pic]
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


           13 January 2016
