
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/09251/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Taylor House (Field House)  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 October 2015                    |On 9 November 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                           MS SAMAR SHEIBA ELHAMD
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Heller, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Egypt who was born on  6  November  1972.
    She appealed against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal ("FTT") to
    dismiss  her  appeal  against  the  respondent's   dismissal   of   her
    application under the Immigration Rules.



Background

2.   On 17 April 2012 the appellant applied to enter the UK  under  a  visit
    visa.  On 6 July 2014  her  application  was  refused.   The  appellant
    appealed to the FTT by notice of appeal  dated  6  August  2014.   This
    resulted in a review being carried out by the Entry  Clearance  Manager
    (the ECM).  The ECM maintained the decision on 12 October 2014.

3.   The appellant subsequently appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (the
    FTT) stating that the  ECO's  decision  was  unlawful  because  he  had
    misconstrued the facts. Secondly, the ECO had failed to establish  that
    any of the alleged  discrepancy  on  the  part  of  the  appellant  was
    motivated by her intention  to  deceive.   Thus,  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 320(7A) of the Immigration Rules were not met.  The appellant
    specifically relied on AA (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2010] EWCA Civ  773  saying  that  there  needed  to  be  a
    deliberate intention to deceive  in  order  to  qualify  for  mandatory
    refusal.  On the evidence before the ECO, this high threshold  was  not
    met.  There was nothing "dishonest" about the appellant's  application.



4.   The appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Robinson  (the
    Immigration Judge) on 19 February 2015.

5.   Having set out the requirements of paragraph  320(7A)  the  Immigration
    Judge found that the appellant had used deception in  order  to  obtain
    entry clearance.  Ms Pickup, who appeared for  the  appellant  at  that
    hearing, submitted that she had not made any false representations  but
    had not stated that she was employed when applying for entry clearance.
     This was an error because she had assumed that  her  husband's  income
    and means would be sufficient to satisfy  the  ECO  that  she  met  the
    requirements  of  the  Rules.   Had  she  indicated  that  she  was  in
    employment it would have made it more likely that her application would
    have been granted as  this  would  have  increased  her  income  level?
    Accordingly, the appellant had not used deception in any previous entry
    clearance application and paragraph  320(7B)  should  not  apply.   The
    respondent disagreed, pointing out that she had not declared her income
    truthfully in answer to questions 65 and  66  of  her  application  for
    entry clearance.

6.   Mr P. Duffy, who appeared for the respondent at the hearing,  submitted
    that her income and salary  were  not  apparent  from  the  documentary
    evidence and invited the Tribunal  to  take  into  account  only  those
    documents pertaining to the circumstances at the date of the refusal.

7.   The Immigration Judge concluded that on the basis  of  the  information
    supplied the appellant appeared to have given false  information  about
    her circumstances which  the  respondent  was  entitled  to  take  into
    account.

8.   Accordingly, the respondent had correctly concluded that  paragraph  7A
    had been engaged and this entitled him to refuse  the  application  for
    entry clearance.



Proceedings before the Upper Tribunal

9.   An application was made to the FTT for  permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal (the UT). The grounds state that there was no dishonesty
    in the application. The appellant's  husband's  income  was  more  than
    sufficient to satisfy the requirements of funds in the  Rules  and  had
    not secured any  advantage  to  the  appellant  in  immigration  terms.
    Further,  the  ECO  should  have  raised  the  issue  of   "non-genuine
    information" relating to the earlier application in 2012  with  her  in
    interview.  This was not done.  Furthermore, the Immigration Judge  was
    criticised for not dealing adequately with Article 8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights (the ECHR).

10.  Upper Tribunal Judge Renton  considered  these  grounds  and  concluded
    that they were at least arguable.  On 23 June 2015 he  noted  that  the
    Immigration Judge had made his decision solely on the basis of what the
    appellant had said in a previous application whereas in fact there  had
    been no false statement.

11.  At the hearing  I  heard  submissions  by  both  representatives.   The
    respondent's representative, Mr Duffy, accepted that paragraph  320(7B)
    was satisfied. The problem was with the findings.  The correct Rule was
    320(7B) (previous breach of immigration laws  by  breaching  conditions
    and or making an application to enter the UK on the basis of  deception
    etc. in relation to an earlier application) and not paragraph 7A (false
    representations made or failure to disclose material facts in  relation
    to the application before the ECO-i.e. in the current application).

12.  Miss Heller pointed out that  sub-paragraphs  7A  and  B  of  the  Rule
    required separate consideration.  The ECO  should  have  dismissed  the
    application under paragraph 320(7B) if he wished to do so  but  he  had
    not done so here.  Therefore, I should allow the appeal and  substitute
    the decision of the UT to allow  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    refusal by the respondent to grant entry clearance.

13.  At the hearing I announced my decision which was to dismiss the  appeal
    against the decision of the FTT for reasons which I will now explain.

Discussion

14.  The appellant applied for entry clearance as  a  representative  of  an
    overseas business under paragraph 144 of the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    basis of the refusal, however, was not under that Rule but on the basis
    that the appellant qualified for mandatory refusal under  paragraph  7A
    of the Immigration Rules.  The Immigration Judge  considered  that  the
    appellant had submitted false information but, it is now conceded that,
     the information supplied was not such as was intended  to  deceive  in
    that respect.  As discussed during the hearing, however, the  appellant
    had not mentioned in her application  of  28  May  2014  that  she  had
    previously stated  in  her  2012  application  that  she  was  in  fact
    unemployed at that time, i.e. within her period of  alleged  employment
    which is said to  have  begun  in  1998.  She  failed  to  mention  the
    discrepancy between her application in  2012  and  her  application  in
    2014. The earlier statement would qualify as a previous  breach  of  UK
    immigration  law  by  using  deception  in  relation  to  the   earlier
    application and that deception would have clearly been material.   This
    was a clear failure on the part of the appellant  to  accurately  state
    the position and did amount to deception within paragraph 7B (d) of the
    Rule.

15.  I note that the refusal of entry  clearance  specifically  referred  to
    paragraph 320(7B) in relation to future applications.  It seems  to  me
    that the FTT would have been entitled to consider paragraph 320(7B) had
    it been drawn to its attention that the appellant had used deception in
    her application form in relation to the past application.

16.  Therefore, although the primary  basis  on  which  the  case  has  been
    argued was under 320(7A)  in  my  view  it  cannot  be  said  that  the
    Immigration Judge materially erred in law if,  as  appears  to  be  the
    case, he decided the case under the wrong  Rule  but  would  have  been
    entitled to dismiss the appeal had he  been  referred  to  the  correct
    Rule.

17.  For this reason I  have  concluded  that  the  ECO's  decision  was  in
    accordance with the Immigration Rules and there was no  material  error
    of law on the part of the FTT.

Decision

18.  The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is  dismissed.   I  find  no  material
    error of law in the decision of the FTT.  Accordingly, the respondent's
    decision to refuse entry clearance stands.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury
