
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/09178/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd August 2016                           |On 30th August 2016           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     upper tribunal Deputy judge ROBERTS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 farzana [t]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION Not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Hussain of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State for the Home Department on
    behalf of the Entry Clearance Officer Islamabad ("the ECO") against the
    decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Grimshaw)  allowing  the
    appeal of Farzana [T] against the ECO's  refusal  to  grant  her  entry
    clearance as the  spouse  of  Mohammed  [R]  a  British  citizen  ("the
    Sponsor")

 2. For the sake of clarity,  in  this  decision,  I  shall  refer  to  the
    Secretary of State/ECO C as "the Respondent" and to Farzana [T] as "the
    Appellant" which reflects their respective positions before the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

Background

 3. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born 1st January 1970.  She made
    application for entry clearance as the spouse of the Sponsor.   At  the
    time of her application, there was also an application  made  by  [MR],
    who is the 14 year old child of the Appellant and Sponsor.

 4. The ECO  initially  refused  the  Appellant's  application  on  several
    grounds.  He was not satisfied that the Sponsor was working as  claimed
    and came to the conclusion that false documentation had  been  supplied
    to him.

 5. The main ground that concerned the  ECO  however  revolved  around  the
    validity of the claimed marriage contracted between the  Appellant  and
    Sponsor. He noted that the Appellant had married  the  Sponsor  on  5th
    February 2000 in Pakistan and again on 15th March 2014.  The  Appellant
    is the Sponsor's third wife.  The Sponsor's first  wife  died  on  18th
    July 1993.  The Sponsor married his second wife (a British citizen)  on
    19th May 1998 but did not divorce her until 20th  May  2013.   The  ECO
    concluded therefore that it  followed  that  the  Sponsor  who  is  now
    domiciled in the UK, was not free under  UK  law  to  marry  the  first
    Appellant  in  2000.   The  ECO  was  also  not  satisfied   that   the
    "remarriage" in March 2014, was valid because it  could  not  be  legal
    under Pakistani law.

 6. Following on from that the Entry Clearance Officer doubted  that  there
    was contact between the parties as claimed.  He therefore  refused  the
    application.

First-tier Tribunal

 7. The appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal.  After hearing evidence
    mainly from the Sponsor Judge Grimshaw made several findings;

      i) She was satisfied that the financial provisions set out in Appendix
         FM to the Rules were met. (So  far  as  the  appeal  before  me  is
         concerned there is no challenge to this finding).

     ii) The judge was also satisfied that she had heard  credible  evidence
         showing contact between  the  parties  and  was  satisfied  of  the
         genuineness of the relationship.

    iii) She noted that the Presenting Officer accepted that the Sponsor was
         naturalised as a British citizen in October 2002.  It followed that
         the Appellant and Sponsor's son, [MR] born in November  2002  would
         qualify for a passport as a British citizen and thus would be  free
         to travel without the need for entry clearance [36].

 8. The judge then went on to consider the validity of  the  marriage.  She
    set out a summary of the Sponsor's matrimonial history.  She noted that
    the Sponsor's first wife was [SA] and she died on 18th July  1993.   On
    19th May 1998 the Sponsor married his second wife [BR].   The  marriage
    was unhappy.  [BR]'s brother objected to a divorce but did  consent  to
    the Sponsor taking  another  wife.   Accordingly  the  Sponsor  married
    Farzana [T] in an Islamic ceremony in Pakistan on  5th  February  2000.
    The son, was born on [ ] November 2002 just shortly after  the  Sponsor
    was naturalised as a British citizen on 3rd October 2002.

 9. The Sponsor continued to live with [BR] in the United Kingdom but spent
    long periods of time with the Appellant  and  their  son  in  Pakistan.
    Eventually the Sponsor initiated divorce proceedings against  [BR]  and
    was granted a decree absolute on 20th May 2013.

10. After his marriage to [BR]  was  dissolved,  the  Sponsor  returned  to
    Pakistan to remarry the first Appellant.  The couple  were  "remarried"
    on 15th March 2014 again in an Islamic ceremony.

11. The judge noted that it has always been the ECO's case that it  is  not
    permissible under Islamic law for the Sponsor and  first  Appellant  to
    "remarry" each other.  Indeed because of  the  Sponsor's  domicile  the
    earlier Islamic ceremony conducted in 2000 cannot be treated  as  valid
    in UK law, such as to permit the Appellant  to  enter  the  UK  as  the
    spouse of Mohammed [R].

12. In dealing with the matter Judge Grimshaw said the following at [32],

         "32. It seems to  me  that  the  matter  can  be  resolved  in  the
             following way.  If the remarriage to the  first  Appellant  in
             2014 is valid under  Islamic  law,  then  there  would  be  no
             difficulties in this country recognising the  marriage,  given
             that when it took place the sponsor was legally free to marry.
              Alternatively, if the remarriage to the  first  Appellant  is
             not allowed under Islamic law it is reasonable to suppose that
             the sponsor's divorce in United Kingdom means that  the  first
             Islamic marriage that took place between the  couple  in  2000
             can now be accepted and is valid.  In my view a marriage  that
             is legally valid abroad (namely the 2000 Islamic  ceremony  in
             the present case) must be accepted here but, I emphasise, only
             at the point the sponsor is considered free to  marry  in  the
             eyes of the law that applies in this country."

    Judge Grimshaw then allowed the Appellant's appeal and also allowed the
    appeal of [MR].

Permission to Appeal

13. The Respondent sought permission to appeal  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision. For the sake of clarity I set out here  that  permission  was
    sought only against the decision allowing Farzana [T]'s appeal.   There
    were no grounds challenging the decision to allow the appeal  of  [MR].
    Mrs Pettersen confirmed that the sole issue  to  be  decided,  revolves
    around the validity of the marriage between the Appellant and Sponsor.

14. There was one ground seeking permission namely that the judge had  made
    a misdirection of law on a material matter.  The ground  set  out  that
    the FtT Judge had erred in law by finding that the marriage  was  valid
    and reliance was placed  on  the  case  of  Abdin  (domicile  -  actual
    polygamous marriage) [2012] UKUT 00309 (IAC).  It was asserted that the
    Sponsor was domiciled in the UK at the time  of  the  marriage  to  the
    Appellant in 2000 and the judge's  finding  that  the  marriage  became
    valid at the time when he divorced his wife in 2013, was  not  open  to
    her on the evidence before her.

15. The grounds asserted that the judge had made no reference to  the  case
    of Abdin and therefore it was arguable that the judge had erred in  law
    in finding that the marriage between  the  Appellant  and  Sponsor  was
    valid given the history of the polygamous marriage and the domicile  of
    the Sponsor.

UT Hearing/Error of Law

16. I heard submissions from Mrs Pettersen and Mr Hussain.  Mrs  Petersen's
    submissions kept to the lines of the grounds seeking  permission.   She
    invited me to set aside the FtT's decision and remake it dismissing the
    Appellant's appeal.

17. Mr Hussain indicated that he had discussed the matter  fully  with  the
    Sponsor who was present at the hearing.   He  said  that  he  had  gone
    through the case law with him t and following that, he did ask  whether
    I could look at the appeal from an Article 8 ECHR  viewpoint.  This  is
    bearing in mind that it was now accepted that the Appellant's  son  was
    entitled to a British  passport  and  an  application  was  already  in
    process.  This  would  mean  that  the  Appellant  would  be  alone  in
    Pakistan, once her son travelled here.

18. He did acknowledge however that Judge  Grimshaw  had  not  gone  on  to
    consider Article 8 because she had  explicitly  recorded  at  [34]  "No
    other issues are raised in the refusal notice and I am  satisfied  that
    there are none".  He queried however whether it could not be  the  case
    that the facts before the judge  were  enough  for  her  to  have  been
    prompted into considering Article 8 ECHR.  Other than that, he said  he
    was unable, to assist further.

Consideration and Findings

19. I find I am satisfied, that the decision of Judge Grimshaw  promulgated
    on 23rd February 2016, contains an error of law requiring it to be  set
    aside and remade.

20. In giving my reasons for this finding, I can do no better than refer to
    the grounds seeking permission.  I am satisfied that the case of  Abdin
    sets out the correct approach which should have been taken by the FtT.

21. Following the approach set out there, I find that in 2000, the  Sponsor
    who at that time was legally married in the UK to [BR], entered into  a
    void polygamous marriage with the Appellant.

22. Thus the FtT's finding that the void marriage became valid by virtue of
    the Sponsor's divorce in 2013 is incorrect.

23. Equally, I find the FtT incorrect to find that the  Sponsor  "marrying"
    the Appellant again in 2014 makes for a valid marriage.  Since  it  has
    always been the case that the first Islamic marriage in 2000 was  valid
    in Pakistan, then a "second marriage" could  not  be  deemed  valid  in
    Islamic law.

24. I find for the foregoing reasons,  that  the  Appellant  and  Sponsor's
    marriage so far as UK law is concerned is void and that that  is  where
    the matter must end.

25. So far as any Article 8 ECHR issue is concerned,  Mr  Hussain  properly
    acknowledged that this had not been raised before the  FtT  and  I  can
    find no reason to say that the judge should have looked at matters from
    an Article 8 ECHR viewpoint.  In any event the Appellant may well  have
    other avenues available to her enabling her to gain entry.

26. There is one further consideration I feel bound  to  mention.   In  the
    papers before me there is a  document  which  appears  to  be  a  draft
    application  for  a   costs   order,   drafted   by   the   Appellant's
    representatives.  I record that  no  application  for  costs  was  made
    before me; and in any case considering my decision, I cannot  see  that
    any application would have had prospect of success.

27. For the foregoing reasons, I conclude that the appeal of the  Secretary
    of State should be allowed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed.

The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  hereby  set  aside  for  legal
error.

I remake the decision, dismissing Farzana [T]'s  appeal  against  the  Entry
Clearance Officer's decision of 14th May 2015 refusing her  entry  clearance
to the United Kingdom as a spouse.

No anonymity direction is made. None was sought.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     26 August 2016

Upper Tribunal Deputy Judge Roberts


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I set aside the FtT's award of a fee and direct no fee award made.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     26 August 2016

Upper Tribunal Deputy Judge Roberts




