
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/09691/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 18 June 2013                               |On 26 June 2013              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                          MISS FARZANA RAHMAN MUNNI

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - DHAKA

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Miss A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 23 December 1978.   On
    5 April 2012 the appellant submitted an application to enter the UK  as
    a Tier 1 (Post-Study work) Migrant.  In support of this application she
    submitted a letter from Kaplan dated 4 April  2012  which  stated  that
    "the final assessments have been  marked  by  Kaplan  Financial  and  a
    recommendation of a pass has  been  made  to  the  University.  Due  to
    technical  issues  with  the  university  system,  marks  are  awaiting
    confirmation by the University exam board on 1 June 2012".  The  letter
    went on to say that the appellant would  receive  her  certificate  and
    transcript which is expected to be on the certification date, namely 24
    September 2012.

2.   On 19 April 2012 the respondent refused the appellant's application  on
    the basis that the appellant had  failed  to  produce  a  qualification
    certificate within twelve months of obtaining it.

3.   The appellant's appeal was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge N  M  K
    Lawrence.  He held as follows:

         "12.     The appellant is unable to  produce  the  original  degree
             certificate at the date of the application. However,  she  did
             the next best thing according the respondent's own guidelines.
             She provided a letterer, dated  2  April  2012,  from  Kaplan,
             which meets  all  of  these  requirements  set  out  in  those
             Guidelines. The respondent was quite correct to say  that  the
             marks awarded by Kaplan has not been  confirmed  by  Liverpool
             John Moores University  and  this  is  because  of  'technical
             issues with the University system' and not because she has not
             passed the examination.  The letter goes  on  to  confirm,  in
             clerk and unequivocal terms that the appellant 'will  receive'
             her certificate on the 24th of September 2012.


         13.  In my view the  appellant  meets  the  eligible  qualification
             requirement and she ought to have been awarded the  20  points
             she is entitled to.


         14.  The second issue is whether the appellant was able  to  submit
             the eligible qualification within twelve months  of  obtaining
             it.  If this is to mean twelve months prior to the date of the
             application the appellant cannot meet it.  However, if  within
             twelve months of obtaining it she does. If it  is  to  be  the
             former then the respondent ought to have exercised  discretion
             in the appellant's favour.  She could not possibly  produce  a
             document which she has not been issued with. In this regard  I
             turn to the judgment in Forrester [2008]  EWHC  2307  (Admin).
             The  High  Court  found  that  the  respondent  'is  given   a
             discretion and she is given a discretion on the basis that  it
             will be exercised with a modicum of intelligence, common sense
             and humanity. It might be asked, in these circumstances,  what
             possible reason there could have been for not  exercising  the
             discretion in this claimant's favour'.  I  am  at  a  loss  to
             identify the logic behind the respondent's refusal to exercise
             discretion in this appellant's favour. I find the respondent's
             approach to this case is 'tick box' decision  making  and  not
             giving weight to the issues. I find if discretion is  properly
             exercised the appellant should be entitled to 15 points  under
             this category."

4.   In the notice of immigration decision issued  by  the  respondent,  the
    appellant was informed that her application does  not  attract  a  full
    right of appeal under Section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and
    Asylum Act 2002.  Her right of appeal is limited to any or all  of  the
    grounds referred to in Section 84(1)(b) and  (c)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, namely:


         "(b) The decision is unlawful by virtue of  Section  19(b)  of  the
             Race  Relations  Act  1976  (c.74)  discrimination  by  public
             authorities;


         (c)  That the decision is unlawful under Section  6  of  the  Human
             Rights Act 1998 (c.42) (Public authority not to  act  contrary
             to Human Rights Convention) as  being  incompatible  with  the
             appellant's Convention rights."

5.   On the  issue  of  discrimination  the  judge  found  that  Mr  Ahmed's
    submissions were utterly unmeritorious. Mr Ahmed could not identify the
    sort of discrimination he alleges Kaplan and UKBA practised against the
    appellant.

6.   In respect of Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998, the  judge  found
    that the appellant has a "civil right"  to  have  her  application  for
    entry clearance to the UK determined fairly.  This  means  on  all  the
    evidence taking  into  account  the  prevailing  law  and  guidance.  A
    decision taken without due considerations is ipso facto wrong  in  law.
    In his view in not appearing to have taken into account the full import
    of the letter from Kaplan dated 2 April  2012,  in  the  light  of  the
    prevailing Guidelines, the  respondent  had  failed  to  determine  the
    appellant's "civil rights  fairly.   Consequently  he  found  that  the
    respondent's decision was contrary to Section 6 of the Human Rights Act
    1998.  The respondent's decision was therefore wrong in law.

7.   As the judge allowed  the  appellant's  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules he did not consider  the  appellant's  appeal  under  Article  8.
    However for the sake of completeness he found that the  appellant  came
    to the UK to get her qualification and that is  exactly  what  she  had
    achieved.  Therefore Article 8 was not engaged.

8.   The respondent was granted permission to appeal  on  the  grounds  that
    the judge materially erred in law by allowing  the  appellant's  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules as  the  appellant's  application  did  not
    attract a full right of appeal under Section 82(1) of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

9.   In order to understand the background to the appellant's appeal, I  set
    out briefly the facts of the appellant's  case.   The  appellant  first
    came to the UK on 1 July 2009 as a student.  She had leave to remain in
    the UK until 31  December  2011.   The  sponsor  was  Kaplan  Financial
    Limited. On 16 March  2010  the  appellant  switched  to  an  Induction
    programme and MSc in International Banking and Finance, with  the  same
    sponsor, Kaplan.  The educational institution was Liverpool John Moores
    University. The completion date was 27 February 2012.   When  she  made
    this switch she informed the UKBA that this was course was scheduled to
    finish on 27 February 2012.

10.  The appellant completed all her examinations by August  2011  except  a
    dissertation, which had to be completed by 31 January 2012.  Her  leave
    to remain however was due to expire on 31 December 2011.  In  order  to
    seek further leave to remain in the  UK  the  appellant  sought  a  CAS
    letter from Kaplan.  Kaplan could not issue the appellant  with  a  CAS
    letter because she had not completed her dissertation.  Kaplan  advised
    the appellant to return to Bangladesh and submit the dissertation  from
    there. It also advised the appellant that she  could  apply  for  entry
    clearance to return to the UK.  The appellant returned to Bangladesh on
    28 December 2011.  She completed her dissertation and submitted  it  on
    time.

11.   It  is  apparent  from  the  determination  that  when  the  appellant
    submitted her application for leave to enter the  UK  as  a  post-study
    worker on 5 April 2011 and when it was refused, fourteen days later, on
    19 April  2012,  that  the  appellant  did  not  have  a  qualification
    certificate.  The letter from Kaplan dated 2 April 2012  relied  on  by
    the  judge  explained  that  there  were  technical  issues  with   the
    university system and that the marks were awaiting confirmation by  the
    university exam board on 1 June 2012.  In the body of that  letter  the
    award date was given as 1 June 2012". The expected  certification  date
    was given as 24 September 2012.  In the respondent's bundle is a letter
    from Liverpool  John  Moores  University  dated  16  May  2012  to  the
    appellant confirming  that  unmoderated  dissertation  mark  is  to  be
    considered on 1 June 2012 at the Assessment Board,  where  it  will  be
    ratified and her award will be confirmed.

12.  Bearing in mind the sequence of events in mind, I am rather puzzled  by
    some of the documents submitted by ECS  (Ethnic  Community  Service  UK
    Ltd) to the First-tier Tribunal when they lodged an appeal against  the
    respondent's decision on the appellant's behalf on 25 July 2012.   They
    submitted a letter from Liverpool JMU dated 23 July 2012  saying  "This
    letter  is  to  confirm  that  the  above  named  student  successfully
    completed all "his" taught modules on the MSc International  Banking  &
    Finance programme.  She was awarded on 16  March  2012  and  will  have
    graduated in July 2012".  On 30 August 2012 ECS submitted a  letter  to
    the First-tier Tribunalsaying that they had been asked by the appellant
    to forward a copy of certificate  "Degree  of  Master  of  Science"  in
    International Banking and  Finance  issued  by  Liverpool  John  Moores
    University in support of her appeal. The  award  certificate  that  was
    submitted was issued on 11 April  2012.   ECS  said  the  original  was
    available on demand.  In her sworn witness statement dated 30  December
    2012 the appellant stated that on 23 July 2012  Liverpool  John  Moores
    University confirmed to her that she was awarded a  certificate  on  16
    March 2012.  The original of that certificate has not been submitted to
    the court.  We do not  have  the  original  of  the  certificate  which
    according to Kaplan she would have received on 24 September 2012. These
    documents were not referred to by the judge even though they  had  been
    received at the Hatton Cross Hearing centre on 3 January 2013.  I  find
    that the information contained in the documents submitted by ECS and in
    the appellant's sworn statement is inconsistent  with  the  information
    contained in the letter from Kaplan and  from  the  University  to  the
    appellant dated  16  May  2012.   If  the  appellant  was  awarded  the
    certificate on 11 April 2012, it begs the  question  why  she  did  not
    submit it before the respondent refused her application  on  19  April,
    some eight days later, if indeed the document was genuine.  If she  had
    been told she was awarded a certificate on 16 March  2012,  I  question
    why the certificate is not dated 16 March 2012 but dated 11 April  2012
    if they are one  and  the  same  document.   It  is  incumbent  on  the
    appellant to give a credible account of the award she has  received  in
    respect of the  course  she  studied  in  the  UK.   In  light  of  the
    inconsistent evidence I am not able to find that the appellant has been
    truthful.  Had the judge properly  considered  the  evidence  that  was
    before him, I find that he would not have reached the findings he  made
    at paragraphs 12 to 14.

13.  It also means that  the  judge's  finding  at  paragraph  20  that  the
    respondent's decision was contrary to s6 of the Human Rights  Act  1998
    was in error as it was based on his findings at paragraphs  12  to  14.



14.  I find that the judge's decision cannot stand.  I set it aside and  re-
    make it.

15.  In light of my findings at paragraph 12 above, the  appellant's  appeal
    is dismissed.



Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
