
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/09345/2013
     OA/09349/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17 July 2014                               |On 22nd July 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                          THE HON. MR JUSTICE LEWIS
                  SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         MISS TEMIDELE IRENE KAREEM
                       MASTER VICTOR OLUWASEGUN KAREEM

                                                                 Respondents
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Adebayo Kareem
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
   INTRODUCTION
   1. This is an appeal against a determination by the First-tier Tribunal
      promulgated on 17 April 2014. By that determination, the Tribunal
      allowed an appeal by Miss Temidele Irene Kareem and Master Victor
      Ouwasegun Kareem against the refusal of an Entry Clearance Officer in
      Lagos on 7 March 2013 to grant them leave to enter as extended family
      members of a European Economic Area ("EEA") national exercising rights
      conferred by the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ("the
      Treaty").


   2. In essence, the respondents contend that their uncle, who is a
      national of Malta, lives in the UK. The respondents wish to be
      admitted to the UK to join him. They contend that they are extended
      family members within the Regulations and seek to obtain an EEA family
      permit to facilitate their admission to the UK. The issue before the
      tribunal was whether the entry clearance officer was correct in
      concluding that they were not extended family members within the
      meaning of the Regulations. The tribunal determined that the
      respondents were extended family members and allowed the appeal. The
      Secretary of State now appeals against that determination.


   THE LEGAL FRAMEWORK
   3. Regulation 11(1) and (2)  of the Regulations deal with the right of
      admission to the UK and provide that:

        "11. - Right of admission to the United Kingdom
        (1) An EEA national must be admitted to the United Kingdom if he
        produces on arrival a valid national identity card or passport
        issued by an EEA State."

        "(2) A person who is not an EEA national must be admitted to the
        United Kingdom if he is-


             (a) a family member of an EEA national and produces on arrival
             a valid passport and a qualifying EEA State residence card,
             provided the conditions in regulation 19(2)(a) (non-EEA family
             member to be accompanying or joining EEA national in the
             United Kingdom) and (b) (EEA national must have a right to
             reside in the United Kingdom under these Regulations) are met;
             or


             (b) a family member of an EEA national, a family member who
             has retained the right of residence, a person who meets the
             criteria in paragraph (5) or a person with a permanent right
             of residence under regulation 15 and produces on arrival-

                 (i) a valid passport; and
                 (ii) an EEA family permit, a residence card, a derivative
                 residence card or a permanent residence card."


   4. Family members are defined in Regulation 7 of the Regulations, so far
      as material, provide as follows.
         "7.- Family member


         (1) Subject to paragraph (2), for the purposes of these Regulations
         the following persons shall be treated as the family members of
         another person-


         (a) his spouse or his civil partner;


         (b) direct descendants of his, his spouse or his civil partner who
         are-
              (i) under 21; or
              (ii) dependants of his, his spouse or his civil partner;


         (c) dependent direct relatives in his ascending line or that of his
         spouse or his civil partner;


         (d) a person who is to be treated as the family member of that
         other person under paragraph (3)."


         .....


         "(3) Subject to paragraph (4), a person who is an extended family
         member
         and has been issued with an EEA family permit, a registration
         certificate or a residence card shall be treated as the family
         member of the relevant EEA national for as long as he continues to
         satisfy the conditions in regulation 8(2), (3), (4) or (5)  in
         relation to that EEA national and the permit, certificate or card
         has not ceased to be valid or been revoked."


   5. "Extended family members"  are defined in Regulation 8 of the
      Regulations in the following terms
        "8.- "Extended family member"


        "(1) In these Regulations "extended family member" means a person
        who is not a family member of an EEA national under regulation
        7(1)(a), (b) or (c) and who satisfies the conditions in paragraph
        (2), (3), (4) or (5)."


        "(2) A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if the
        person is a relative of an EEA national, his spouse or his civil
        partner and-


              (a) the person is residing in [a country other than the
              United Kingdom] and is dependent upon the EEA national or is
              a member of his household;


              (b) the person satisfied the condition in paragraph (a) and
              is accompanying the EEA national to the United Kingdom or
              wishes to join him there; or


              (c) the person satisfied the condition in paragraph (a), has
              joined the EEA national in the United Kingdom and continues
              to be dependent upon him or to be a member of his household."


        "(3) A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if the
        person is a relative of an EEA national or his spouse or his civil
        partner and, on serious health grounds, strictly requires the
        personal care of the EEA national his spouse or his civil partner."

        "(4) A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if the
        person is a relative of an EEA national and would meet the
        requirements in the immigration rules (other than those relating to
        entry clearance) for indefinite leave to enter or remain in the
        United Kingdom as a dependent relative of the EEA national were the
        EEA national a person present and settled in the United Kingdom."


        "(5) A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if the
        person is the partner of an EEA national (other than a civil
        partner) and can prove to the decision maker that he is in a
        durable relationship with the EEA national."


        "(6) In these Regulations "relevant EEA national" means, in
        relation to an extended family member, the EEA national who is or
        whose spouse or civil partner is the relative of the extended
        family member for the purpose of paragraph (2), (3) or (4) or the
        EEA national who is the partner of the extended family member for
        the purpose of paragraph (5)."

   6. Regulation 12 of the Regulations deals with the issuing of an EEA
      family permit. Regulation 12(1) deals with family members. Regulation
      12(2) and (3) deal  specifically with extended family members and
      provide that:

        "(2) An entry clearance officer may issue an EEA family permit to
        an extended family member of an EEA national who applies for one if-




             (a) the relevant EEA national satisfies the condition in
             paragraph (1)(a);


             (b) the extended family member wishes to accompany the
             relevant EEA national to the United Kingdom or to join him
             there; and


             (c) in all the circumstances, it appears to the entry
             clearance officer appropriate to issue the EEA family permit."


   THE FACTUAL BACKGROUND
   The Applications
   7. The respondents to this appeal, Irene and Victor Kareem, are nationals
      of Nigeria born on 25 July 1996 and 10 October 1997 respectively. They
      live with their father in Nigeria and attend a boarding school in
      Nigeria. Sadly, their mother died in 2012


   8. They have an uncle, Mr Adebayo Kareem, who is a national of Malta. He
      is currently working and living with his wife in the United Kingdom.
      He is an EEA national for the purposes of the Regulations. On 14
      January 2013 both respondents applied for admission to the United
      Kingdom. The basis for that application was, in essence, that they
      wished to join their uncle in the United Kingdom on the basis that
      they were extended family members within the meaning of the
      Regulations. The applications did not identify the particular sub-
      regulation or sub-regulations in Regulation 8 of the Regulations on
      which the respondents relied.

   9. In their application forms, the respondents gave details of their
      father and stated that his work or occupation was business/insurance
      practitioner. The form recorded that they had visited London in 2012
      and had visited the United Arab Emirates in 2011 and the United States
      of America in 2012 for holidays. There was also a visit to India in
      2011. The application forms explained that the respondents lived at
      home with their father. The application forms gave details of their
      uncle's address, employment, and income. The application also states
      that the respondents (or their uncle) would receive income from their
      father.


  10. The uncle, Mr Adebayo Kareem, also sent two letters each dated 20
      February 2013 to the entry clearance officer. One is headed
      "Invitation Letter" inviting the respondent to live with him and his
      wife in the United Kingdom as their mother had died and their father
      was not coping well with his bereavement. The second letter is headed
      sponsorship letter and says that the uncle paid the fees for the
      respondents' boarding school, food and upkeep. It explained that he
      sent money to his brother (the respondents' father) or left money with
      him when he visited Nigeria.  The respondents' father also sent a
      letter dated 21 February 2013 to the entry clearance officer
      indicating that he consented to his brother taking the two respondents
      to the United Kingdom.


The Decision of the Entry Clearance Office
  11. By notices dated 7 March 2013, the entry clearance officer refused
      each application. In relation to Mrs Irene Kareem, the notice of
      refusal is in the following terms:
        "Your Application


         You have applied for admission to the United Kingdom by virtue of
         European Community Law as the family member of a European Economic
         Area national who is exercising, or wishes to exercise, rights of
         free movement under the Treaty of Rome in the United Kingdom.


         The Decision


         You state that you wish to go and join your uncle in the UK. He is
         a Maltese citizen exercising his treaty rights in the UK. He has
         stated that he has been supporting you as your father was unable to
         do so as he was caring for your mother. He has stated your mother
         has now died. However; I note that you were issued a visa last year
         to visit the UK with your parents. In that application your father
         submitted documents to show that he was self employed and that he
         was paying for the trip for the whole family. You also made a
         recent application to join your uncle in January of this year and
         in that application your father stated that he would continue to
         support you. Given this and the fact that you have submitted no
         evidence of your claimed dependency on your uncle I am not
         satisfied that you are dependent on the EEA national or a member of
         his/her household. I am therefore not satisfied that you are an
         extended family member in accordance with Regulation 8 of the
         Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.
         I therefore refuse your EEA family permit application because I am
         not satisfied that you meet all of the requirements of Regulation 8
         of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006."


  12. A notice in the same terms was sent to Victor Kareem. The notices do
      not specifically identify which sub-regulation of Regulation 8 of the
      Regulations the entry clearance officer was considering. The wording
      of the notice, and in particular the reference to the officer not
      being satisfied that the respondents were dependent on the EEA
      national or a member of his household, reflects the provisions of
      Regulation 8(2) of the Regulations.


  13. There was an internal review of the decisions by an entry clearance
      manager. The respondents provided further information including copies
      of bank statements said to show payments from the respondents' uncle
      to their father. The entry clearance manager reviewed the matter and
      decided to maintain the decision of the entry clearance officer on
      this basis:

         "The appellant has stated in the Grounds of Appeal that he provided
         documents with the application demonstrating that his sponsor has
         been sending money through the appellant's father and other
         individuals. I note that a letter was provided with the application
         from the appellant's father stating that the sponsor has been the
         sole provider for some years now. The appellant has provided bank
         statements with the appeal in which some transactions are
         highlighted. Whilst I note that he states in the Grounds of Appeal
         that these demonstrate payments through other people when the
         sponsor cannot travel, no supporting evidence of this has been
         provided. This information contradicts that provided in the
         appellant's previous applications, in which he stated that his
         father would fund his travel to the UK (ABV/789648) and had part
         financial responsibility for him (LAG/5380655). I am therefore not
         satisfied that the appellant has demonstrated that he is dependant
         on his uncle as claimed."


   The Appeals
  14. The Respondents then appealed the refusals to the First-tier Tribunal.
      The grounds of appeal were expressed in the following term:
         "Proof
         I disagree with the E.C.O Decision simply because in my recent
         application, we submitted with the applications a supporting
         documents explaining how our uncle [Mr Adebayo Kareem] has been
         sending money to me and my brother through our father [MrGani
         Bamidele Kareem] and also the reasons why the money cannot be given
         to us directly, we submitted also with the applications two
         different bank statements [Barclays & HSBC] showing the list of the
         people he's been sending the money through when he [Mr Adebayo
         Kareem] cannot visit himself due to his work.


         Holiday
         It was our mother's wish for all of us to go on family holidays,
         unfortunately only half of us could go due to the deteriorating
         condition of our mother and in fact she died halfway through the
         holidays.
         I'm sure there was some arrangement between our father [Mr Gani
         Bamidele Kareem] and our unlce [Mr Adebayo Kareem] as our father
         always consult our uncle anything concerning myself and my brother
         [Master Victor Oluwasegun Kareem].


         Mistakes
         Long before the demise of our mother, our father has not been
         himself, the whole situations has been taken its toll on him. He
         has been making a lot of mistakes, lot of wrong decisions, It seems
         he cannot cope most especially after the death of mother, he's been
         going to the hospital himself for treatments. I believe that is
         reasons why he's been making a lots of mistakes and wrong decisions
         so also I believe that is the one of the many reasons why our uncle
         has been frequently visiting and phoning us in other to ensure
         things are ok with us."


   The First-Tier Tribunal Determination
  15. The First-tier Tribunal dealt with the background and the proceedings
      before it. In identifying the relevant law, the First-tier Tribunal
      considered the appeal on the basis of Regulation 8(4) of the
      Regulations, that is on the basis that the respondents would be
      extended family members if they were a relative of the EEA national
      and would meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules (other than
      those relating to entry clearance) for indefinite leave to enter or
      remain in the United Kingdom as a dependent relative of the EEA
      national were the EEA national a person present and settled in the
      United Kingdom. The tribunal considered that the relevant provisions
      of the Immigration Rules were those set out in Immigration Rule 298
      or, possibly, 317.


  16. In relation to that issue, the tribunal found that the respondents
      could satisfy the requirements of Immigration Rule 298 and its
      reasoning is contained in the two following paragraphs:
         "23. I find that both these Appellants do satisfy the requirements
         set out in paragraph 298 of the Immigration Rules, in that they:-
                  i) Are seeking to remain with a relative in one of the
                     following circumstances:- (d) one parent or a relative
                     is present and settled in the United Kingdom, and
                     there are serious and compelling family or other
                     considerations which make exclusion of the child
                     undesirable, and suitable arrangements have been made
                     for the child's care, and
                 ii) The children are "under the age of 18";
                iii) Are not leading independent lives, are unmarried (and
                     are not civil partners), and have not formed any
                     independent family unit; and
                 iv) Can, and will, be accommodated adequately by the
                     parent, parents or relative the child was admitted to
                     join without recourse to public funds, in
                     accommodation which the parent, parents or relative
                     the child was admitted to join owned or occupied
                     exclusively; and
                  v) Can, and will, be maintained adequately by the parent,
                     parents or relative the child was admitted to join,
                     without recourse to public funds; and
                 vi) Does not have one or more unspent convictions within
                     the meaning of the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act
                     1974.


         24.  I find that both these Appellants satisfy all of those
         requirements set out in paragraph 298 of the Immigration Rules, on
         the basis that they are children of a relative who is effectively
         'present and settled in the United Kingdom'."


  17. In relation to Immigration Rule 317, the First-Tier Tribunal's
      conclusion was as follows:
         "25. If I am wrong about that, and the correct provision to look at
         in the circumstances is paragraph 317 of the Immigration Rules, I
         nevertheless find that both these Appellants comply with the
         provisions of that Rule also. That Rule sets out the requirements
         for Indefinite Leave to Enter or Remain in the United Kingdom as
         the 'parent, grandparent or other dependent relative of a person
         present and settled in the United Kingdom'.
         26. Having said that, sub-paragraph (i) of paragraph 317 makes it
         clear that a person applying under that Rule must be related to the
         person present and settled in the United Kingdom in one of a number
         of defined ways. These Appellants, who are still under the age of
         18, don't seem to fall within any of the categories outlined in sub-
         paragraphs (a) - (f) of sub-paragraph (i) of paragraph 317 of the
         Immigration Rules."

THE APPEAL
  18. The Secretary of State appealed, with permission, on two grounds. The
      first was that the tribunal had erred in considering this appeal under
      the provisions of the Immigration Rules not the Regulations. Mr Duffy,
      appearing on behalf of the Secretary of State, withdrew that ground of
      appeal at the hearing. We consider that he was correct to do so. The
      tribunal applied Regulation 8(4) of the Regulations. That, in turn,
      directed attention to whether or not the respondents satisfied certain
      requirements of the Immigration Rules. Consequently, the tribunal did
      not err by considering the provisions of the Immigration Rules; it was
      directed to do so by Regulation 8(4) of the Regulations.


  19. The second ground of appeal alleges that the tribunal failed to give
      adequate reasons for allowing the appeal and did not make relevant
      findings.

   ANALYSIS
  20.  In our judgment, properly analysed, there were two routes by which
      the respondents were claiming to be extended family members for the
      purposes of regulation 12 of the Regulations. First, they were
      claiming that they were dependants of their uncle who was an EEA
      national exercising Treaty rights in the UK and therefore they fell
      within regulation 8(2) of the Regulations. Secondly, they were
      contending that they were persons who would meet the requirements in
      the Immigration Rules (other than those relating to entry clearance)
      for leave to remain or enter the UK if their uncle were present and
      settled in the UK (as opposed to exercising Treaty rights) and so fell
      within Regulation 8(4) of the Regulations. That would involve
      consideration of Immigration Rules 297 and 298 (which are in
      materially similar terms) and 317. Those Rules deal with leave to
      enter and remain as, amongst other things, a relative of a person
      present and settled in the UK.


  21. The First-tier Tribunal has, in our judgment, however, erred in law in
      the way in which it dealt with these appeals. First, the tribunal
      erred in its approach to Immigration Rule 298. The material provisions
      of that rule in the present case provide that
        "298. The requirements to be met by a person seeking indefinite
        leave to remain in the United Kingdom as the child of a parent,
        parents or a relative present and settled in the United Kingdom are
        that he:-
        (i) is seeking to remain with a parent, parents or a relative in
        one of the following circumstances:
        `.....
        (d) one parent or relative is present and settled in the United
        Kingdom and there are serious and compelling family or other
        considerations which make exclusion of the child undesirable and
        suitable arrangement shave been made for the child's care ....."

  22. The basis for the tribunal's conclusion that the requirements were met
      is set out in paragraph 24 of its determination, namely that the
      respondents "are children of a relative who is effectively 'present
      and settled in the United Kingdom'". First, that, in our judgment, is
      a misstatement or misunderstanding of the relevant requirements of
      Immigration Rule 298. It is not sufficient that the respondents are
      children of a relative who is effectively present and settled. There
      must be "serious and compelling family or other considerations" which
      make the exclusion of the respondents from the United Kingdom
      "undesirable".


  23. Secondly, the tribunal fails to identify what were the "serious and
      compelling circumstances" in the present case. The background is that
      the respondents were aged 17 and 16 at the relevant time. They had
      spent their entire life in Nigeria. They attended boarding school
      there. They lived otherwise with their father. Their father had
      recently been bereaved and was said to be suffering from depression.
      The tribunal do not identify which factors it identified as giving
      rise to "serious and compelling " considerations making it undesirable
      for the respondents to be excluded from the United Kingdom. For those
      reasons, we are satisfied that the tribunal erred in law in relation
      to this aspect of the matter.


  24. Thirdly, the tribunal erred in law in its interpretation of
      Immigration Rule 317. The material provisions of that rule provide as
      follows:
        "317.. The requirements to be met by a person seeking indefinite
        leave to remain in the United Kingdom as the parent, grandparent or
        other dependent a relative present and settled in the United
        Kingdom are that he:-
           (i) is related to a person present and settled in the United
           Kingdom in one of the following ways:


           (f) the son, daughter, sister, brother, uncle or aunt over the
           age of 18 if living alone outside the United Kingdom in the most
           exceptional compassionate circumstances."


  25. The tribunal found that the respondents satisfied the provisions of
      Immigration Rule 317. That decision is wrong as a matter of law. The
      two respondents were under 18. They were not related to their uncle in
      one of the ways prescribed by Immigration Rule 317. For each of those
      two separate reasons, the respondents did not satisfy the requirements
      of Immigration Rule 317. Further, it may be doubted that they were
      living alone as they were living with their father when not at
      boarding school. In any event, it is clear that the tribunal erred in
      law and misinterpreted or misapplied Immigration Rule 317.


  26. For those reasons, the tribunal erred in law and we set aside the
      determination allowing the appeal. We remit the case to the First-tier
      Tribunal pursuant section 12(2)(b) of the Tribunals, Courts and
      Enforcement Act 2007.  We also make the following observations. First,
      the tribunal will need to consider both regulation 8(2) and (4) of the
      Regulations. The basis of the entry clearance officer's decision was
      regulation 8(2) of the Regulations and the conclusion that the
      respondents were not dependants of the EEA national (their uncle) or
      members of his household. The tribunal did not address this issue and
      did not consider the adequacy of the reasons given by the entry
      clearance officer for the refusals. The respondents appeal against
      that finding. The tribunal will need to consider and address this
      issue. Secondly, the tribunal will need to consider regulation 8(4) of
      the Regulations and the relevant Immigration Rules to determine
      whether or not these respondents fall within the regulation 8(4) and
      so may claim to be extended family members of the EEA national.


ANCILLARY MATTERS
  27. For completeness, we note that at the hearing before this Tribunal,
      permission was granted to the Appellant, the Secretary of State to add
      an additional ground of appeal, namely that if the First-tier Tribunal
      was correct to have allowed the appeal  under Regulation 8 of the
      Regulations, then it should have remitted the matter back to the
      Secretary of State for the Home Department rather than simply allowing
      the appeal. The point that the Secretary of State  wished to make was
      that Regulation 12(2) of the Regulations conferred a discretion on her
      to grant an EEA family permit if the requirements of Regulation 8 were
      satisfied. Even if the tribunal had been correct to hold that the
      respondents were extended family members for the purposes of
      Regulations 8 and 12(2) of the Regulations, the result would be that
      the Secretary of State then had a discretion to grant an EEA family
      permit and the exercise of that discretion ultimately, was a matter
      for her. In the event, we have found that the tribunal erred in law
      and the determination allowing the appeal must be aside. In those
      circumstances, this ground does not therefore need to be addressed.


   CONCLUSION


  28. The First- tier Tribunal made an error of law and the determination is
      set aside. The matter is remitted to a differently constituted First-
      Tier Tribunal.






Signed:                                 Date: 21/07/2014


Mr Justice Lewis
