
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/09012/2014
     OA/09013/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24th June 2016                             |On 3rd October 2016           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                 (1) IAN [C]
                              (2) sebastian [c]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms A Bhachu (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Chapman, promulgated on 2nd October 2015, following a hearing  at
    Birmingham on 28th September 2015.  In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeals of Ian  [C]  and  Sebastian  [C],  whereupon  the
    Appellants subsequently applied for, and were  granted,  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellants

 2. The Appellants are two brothers.  Both are citizens  of  Jamaica.   The
    First Appellant was born on 31st May 1999 and he is  now  17  years  of
    age.  The Second Appellant was born on 23rd March 2001, and is  now  15
    years of age.  They have lived all their lives  in  Jamaica  and  still
    continue to do so.  They have lived with  their  maternal  grandmother,
    Mrs Jennifer [R].  On 14th April 2014, they made applications for entry
    clearance to join their mother and stepfather in the United Kingdom, so
    as to be in the same household as the  stepsiblings.   The  Appellants'
    mother  and  stepfather  are  Mrs  Sheren  [R]  and  Mr   Kenneth   [C]
    respectively.  The latter is a British citizen.  That  application  was
    refused on 1st July 2014 on the basis that the Appellants' mother,  Mrs
    [R], had limited leave to remain,  and  that  she  did  not  have  sole
    responsibility for the upbringing of the  Appellants,  and  that  there
    were no serious and compelling family  or  other  considerations  which
    make the decision of the children undesirable.  Moreover, it  was  also
    said that the Appellants could not be adequately  accommodated  without
    recourse to public funds in the UK.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge considered the evidence that Mrs [R], the Appellants' natural
    mother, had travelled to Jamaica in 2011, with  her  husband,  and  had
    spent time with the Appellants there.  She spent one month there.   She
    communicated regularly with the  Appellants  by  telephone  and  social
    media in any event.  She provided them with money for  food,  clothing,
    and leisure activities.  That evidence was confirmed by her husband, Mr
    Kenneth [C] and he had also supported the Appellants (see paragraphs 15
    to 16).  There are also letters from the grandmother of  the  children,
    Mrs Jennifer [R], which confirmed this basic evidence (paragraph 17).

 4. When Mr [C] gave evidence, the judge observed how he explained that  he
    had met his wife in 2004 whilst she was visiting family in  the  Cayman
    Islands.  At the time she did not have her two children with her.   The
    children were living with their grandmother.  When  they  married,  Mrs
    Sheren [R] joined Mr Kenneth [C] in the Cayman Islands.  There  appears
    to have been an agreement between them that they would do the best  for
    the Appellant children when they were married.

 5. The judge had regard to the  relevant  case  law  in  this  area  which
    consisted of TD (Yemen) [2006] UKAIT 00049 and of Mundeba  [2013]  UKUT
    88 and Singh v ECO, New Delhi [2004] EWCA Civ 1075, all of  which  were
    considered carefully (see paragraphs 25 to 32).

 6. The judge then made his findings and concluded that  the  consideration
    of "sole responsibility" under the law is one that is "a practical  one
    which, in each case, looks to who in fact is exercising  responsibility
    for the child" (see paragraph 40).  The judge then broke down the facts
    that were before him, observing that the Appellants' biological  father
    played no part in their lives, but in 2004, when Mrs [R]  met  with  Mr
    [C], it was discussed with Mr [C] "the  need  for  him  to  take  on  a
    father's role with respect to the Appellants" (see paragraph  41(iii)).
    Then they were  married  on  11th  January  2005  in  Jamaica  and  the
    Appellants did attend their parent's  wedding.   Mr  [C]  and  Mrs  [R]
    returned to live in the Cayman Islands and the Appellants continued  to
    live in Jamaica with their grandmother and subsequently with Mrs  [R]'s
    sister, Faye, who moved into the household occupied by  the  Appellants
    and their grandmother  with  her  two  young  children  (see  paragraph
    41(iv)).  Then in Mr [C]'s and Mrs [R]s' absence in 2004 sent money  to
    Jamaica to contribute to the upbringing of the children.  Mrs [R]  also
    returned to Jamaica for three months at the end of  2004  during  which
    period she was married to Mr [C].

 7. The judge, in considering all this evidence, concluded that

         "I have little doubt that Mr [C] and Mrs  [R]  have  a  strong  and
         heartfelt desire to have the Appellants join  them  in  the  United
         Kingdom.  They give good reasons for doing  so,  namely,  that  the
         Appellants are the children of Mrs [R], that Mr  [C]  agreed,  when
         they were married, to be responsible for them  in  place  of  their
         natural father, and also so that the  Appellants  can  be  part  of
         their larger family.  I accept that they have demonstrated that the
         Appellants have always been in their  thoughts  because  they  have
         made financial contributions  towards  their  upkeep  over  a  long
         period of time, and made an effort to have the Appellants join them
         in the Cayman Islands in 2011" (paragraph 42).

 8. The judge went on to hold, however, that "these factors alone, however,
    do not mean that they have had sole responsibility".  This is because

         "financial contributions  in  themselves  do  not  amount  to  sole
         responsibility, and I note that in the evidence presented to me the
         financial contributions have been on  a  much  more  regular  basis
         since Mr  [C]  and  Mrs  [R]  moved  to  the  United  Kingdom  ..."
         (paragraph 43).

 9. He also went on to say that the evidence suggested that there had  been
    a greater input into the upbringing of the Appellants since that  time.
    Since the Entry Clearance Officer made  the  decision  to  refuse,  the
    amount of contact and contributions has increased.

10. He then concluded that whilst there was "some evidence of the role that
    Mrs [R] has played in the life of her children more recently, there  is
    very little evidence of any involvement, save for the  money  transfers
    between 2004 and 2013" (paragraph 45).

11. In addition, as far as the children's schooling was  concerned,  whilst
    it was the case that Mrs [R]  had  made  visits  to  Jamaica  in  2011,
    neither Mrs [R] nor Mr [C] had visited  the  schools  attended  by  the
    Appellants (see paragraph 46).  The judge was clear that this  did  not
    mean that the visits are a prerequisite  to  a  determination  of  sole
    responsibility (see paragraph 47).

12. However, the judge observed that given that  the  flight  time  between
    Jamaica and the Cayman Islands was only 45 minutes, it  was  not  clear
    why Mrs [R] did not make more frequent visits to see  the  children  in
    Jamaica (paragraph 47).

13. In the meantime, the  Appellants  were  being  looked  after  by  their
    grandmother and jointly by the aunt, Faye.  He did observe  that,  "the
    aunt was the recipient of the funds sent to Jamaica and appears to have
    had sole responsibility as to how these funds were spent".

14. The judge therefore concluded that what one had here was a scenario  of
    "shared responsibility" (see paragraph 49).  It was not the  case  that
    Mrs [R] or Mr [C] had abdicated all responsibility for the  Appellants.
    Indeed, this was clearly not the case.  Nevertheless,  they  could  not
    show  that  they  had  sole  responsibility  for  the  Appellants  (see
    paragraph 50).

15. As far as the question  of  serious  and  compelling  family  or  other
    considerations was concerned, no evidence had  been  provided  to  show
    that it was the case here that the  children  had  to  be  admitted  on
    account of the application of this Rule.

16. In considering Article 8 of the ECHR, the judge noted that,

         "I acknowledge and understand the reasons why Mrs [R] now wants  to
         have all her children with her, and I understand Mr [C]  feels  the
         same way, particularly after  having  made  a  form  of  commitment
         regarding the Appellants before he married Mrs [R]" (paragraph 64).

17. However, the parents have chosen to arrange their family life  in  this
    particular manner and  had  only  recently  decided  now  to  have  the
    children join them in the UK and that was a matter for which they alone
    were responsible (paragraph 64).

18. The appeals were dismissed.

Grounds of Application

19. The grounds of application say that the judge did  not  fully  consider
    and made false findings on core elements of the evidence,  particularly
    the passports presented in evidence by the Appellants and the  evidence
    relating to when the Sponsor lived in the Cayman Islands.  These errors
    affected the eventual outcome of the decision in relation to the  issue
    of sole responsibility.

20. On 29th March 2016, permission to appeal was granted.

21. On 8th April 2016, a Rule 24 response was entered to  the  effect  that
    the judge was entitled to come to the conclusions that he  did  because
    the Appellants failed to explain what the stamps in the passport  were,
    who they belonged  to,  or  what  their  relevance  was.   The  judge's
    response to the full responsibility issue was not flawed because he had
    applied the Rule in TD (Yemen).



Submissions

22. At the hearing before  me  on  24th  June  2016,  the  Appellants  were
    represented by Ms Bhachu.  She relied upon her  skeleton  argument  and
    handed up a determination in  AM  (fair  hearings)  Sudan  [2015]  UKUT
    00656, upon which she placed reliance.  Ms Bhachu  made  the  following
    submissions.  First, that the judge observed at paragraph  17(ix)  that
    there was in the Appellants' bundle a copy of  the  Second  Appellant's
    passport, and within three  pages,  a  copied  passport  on  which  the
    immigration authority's appear indicating entries and  exits  from  the
    Cayman Islands and Jamaica.

23. The judge said in relation to  these  that,  "these  entries  were  not
    explained to me, nor was it explained to me whether they related to the
    Second Appellant's passport, or some other passport".

24. Ms Bhachu submitted that these entries and exits relate to, 2007, 2008,
    2011, and  2012.   She  submitted  that  they  were  contained  in  the
    Appellants' bundle at pages 215 to 217.  The passport numbers stated on
    the Second Appellant's passport is  C1209192,  and  this  is  the  same
    number as appears in the passport copies at pages 215 to 217 at the top
    of the page.

25. Ms Bhachu submitted that accordingly,  the  evidence  demonstrated  the
    entry and exit of the Second Appellant from  the  Cayman  Islands,  and
    this showed that the  Second  Appellant,  Sebastian  [C],  was  leaving
    Jamaica to visit his mother in the Cayman Islands.  This  was  relevant
    to the issue of the contact  and  the  visits  maintained  between  the
    Appellant and the Sponsor in the Cayman Islands.

26. It was a matter that appears to have  been  wholly  overlooked  by  the
    judge.  Indeed, the judge said that "these entries were  not  explained
    to me" and attached no relevance or weight to them whatsoever.

27. Second, in relation to the issue  of  sole  responsibility,  the  judge
    stated that,

         "I accept that they have  demonstrated  that  the  Appellants  have
         always been in their thoughts  because  they  have  made  financial
         contributions towards their upkeep over a long period of  time  and
         made an effort to have the  Appellants  join  them  in  the  Cayman
         Islands in 2011" (see paragraph 42).

28. This sat ill at ease with the statement in the subsequent paragraph  at
    paragraph 43 where the judge  stated  that,  "there  is  no  supporting
    evidence of contact up to the period November 2014  onwards,  which  is
    after the Entry Clearance Officer made the  decision  to  refuse  entry
    clearance" (paragraph 43).

29. What the judge was here suggesting was that, although Mr  [C]  and  Mrs
    [R] moved to the United Kingdom, there was no evidence of their contact
    with the Appellant children until the  period  November  2014  onwards,
    when this was plainly not the  case.   The  earliest  efforts,  on  the
    judge's own findings, were made in 2011, and the judge so recognised at
    paragraph 42 when he stated that he would accept  that  there  was  "an
    effort to have the Appellants join them in the Cayman Islands in  2011"
    (paragraph 42).

30. At the time Mr [C] and Mrs [R] were  properly  settled  in  the  Cayman
    Islands.  All of this clearly went to  the  satisfaction  of  the  sole
    responsibility test.  It was not a case of there simply having been  "a
    heartfelt desire" (paragraph 42) for having the Appellants now join  Mr
    [C] and Mrs [R] in the United Kingdom.  This  was  something  that  the
    Sponsors had always intended, and  formed  part  of  the  agreement  of
    marriage between Mr [C] and Mrs [R] as long ago as 2005, and an attempt
    to almost successfully do so merely crystallised in 2011.

31. The judge's failure to properly interpret this evidence in the  context
    of satisfying the sole responsibility test was an error of  law.   When
    this evidence is properly considered, it acquires a new significance in
    the context of the telephone records, letter from the Sponsor's  mother
    and the letter from her sister supporting the applications.

32. For her part, Ms Aboni relied upon the Rule 24 response.  She submitted
    that the judge had accepted there was contact.  The judge had  accepted
    that family life existed.  The judge had said, however, that the degree
    of involvement of the sponsoring mother was inadequate, and much of the
    evidence postdated the decision of the Entry  Clearance  Officer.   The
    judge was entitled to come to this conclusion.   As  for  the  passport
    entries, they were not explained and would have made no  difference  to
    the outcome of the decision.

33. In reply, Ms Bhachu submitted that the fact was that there were lots of
    visits between  the  Appellants  and  the  sponsoring  mother  and  the
    passport entry stamps confirmed the  visits  of  the  Second  Appellant
    child and this  showed  that  the  sponsoring  mother  was  not  simply
    desirous of having her children live with her but  had  actually  taken
    practical steps to do so at various junctures in her life.   She  asked
    me to make a finding of an error of law and to remake the decision.

Error of Law

34. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law for the following reasons.

35. First, there was evidence before the judge of  the  Second  Appellant's
    passport.  It had three pages from  a  copied  passport  on  which  the
    immigration authorities had stamped entry and exit dates.  These  dates
    were clearly from the Cayman Islands and Jamaica.  It  was  not  enough
    for the judge to say that "these entries were not explained to me,  nor
    was it explained to me whether they related to the  Second  Appellant's
    passport, or some other passport" (see  paragraph  17(ix)).   The  fact
    that the Second Appellant's passport number C1209192 is the same as the
    entries on the passport copies at pages 215 and 217 is significant.

36. Second, and no less importantly, the judge had already  concluded  that
    Mr [C] and Mrs [R] had demonstrated "that the  Appellants  have  always
    been in their thoughts, and that they have made financial contributions
    for their upkeep over a long period of time", but had also then gone on
    to say that they had "made an effort to have the Appellants  join  them
    in the Cayman Islands in  2011"  (paragraph  42).   This  was  entirely
    consistent with the entry and exit stamps  in  the  Second  Appellant's
    passport which did relate specifically to 2011 itself.

37. A closer look at these entries would have shown that they  went  beyond
    2011 to 2007 and 2008 as well.  They extended into not  just  2011  but
    also to 2012.  But no less important, in this regard is also  the  fact
    that the judge then contradicted himself by stating that "there  is  no
    supporting evidence of contact up to the period November 2014  onwards,
    which is after the Entry Clearance Officer made the decision to  refuse
    entry  clearance"  (paragraph  43).   The  findings  of  fact   between
    paragraphs 43 and 44 are at varies with each other.

38. Third, the judge erred in the ultimate conclusion that,

         "the arrangements for the care of the Appellants have now  been  in
         place for a long time.  They came about as the result of the choice
         made by Mrs [R] and Mr [C]. This is a choice which  they  continued
         to believe appropriate for them whilst  they  were  living  in  the
         Cayman Islands and bringing up their other three children together,
         and  one  they  have  only  recently  decided  was  no  longer  the
         appropriate one for them" (paragraph 64).

39. There are notable difficulties with this.  First, it was not  the  case
    at all that Mr [C] and Mrs [R] had made a choice to live in the  manner
    that they did.  Quite the contrary was the case.  Mrs [R] had,  on  the
    judge's own findings, made an agreement with Mr [C]  that,  he  was  to
    assume the role of a father when she was to marry him.  Whilst they had
    three of their own children together then,  any  "arrangement  for  the
    care of the Appellants" that was in place, had  to  be  viewed  in  the
    context of the fact that an attempt was made  to  have  the  Appellants
    join Mr [C] and Mrs [R] in the Cayman Islands, on the findings made  by
    the judge himself.  Second, what all of this suggests is that it is not
    by any means the case that "they have only recently decided"  that  the
    arrangement is no longer appropriate for them to continue.

40. In any event, there is no rule of law in the application of  the  "sole
    responsibility" test that an arrangement of family living, where  there
    is  a  shared  responsibility  with  other   family   members,   cannot
    subsequently be changed, as family lives do in  the  course  of  things
    change.  Responsibility can shift, from one which is "shared",  to  one
    which is a "sole responsibility",  bearing  in  mind  always  that  the
    concept of "sole responsibility" is not to be interpreted in a  literal
    sense, because of the very nature of things, where  the  responsibility
    is shared, it can never be "a sole responsibility anyway (see  Emmanual
    [1972]).

41. For all these reasons, this is a decision which amounts an error of law
    (see Section 12(1) of TCE 2007)  such  that  I  should  set  aside  the
    decision and remake the decision.



Remaking the Decision

42. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before him, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  I am allowing this appeal for the following reasons.

43. First and foremost, this is not a case where the sponsoring mother  has
    abandoned her children, and indeed this was  not  the  finding  of  the
    original judge, who found that Mr [C] and Mrs [R] "have  a  strong  and
    heartfelt desire to  have  the  Appellants  join  them  in  the  United
    Kingdom" (paragraph 42).  They had their own  lives,  of  course,  when
    they married in the  Cayman  Islands  in  January  2005,  but  all  the
    evidence is that they have taken their responsibilities  towards  their
    children in  the  most  utmostly  serious  fashion.   They  have  three
    children amongst themselves and these children  live  with  them.   The
    judge found that the reason for sponsoring the  Appellant  children  to
    come to the UK amounted to "good reasons for doing so",  so  that  "the
    Appellants can be part of their larger family" (paragraph 42)  together
    with the other three children who are living in the UK.

44. Second, and no less significantly, Mrs [R], the  mother,  had  made  Mr
    [C], the stepfather, "agree in a manner, when they were married, to  be
    responsible for them in place of their natural father" (paragraph  42).



45. Third, the judge found that "the Appellants have always been  in  their
    thoughts because they have made financial  contributions  toward  their
    upkeep over a long period of time" (paragraph 42).

46. Fourth, the judge also found that they had "made an effort to have  the
    Appellants join them in the Cayman Islands in 2011" (paragraph 42).  It
    is this latter aspect of the case, which upon further evidence in  this
    Tribunal, has acquired a new significance  because  it  now  transpires
    that the passport entries in the Appellants'  passports,  showing  that
    attempts were made to have the children join the parents in the  Cayman
    Islands when they were settled there, extended  way  beyond  2011  into
    2007, 2008 and then 2011 and 2012, when  there  were  visits  and  this
    evidence appears in the Appellants' bundle at pages 215 to 217.

47. It is in this context that the concept of "sole responsibility" must be
    interpreted.  As already pointed out, it is well  accepted  that  there
    can never be "sole responsibility" in the literal sense, because in its
    very nature, where children are left behind, the responsibility has  to
    be shared.  "Sole responsibility" is not the  same  as  legal  custody.
    If, as the judge earlier accepted, monies were being sent over  a  long
    period of time by the sponsoring mother, they were being sent  for  the
    children's upkeep, and the judge found that, "in more recent times" the
    mother had taken on a significant role (paragraph  48).   It  does  not
    matter whether this is recent or not recent.

48. What matters is that the taking on of the sole is  entirely  consistent
    with the mother's long-term interest in having her children  join  her,
    and even taking an undertaking from her  husband,  as  a  condition  of
    marrying him when she  did  so  in  January  2011.   Nothing  could  be
    stronger than this evidence to show that she has continued to treat her
    children as her children and to have a longstanding aspiration of being
    reunited with them.  Indeed, there is a reason  for  why  the  mother's
    interest more recently has become more pronounced and that is that  the
    grandmother now has health issues, as inevitably she would as time went
    on (see paragraph 49).

49. In circumstances where the Appellants'  natural  father  has  left  the
    scene and is  not  involved  in  their  lives,  the  sponsoring  mother
    exercised practical care and day-to-day support for the Appellants from
    the UK and it is  no  stretch  of  imagination  to  say  that  she  has
    exercised "sole responsibility" over her own children in that  she  has
    been singularly involved in the welfare of her children.

50. In addition, it is important that regard is also had to Section  55  of
    the BCIA 2009 because the case of T (s.55 BCIA 2009 - entry  clearance)
    Jamaica [2011] UKUT 00483 (IAC) has established that it  stands  to  be
    applied in a case such as the  present.   This  is  a  case  where  the
    interests of the child were plainly under  consideration  in  an  entry
    clearance case, and the original judge failed to pay close attention to
    the issue of "best interests"  of  the  Appellant.   It  is  now  well-
    established that where the interests of a child are under consideration
    appropriate enquiries need to be made in  entry  clearance  cases  with
    regard to the age, and care needs of  the  child  (see  JO  and  Others
    (Section 55 duty) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 00517.).  The decision maker must
    properly be informed of the position  of  the  child.   Being  properly
    informed and conducting a scrupulous  analysis  is  a  prerequisite  of
    identifying the child's best interests.  This then has  to  be  balance
    against other essential considerations.  Performing these  duties  will
    be an intensively fact-sensitive and contextual exercise.   This  is  a
    case where the ECO did not do this.  However, the judge did not  do  it
    either.  This was a failing of an  administrative  responsibility.   It
    was also the failing of a legal obligation.

51. In the case of T (s.55 BCIA 2009 - entry clearance) Jamaica [2011] UKUT
    00483 (IAC) it was  held  that,  "it  is  difficult  to  contemplate  a
    scenario where a  Section  55  duty  was  material  to  an  immigration
    decision and indicated a certain Article that Article 8 did  not"  (see
    paragraph 29).  When the facts of this case are considered it is  plain
    that there is no moral or physical danger to the  children.   They  are
    young and in their formative years of their age.  They have been looked
    after by someone, but the grandmother has health issues,  and  requires
    assistance by the aunt.  The wishes of the  children  are  to  be  with
    their natural mother.  They have visited  the  natural  mother  in  the
    Cayman Islands.  They know that the natural  mother  has  been  sending
    monies and there is a long-term plan to have the family reunited.   The
    Appellants have a mother and a stepfather in the  UK  who  can  provide
    maintenance and accommodation and who have a clear desire to  care  for
    them.  In these circumstances, the requirements of Article 8  are  also
    plainly met.  This is for the following reasons.

52. In Mundebe [2011] UKUT 88 (IAC) it has been explained  yet  again  that
    the focus of Section 55 is on the circumstances of  the  child  in  the
    light of his or her age, social background and development history.  It
    requires an enquiry into whether there is (a) evidence  of  neglect  or
    abuse; (b) there are unmet needs that could be  catered  for;  and  (c)
    whether there are stable reasons for the child's  physical  care.   The
    assessment of one's consideration as  to  whether  the  combination  of
    circumstances are sufficiently serious and compelling  to  require  the
    admission of these Appellant children into the UK.   Taking  all  these
    matters into account, I am  allowing  this  appeal  for  the  following
    reasons.

53. If one applies what Bingham established in Razgar  (at  paragraph  17),
    the following emerges.  At first, it is plain that continued  exclusion
    of the Appellant children is an interference  by  a  public  authority,
    namely, the Secretary of State, with the exercise  of  the  Appellants'
    right  to  respect  for  their  family  life.   This  family  life   is
    qualitatively different with the one that the Appellants were presently
    enjoying in their country of  origin,  where  their  carer  has  health
    problems, as against a family life that they will enjoy with their  own
    mother and stepfather, both of whom are keen and able to look after the
    Appellants, and this especially the case  given  that  the  Appellants'
    natural father is not on the scene, and particularly  in  circumstances
    where there was a bond between the parent that the  children  would  be
    looked after by them, and in circumstances where efforts were  made  to
    this effect when the parents were living in the Cayman Islands.

54. Second, the interference here does have consequences of such gravity as
    potentially engage the operation of Article 8  (bearing  in  mind  that
    this is a low threshold).  Third, and on the other  hand  however,  the
    decision is not in accordance with the law because the  Appellants  can
    meet the sole responsibility test in the  Immigration  Rules.   Fourth,
    the interference is not necessary in a democratic society,  because  it
    is not necessary for the economic wellbeing of the country, or for  the
    prevention of crime, or for the protection of the rights  and  freedoms
    of others.  There is no hint whatsoever of any wrongdoing or illegality
    by any of the parties concerned.  In fact, all the evidence is that the
    Appellants' mother is in the UK (now happily remarried)  and  that  the
    stepfather had undertaken to assume the role  of  a  father  for  these
    children, and that efforts have been made as long ago as 2007 to ensure
    this, with a long period of financial remittances being  made.   Fifth,
    all-in-all, the interference is not  proportionate  to  the  legitimate
    public end that is sought to be achieved.

55.  It  is  well  accepted  that  the  material  question   engaging   the
    proportionality of an administrative action that threatens to  break  a
    family is whether it is reasonable to expect the  Appellant  to  remain
    separately from his or her natural parents, which in  this  case  means
    their natural mother (their natural father  effectively  having  broken
    off from them), who is now a person with the legitimate legal status in
    the UK and  is  settled.   On  the  facts  of  this  case,  it  is  not
    reasonable.

56. On the totality of the evidence before me, I find that  the  Appellants
    have discharged the burden of  proof  and  the  reasons  given  by  the
    Respondent do not justify the  refusal.   Therefore,  the  Respondent's
    decision  is  not  in  accordance  with  the  law  and  the  applicable
    Immigration Rules.

Notice of Decision

57. The appeal is allowed.

58. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 30th September 2016




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  fee  award
of the amount paid or payable.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 30th September 2016


