
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/09755/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 9 February 2016                       |On 15 March 2016                  |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ABU DHABI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MUHAMMAD YAMEEN
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. C. Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. S. Mustafa, Denning Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Wylie promulgated on 14 August 2015 in  which
    he allowed Mr. Yameen's appeal to the extent of remitting  it  back  to
    the Secretary of State to make a  decision  on  the  application  still
    outstanding.
 2. For the purposes of this decision I refer to the Secretary of State  as
    the Respondent, and to Mr. Yameen as the  Appellant,  reflecting  their
    positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.


 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


    "It is arguable that the Judge erred in  allowing  the  appeal  to  the
    extent that it was remitted to the Entry Clearance Officer on the basis
    that Appellant had only limited grounds of appeal open to him, none  of
    which feature in the decision."


 4. At the hearing  I  heard  submissions  from  both  representatives.   I
    reserved my decision which I now set out with reasons.


Submissions


 5. Mr. Avery submitted that there was a restricted right of  appeal.   The
    grounds of appeal before the First-tier Tribunal  referred  to  section
    84(1)(c), but it was not clear how the grounds related to this section.
     The appeal had been decided as if the 2014 Act  did  not  exist.   The
    judge was wrong, and it was not arguable that he was correct.


 6. Mr. Mustafa accepted that it had not been submitted in the  grounds  of
    appeal before the First-tier Tribunal that  the  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law.  He submitted  that  section  84(1)(c)  was  a
    human rights ground.  The main point  was  that  this  was  not  a  PBS
    application, but was an entrepreneur visit visa application.  Therefore
    section 85A did not apply.  The decision was made on 9  July  2014,  by
    which point there  was  a  limited  right  of  appeal  for  visit  visa
    applications.


 7. However, section 86(3)(a) applied to permit  the  judge  to  allow  the
    appeal on the basis that it was not in accordance with the  law.   This
    subsection had been omitted from 20 October  2014  onwards,  after  the
    appeal had been lodged.  In relation to section  85(2),  the  Appellant
    had provided a letter which the Respondent found not to be genuine  but
    the Appellant had addressed this point in his statement.  The judge was
    entitled to  consider  any  matter  raised  in  the  statement.   Under
    sections 85 and 86 the judge had jurisdiction to take on new points  in
    order to determine the matter fairly.


 8. Even if the appeal were limited under  section  84(1)(c),  this  was  a
    human rights ground and, if the Appellant was alleged to have  deceived
    the Respondent, he was not being given a  fair  opportunity  to  appeal
    against the point that he had deceived  the  Respondent,  which  was  a
    breach of his rights under Article 6 ECHR.  The judge decided correctly
    that the Respondent's decision was not in accordance with the law under
    sections 85 and 86.


 9. In response Mr. Avery submitted that the judge had not  approached  the
    appeal in the correct way.  The grounds of appeal were limited and  the
    Appellant should have written to the Respondent pointing out  that  the
    DVR provided did not relate to him.


Error of law


10. The Appellant appealed against  the  Respondent's  decision  to  refuse
    leave to enter as an entrepreneur visitor.  The right of appeal against
    this decision is set out in section 84(1)(c) of the 2002 Act.


11. Section 84(1)(c) provides that an appeal may be brought  on  the  basis
    "that the decision is unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights  Act
    1998 (c. 42) (public authority not to  act  contrary  to  Human  Rights
    Convention) as  being  incompatible  with  the  Appellant's  Convention
    rights."


12. Therefore the only basis on which the Appellant  could  appeal  against
    the decision was on the basis that it was a breach of his human  rights
    or, as acknowledged by the Respondent in the grounds of appeal, on  the
    basis that it was unlawful under section 19 of the Race  Relations  Act
    1976.


13. The Respondent refused the application under  the  general  grounds  of
    refusal.  The burden of proof lies on the Respondent to show  that  the
    application should have been  refused  on  these  grounds.   The  judge
    states that the burden is on  the  Appellant  in  immigration  appeals,
    although a refusal under the general grounds burden of  proof  lies  on
    the Respondent.  However, this is not material as the judge found  that
    there was no reliable evidence to suggest that the letter  provided  by
    the Appellant was not genuine, given that the DVR provided  related  to
    an application made by someone other than the Appellant.


14. However, having found that there was no reliable  evidence  to  suggest
    that the decision should have  been  refused  on  one  of  the  general
    grounds, under section 84(1)(c) the only option available to the  judge
    was to consider whether or  not  the  decision  was  a  breach  of  the
    Appellant's human rights.


15. It was submitted by Mr. Mustafa that section 86(3)(a) applied  as  this
    subsection had only been omitted from 20 October 2014, after  the  date
    of appeal.  This subsection provides:


    "The Tribunal must allow the appeal in so far as it thinks that (a) a
    decision against which the appeal is brought or  is  treated  as  being
    brought was not in  accordance  with  the  law  (including  immigration
    rules)."


16. However, irrespective of when this subsection was  repealed,  it  would
    not have applied  to  the  Appellant's  appeal  in  any  event  due  to
    subsection 86(1) - "This section applies on  an  appeal  under  section
    82(1), 83 or 83A."  It was not disputed that the Appellant's right  of
    appeal was under section 84(1)(c), which is not covered by section 86.


17. It was further submitted that the  judge  was  entitled  to  take  into
    account  matters  raised  in  the  Appellant's  witness  statement   by
    reference to section 85  in  order  to  enable  him  to  determine  the
    decision  fairly.   However,  this  applies  to  allow  a  Tribunal  to
    "consider any matter raised in the statement which constitutes a ground
    of appeal of a kind  listed  in  section  84(1)  against  the  decision
    appealed against."  It does not operate to  allow  consideration  of  a
    ground of appeal which is not listed in section 84(1) as  a  ground  on
    which the Appellant may appeal against the decision.


18. I therefore find that the judge was  not  entitled  to  find  that  the
    decision was not in accordance with the  law,  but  that  he  was  only
    entitled to allow  it  on  the  basis  that  it  was  contrary  to  the
    Appellant's human rights or contrary to the Race Relations Act 1976.  I
    find that this is a material error of law.


Remaking


19. The grounds of appeal before the First-tier  Tribunal  state  that  the
    decision is against Article 6, and that  the  Appellant  has  not  been
    provided with any opportunity to  rebut  the  allegation  against  him.
    However, the Appellant had a right of appeal against the decision under
    section 84(1)(c) on human rights grounds,  in  which  appeal  he  could
    rebut the allegation against him,  as  he  did  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  That the judge could not allow  the  appeal  on  this  basis
    alone does not mean that the Appellant was denied a right to rebut  the
    allegation against him.  I find that the decision is not  a  breach  of
    the Appellant's rights as protected by Article 6.


20. There is no evidence to show that this decision  is  a  breach  of  the
    Appellant's human rights under Article 8, and it was not argued  before
    me that the decision breached his rights to a family or  private  life.
    In his witness statement he says that he has a family and  children  in
    Pakistan and I find that the decision does not interfere with his right
    to family life.  He intended  to  come  to  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    business visitor.  To the extent that the decision interferes with  his
    private life by preventing him from making a short visit to the  United
    Kingdom, I do not find that any interference would be significant,  nor
    disproportionate.  The Appellant can continue to enjoy his private life
    in Pakistan as he has been doing.


21. It has not been argued that the decision  was  unlawful  by  virtue  of
    section 19B of the Race Relations Act 1976.


22. As pointed out by Mr.  Avery  at  the  hearing,  it  was  open  to  the
    Appellant to contact the Respondent to inform him that the DVR provided
    related to a different  applicant.   There  is  no  evidence  that  the
    Appellant did this.  I note that the Appellant is legally  represented.
    There is no mention in the grounds of appeal of the fact that  the  DVR
    was not in relation  to  the  Appellant,  or  that  the  Appellant  has
    contacted the  Respondent  in  relation  to  any  allegation  of  false
    documents.  In the witness statement the Appellant states that the  DVR
    does not relate to him, paragraph [4], but there is no indication  that
    he has contacted the Respondent to point this out.






Notice of decision



23. The decision involves the making of a material error of law.  I set  it
    aside, except that the finding at paragraph [10] that the DVR  provided
    by the Respondent did not relate to the Appellant is preserved.


24. I remake the decision dismissing it on human rights grounds.



Signed                                  Date 4 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
