
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA093442013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 April 2016                              |On 14 June 2016               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                         The entry clearance officer
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 nidal ahmed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Khan, instructed by Howells, Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Nidal Ahmed, was born on 25 May 1989  and  is  a  female
    citizen of Sudan.  The appellant appealed against the decision  of  the
    Entry Clearance Officer, dated 10 March 2013 to  refuse  to  grant  her
    entry clearance as the spouse of a refugee in the United  Kingdom  (the
    sponsor - Loai  Abou  Hamad  Hasaballa).   First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Henderson) in a determination promulgated on 21 August 2015 allowed the
    appeal.  The ECO now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. In summary, the grounds assert that the appellant  had  relied  upon  a
    false marriage certificate but also that the  sponsor,  in  his  asylum
    claim in the United Kingdom,  had  claimed  that  he  was  single,  not
    married.  The judge had employed  judicial  knowledge  as  regards  the
    manner in which interviews were conducted, namely that they were signed
    by the sponsor first and before being read back to the interviewee.  It
    was not appropriate for the judge to use  judicial  knowledge  of  such
    practice and it is unclear how she had derived this knowledge.

 3. The judge deals with  the  "false"  document  at  [36].   There  was  a
    document verification  report  by  one  of  the  respondent's  officers
    dealing with their visit to the "Attestation Department" February 2013.
     The Department appeared to have confirmed the marriage certificate  as
    not genuine.  A letter had also been provided with English heading  but
    the text of which was written in Arabic. There was no translation.  The
    judge rejected that evidence since it  had  not  been  translated  into
    English.  The appellant, on the  other  hand,  relied  upon  an  expert
    report from Peter Verney.  The judge deals at length with  this  report
    at [39-44].  The  judge  found  [44]  in  light  of  all  the  evidence
    including the expert report that the marriage was genuine.  Other  than
    briefly alluding to "a false marriage certificate" the grounds  contain
    no substantive challenge to the detailed finding of the judge.

 4. As regards the employment of judicial knowledge by the  judge,  I  find
    that she did not err in law.  The judge has done no more than to make a
    finding that an error may have crept into the interview record  of  the
    sponsor which might have been noticed by  him  and  corrected  had  the
    interview record been read back to him.  As Ms Khan, for the  appellant
    submitted, there was no evidence from the respondent that  contradicted
    the judge's view as to how the interview had been conducted.  There was
    no evidence, in particular, that the interview had, in fact, been  read
    back to the sponsor.  The judge was not compelled by the answers  given
    by the sponsor at interview inevitably to find that the sponsor and the
    appellant had married subsequent to his flight to the  United  Kingdom.
    It was plainly open to the judge to accept that the sponsor had, as  he
    claimed, made a mistake.  The judge has given one reason as to why that
    mistake may have occurred; had the judge  followed  the  logic  of  the
    grounds of appeal, then  she  would  have  had  to  conclude  that  the
    appellant and sponsor had lied about when they had married.  The  judge
    found otherwise and she supported her conclusions with cogent and clear
    reasoning; indeed, I observe that  the  main  issue  before  the  judge
    appears to have been the validity of the  marriage  certificate  rather
    than the sponsor's answers in his screening interview.  I am  satisfied
    that the judge had not erred in law as asserted in the  grounds  or  at
    all.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 9 June 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
