
[pic]
IAC-AH-DH-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/09054/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 16th March 2016                         |On 18th April 2016               |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                                 jiabin ruan

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                    THE Entry Clearance Officer - BEIJING
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A White, Counsel instructed by Ian Henery
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of the Peoples Republic  of  China  born  on
    22nd June 1996.  The Appellant applied on 6th June 2014,  when  he  was
    still not quite 18 years of age, for entry clearance as  the  dependent
    child of his mother, the Sponsor Ya Mei  Chen.   That  application  was
    refused for the reasons given in a Notice of  Decision  dated  8th  May
    2014.  The refusal was  confirmed  on  review  by  an  Entry  Clearance
    Manager on 5th January 2015.  The Appellant appealed,  and  his  appeal
    was heard by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Kershaw  (the  Judge)
    sitting at Birmingham on 30th March  2015.   He  dismissed  the  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds for the reasons
    given in his Decision dated 5th April 2015.  The Appellant sought leave
    to appeal that decision, and on  7th  July  2015  such  permission  was
    granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The circumstances of the Appellant's family are  that  his  father  has
    been resident in the UK since 2000 but it was not in  dispute  that  at
    the date of decision he was not settled in  the  UK.   The  Appellant's
    mother, the Sponsor, came to the UK in 2003 when the Appellant was just
    7 years of age.  She was granted indefinite leave to remain in May 2010
    and is therefore settled in the UK.  The Appellant has a brother,  [SR]
    born on [ ] 2007, and a sister, [CR] born on [ ] 2008.  They live  with
    their parents in the UK and both are British citizens.

 4. The Judge dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules  because  he
    was not satisfied that the Appellant could  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 297(i)(e) and (f) of HC 395.  He was not satisfied  that  the
    Sponsor had had the sole responsibility for the care of  the  Appellant
    because whilst  the  Appellant  had  lived  in  China  first  with  his
    grandmother and then with his uncle, the Sponsor had not abdicated  her
    responsibility for the care and upbringing of the  Appellant,  but  had
    shared that responsibility with her husband.   The  Judge  treated  the
    best interests of the Appellant as a primary consideration, but was not
    satisfied that there  were  serious  and  compelling  family  or  other
    considerations  which  made  the  Appellant's  exclusion   undesirable.
    Finally, as regards Article 8 ECHR, the  Judge  found  that  there  was
    family life between the  Appellant  and  his  parents  which  would  be
    interfered with by the  Respondent's  decision  to  such  a  degree  of
    gravity as to engage the Appellant's Article 8 rights,  but  that  such
    interference was proportionate.

 5. At the hearing, Ms White argued that the Judge  had  erred  in  law  in
    coming  to  these  conclusions.   She  referred  to  the   grounds   of
    application and argued that in considering paragraph 297, the Judge had
    failed to take into account the purpose of family union as required  by
    the decision in TD (Yemen) [2006] UKAIT  00049.   The  Judge  had  also
    failed to take into account the best interests of all the  children  of
    this family.  He had only considered those of  the  Appellant  and  not
    those of his  siblings.   The  Appellant's  siblings  had  hardly  been
    mentioned at all.  They had been denied the opportunity  to  live  with
    and form a relationship with their elder brother.  The Judge  had  also
    failed to consider why the Appellant had  not  attempted  to  join  his
    parents before and why they had not seen each other  since  2003.   The
    financial reason given by the Sponsor was recorded at paragraph  36  of
    the Decision.

 6. As regards Article 8 ECHR, Ms White submitted that the Judge had  erred
    in law by failing to take into account all  of  the  relevant  factors.
    Again he had not considered the best interests of the other children of
    the family.

 7. In response, Mr Whitwell referred to the Rule 24  response  and  argued
    that there had been no such errors of law.  Regardless of  the  purpose
    of the relevant Immigration Rule, the fact of the matter was  that  the
    Appellant's application failed to satisfy the requirements of paragraph
    297.  The Appellant had applied for entry  clearance  about  one  month
    before his 18th birthday at a time  when  he  had  enjoyed  comfortable
    circumstances in China and there had been no need for him to leave that
    country.

 8.  Finally,  Mr  Whitwell  submitted  that  the  Judge's  proportionality
    decision could not be criticised.  He had found  that  it  was  in  the
    Appellant's best interest to remain  living  in  China  as  opposed  to
    joining his parents and siblings in the UK whom he had not  lived  with
    or even seen for many years.

 9. I find no material error of law in the decision of the  Judge  which  I
    therefore do not  set  aside.   The  facts  in  this  appeal  were  not
    disputed, and the Judge applied them correctly to the  requirements  of
    paragraphs 297(i)(e) and (f) of HC 395.  His decision that the  Sponsor
    had shared the responsibility  for  the  care  and  upbringing  of  the
    Appellant with her husband cannot be faulted on the evidence before the
    Judge.  There is considerable  overlap  between  the  consideration  of
    serious and compelling family or other considerations for the  purposes
    of paragraph 297(i)(f) and any consideration of  proportionality.   The
    Judge analysed carefully the circumstances of  the  Appellant  and  his
    family in this context and was entitled to come to the  decision  which
    he did.  The purpose of paragraph 297  to  encourage  family  unity  is
    reflected in its requirements and  as  Mr  Whitwell  pointed  out,  the
    Appellant could not satisfy those requirements.

10. As regards Article 8 ECHR, the Judge demonstrated that he  had  carried
    out  the  balancing  exercise  necessary  for  any   consideration   of
    proportionality and again in my view he came to a conclusion which  was
    open to him.  It is true that when considering proportionality and also
    paragraph 297(i)(f), the Judge had scant regard for the best  interests
    of the Appellant's siblings.  However, if this does amount to an  error
    of law, I find that it is not a material error.  The  decision  of  the
    Respondent denies the Appellant's siblings the chance to live and  form
    a relationship with him but the Appellant's  siblings  have  never  met
    him, and there was no evidence before the Judge of  any  hardship  they
    might have experienced as a consequence.  It is impossible to find that
    such circumstances would outweigh the public  interest  represented  by
    the fact that the Appellant could not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    relevant Immigration Rule.

11. For these reasons I find no error of law in the decision of the Judge.




Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so, and I find no reason to do so.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
