
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/09174/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:   Columbus House,       |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|Newport                           |                                |
|On: 14 July 2016                  |On: 04 August 2016              |
|                                  |                                |


                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS

                                   Between

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - DHAKA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                SAHARUN BEGUM
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tuburu, Ty Arian Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. This is an appeal  by  the  against  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Whitcombe in which he  allowed  the  appeal  of  Saharun
    Begum, a citizen of Bangladesh, against the Entry  Clearance  Officer's
    decision to refuse entry clearance as the spouse of the  Sponsor  Milon
    Miah, on Article 8 ECHR grounds. For the sake of clarity, I will  refer
    to Mrs Begum as 'the Applicant'.


 2. The  Applicant  applied  for  entry  clearance  on  12  May  2014.  Her
    application was refused by the Entry Clearance Officer on 29 June 2014.
    The Applicant exercised her right of appeal against this  decision  and
    this is the appeal that was heard before Judge Whitcombe on 7 September
    2015 and dismissed by virtue of the Immigration Rules  but  allowed  on
    Article 8 ECHR grounds. The Entry Clearance Officer's  application  for
    permission to appeal against the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  decision
    was granted on 4 April 2016 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lever  in  the
    following terms

          The grounds assert that the judge erred in his consideration of A8
          and did not apply guidance in SS Congo.


          The judge accepted that the  case  failed  under  the  Immigration
          Rules but allowed it under A8 ECHR on the basis that  if  a  fresh
          application  was  made  then  there  was  a  good  prospect   such
          application would be successful.


          It is arguable that this is not a correct use of A8 ECHR  and  not
          in accordance with the test set out in SS Congo.


 3. By a rule 24 response dated 11  May  2016  the  Applicant  opposed  the
    appeal arguing that having found that the Applicant could  not  succeed
    under the Rules the Judge was  right  to  consider  whether  compelling
    circumstances could be identified and having done so go on to  consider
    Article 8 outside the rules.


 4. At the hearing before me Mr Richards appeared for the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer and Mr Tuburu represented the Applicant and submitted a written
    skeleton argument which, for the most part, was a repeat of the rule 24
    response.


Background


 5. The Applicant is a Bangladeshi citizen born on 15 December 1989. She is
    married to Milon Miah a British citizen resident in the United Kingdom.
    The Applicant applied for entry clearance to enable  her  to  join  her
    husband in the United Kingdom. The application was refused because  the
    Respondent was not satisfied that the Applicant met  the  relationship,
    financial or English language requirements of the Immigration Rules.


 6. At the appeal hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  the  Judge  found
    that the marriage was  genuine  and  subsisting  and  that  the  couple
    intended to live together permanently as husband and wife and therefore
    that the relationship requirements were satisfied. The Judge found that
    the English language requirements were not satisfied at the date of the
    Respondent's decision but they were satisfied, although not taken  into
    account, by the time of the Entry Clearance Manager's review. So far as
    the financial requirements were concerned the Judge found,  in  effect,
    that the Applicant came close to satisfying the income requirements but
    did not, even at the date of the hearing satisfy the specified evidence
    requirements of Appendix FM-SE.


 7. Having dismissed the Immigration Rules appeal  the  Judge  went  on  to
    consider the appeal under the provisions of Article 8 ECHR  and  in  so
    doing found that it was likely  that  a  fresh  application  for  Entry
    Clearance would meet the requirements of the Rules  and  be  successful
    and  that  in  those  circumstances  there   was   a   disproportionate
    interference in the Applicant's family life because to make  a  further
    application would entail further cost and delay.


Submissions

 8. For the Entry Clearance Officer Mr Richards said that having found that
    if a fresh application were made it would probably have  succeeded  the
    Judge went outside his self-direction at paragraphs 10  to  12  of  the
    decision where he correctly said that he was restricted to  considering
    the  circumstances  at  the  date  of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's
    decision. In accordance with section 85A of  the  NIA  2002  the  Judge
    should have restricted himself so far as Article 8  was  concerned.  Mr
    Richards otherwise relied on the grounds of appeal adding that  it  was
    not appropriate for the Judge to  describe  (at  paragraph  39(v))  the
    requirements of the  rules  as  a  technicality.  The  Judge  fails  to
    identify compelling circumstances to go outside the rules.


 9. For the Applicant Mr Tuburu relied on the rule 24 response and skeleton
    argument. He said that the judge  considered  the  matter  and  reached
    appropriate findings revealing no error of law. This was a correct  use
    of Article 8 following SS Congo. When the Judge found  that  the  rules
    were not met he had  to  go  on  to  consider  Article  8.  There  were
    compelling reasons because of the length of time it had taken to get to
    the appeal stage.

10. I said that it was my judgment that the decision contained  a  material
    error of law. The application did not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules and the Judge went on to consider Article  8  without
    finding compelling reasons to do so. The matter was clearly  remediable
    by the Applicant through making a  fresh  entry  clearance  application
    that would in any event have been quicker than the appeal process.  The
    decision could not stand. The Entry Clearance Officer's appeal would be
    allowed, the decision of the First-tier tribunal would be set aside and
    a fresh decision made dismissing the Applicant's appeal on all gorunds.
    I reserved my written decision.

Error of law

11. The Applicant applied for Entry Clearance as the spouse of the Sponsor.
    It is common ground that her application did not meet the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shows
    that whereas the Entry Clearance Officer was wrong to decide  that  the
    relationship requirements of the rules were not met he was right not to
    be satisfied that the English  language  and  maintenance  requirements
    were fulfilled.


12. Having  made  the  finding  that  the  application  fid  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules the Judge went on at paragraph 36
    of his decision to consider Article 8 ECHR. He  did  not  identify  any
    compelling reason for doing so. As such the judge failed to have regard
    to the Court of Appeal decision in SS Congo [2015] EWCA Civ  387.  This
    is a material misdirection.


13. To the extent that it may be argued that 'compelling reasons'  although
    not mentioned in terms, were implicit in the findings of the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge, such a finding would in my judgment be irrational.  Put
    simply the Applicant did not meet the evidential  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules. As was made clear in SS  Congo  the  requirement  to
    meet the evidence rules ensures that those applying for entry clearance
    are dealt with equally and fairly. The Judge was wrong to find that the
    evidence rules were, in this instance, a mere technicality.


14. The errors of law detailed above were material to the decision to allow
    the appeal. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal must be and is  set
    aside.


15. In remaking the decision, I take into account the  First-tier  Tribunal
    findings concerning the subsistence of the marriage. This is a  genuine
    relationship and the Applicant intends to  live  permanently  with  the
    Sponsor. I also take account of the finding that whereas the  Applicant
    did not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules at the  time  of
    the decision or indeed at the time of the hearing before the First-tier
    Tribunal  she  is  likely  to  meet  those  requirements  if  a   fresh
    application is made. In my judgment and particularly having  regard  to
    these circumstances there are no compelling reason to consider  Article
    8 outside the Immigration Rules. The situation  is  clearly  remediable
    for the Applicant  through  the  making  of  a  fresh  entry  clearance
    application. This is the swiftest way in which the family life  of  the
    Applicant and Sponsor can be continued and, had it  been  necessary  to
    consider the question of proportionality, a proportionate  response  to
    any interference there may have been in their family life caused by the
    Entry Clearance Officer's correct decision.


Conclusion

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law for the reasons set out above.


17. I allow the Entry Clearance Officer's appeal and set aside the decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal.


18. I remake the decision by dismissing the Applicant's appeal against  the
    Entry Clearance officer's decision both by virtue  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and Article 8 ECHR.








Signed:                                            Date: 04/08/2016

J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
