
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/09795/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 2nd February 2017                       |On 03rd February 2017            |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                             master haseeb sethi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISLAMABAD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms D Revill of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Aujla promulgated on 8 August 2016, in which  his  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's decision to refuse  him  entry  clearance  to  the  United
    Kingdom under paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules dated 15 June 2015
    was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan, born on 29 September 1999  who
    sought to join his brother, Muhammad Usman Sethi (the "Sponsor") in the
    United Kingdom, as his dependent relative.

 3. The Respondent refused the Appellant's application on  the  basis  that
    there were no serious compelling circumstances that made his  exclusion
    undesirable.  This was because there was no information about his other
    family members in Pakistan or why the Appellant was unable to  continue
    living with his uncle in Pakistan.  The  Pakistani  court  guardianship
    order was not accepted, nor was there sufficient  evidence  of  contact
    with the Sponsor.  It was  not  accepted  that  the  refusal  of  entry
    clearance was in breach of Article 8  of  the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights.

 4. Judge Aujla dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules and on human rights grounds.  This was primarily because  it  was
    not accepted that there were serious compelling  circumstances  as  the
    Appellant's claim to be living in overcrowded conditions was  rejected,
    there were other family members in Pakistan to  care  for  him  and  it
    would be in the Appellant's best interests to  remain  in  his  settled
    environment in Pakistan.  It was not considered  that  there  were  any
    compelling circumstances to consider the  application  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules on Article 8 grounds.

The Appeal

 5. Judge Hollingworth granted permission to appeal on two  grounds,  first
    that the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  finding  continuing  emotional
    support, guidance and stable care in Pakistan for the  Appellant  which
    was arguably contrary to  the  evidence  before  him  and  insufficient
    reasons were given.  Secondly, that unknown  'miscellaneous'  documents
    were taken into account which was procedurally unfair to the Appellant.

 6. At the appeal, both representatives confirmed that they  did  not  know
    what the 'other miscellaneous documents in the Tribunal file' were that
    Judge Aujla stated in his decision that  he  had  taken  into  account.
    Further, it was not clear from my file what these documents  were.   In
    the circumstances, it was impossible to know what  precisely  had  been
    taken in to account and what bearing, if any, such documents  may  have
    had on the decision to dismiss the appeal or the reasons for it.

 7. I indicated at the outset of the hearing that my preliminary  view  was
    that it was a material error of  law  for  Judge  Aujla  to  take  into
    account miscellaneous documents which were not served on  either  party
    as it was procedurally  unfair  to  do  so.   I  heard  no  substantive
    submissions in response on behalf of the Respondent.  I find  that  the
    hearing was procedurally unfair in that the appeal  was  determined  by
    taking into account unknown  miscellaneous  documents  which  were  not
    before either party.  That  was  a  material  error  of  law.   It  was
    accepted by both parties that as such the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal should be set aside and remitted for fresh  determination.  In
    the circumstances,  it  was  unnecessary  to  go  on  to  consider  the
    alternative ground of appeal as the decision has to be set aside in any
    event.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of a material error of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

Directions to the parties

 1. This appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  complete
    rehearing.


 2. Any further evidence relied upon shall be  filed  with  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and served upon the other party no later than 14 days prior to
    the hearing of the remitted appeals.


 3. The Appellant is to file with the First-tier Tribunal  and  serve  upon
    the Respondent no later than 14  days  prior  to  the  hearing  of  the
    remitted appeals a skeleton argument setting out relevant issues,  with
    reference to evidence and case-law.

Directions to administration

 1. The appeal is remitted and shall be heard at the Taylor  House  hearing
    centre on a date to be fixed by that centre.


 2. The remitted appeal is to be  listed  before  any  Judge  except  Judge
    Aujla.


 3. There is a time estimate of 2 hours for the hearing.


Signed        [pic]        Date     2nd February 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson


