
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/09484/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 8 August 2014                                |On 26 August 2014          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - SHANGHAI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                mrs ying zhao
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms W Targonska of Igor & Co.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant before the Upper Tribunal is the Entry Clearance  Officer
    in Shanghai.  I shall refer to Mrs Zhao as 'the claimant' herein.

 2. The claimant is a citizen of  the  People's  Republic  of  China.   Her
    husband, Mr Zhang (the sponsor) lives in  the  United  Kingdom  as  the
    holder of a Tier 2 inter-company  transfer  migrant  visa,  with  leave
    initially conferred until 6 July 2014,  but  which  has  recently  been
    extended so as to be conferred until 9 July 2016.  Mr Zhang is  also  a
    citizen of China.

 3. The claimant applied to join her husband in the  United  Kingdom.   Her
    initial application was refused  on  8  November  2012  in  a  decision
    stating as follows:

         "You previously applied to visit the UK for ten days as a  tourist.
         You stated that you did not have any friends or family  in  the  UK
         (Q8.7) and that you  would  stay  at  Peckham  Lodge  (Q8.7).   You
         provided  a  flight  booking  for  26/1/12  -  4/2/12   and   hotel
         reservations for these dates together with  an  itinerary.   During
         the course of our enquiries you  were  contacted  and  specifically
         asked if you knew anyone in the UK.  You said 'no' and that your ex-
         boyfriend had studied in the UK but was back in China and that  you
         had separated.  You also listed your parents as  Qizhong  Zhao  and
         Yuncai Gao and provided a Hukou confirming these details.

         You actually stayed in the UK from 14/1/12 - 5/2/12.  In  interview
         you confirmed that you first met your now husband in  October  2010
         and that the relationship started in December 2010. He went to  the
         UK in July 2011 and you married in 9/10/12. When you visited the UK
         you stayed with your then boyfriend. You said you  thought  it  was
         more simple to apply for a tourist visa and your travel agency  had
         told you it was better to apply  that  way.  You  said  you  didn't
         mention your boyfriend when specifically  asked  as  you  were  not
         close at the time and had only known each other a  year  before  he
         went to the UK. Given that you stayed with him and married  shortly
         afterwards I do not accept this explanation. You did not intend  to
         stay in the hotels and follow the itinerary and these were provided
         by your travel agency. You also stated that in  fact  your  parents
         are Zhide Wang and Yunxia Gao and that you had previously lived  at
         your uncles home and used your  uncles  Hukou  in  order  to  study
         there...

         I am  satisfied  that  you  employed  deception  in  your  previous
         application.  Given this  your  current  application  falls  to  be
         refused under paragraph 320(7B)  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   Any
         future applications will also be  automatically  refused,  for  the
         same reason, until 30/11/21 - a ten year period after the  previous
         refusal in which deception was used...Given that  your  application
         has been refused  under  the  general  grounds  for  refusal  I  am
         therefore  satisfied  that  you  also  fall  to  be  refused  under
         paragraph 319C (a) of the Immigration Rules."

 4. The claimant then made a further application for entry clearance  as  a
    PBS Tier 2 long-term staff partner.  This application was refused on 13
    March 2013, which is the decision at the heart of the  instant  appeal,
    for the following reasons:

         "You where [sic] then refused by  an  Entry  Clearance  Officer  on
         08/11/2012 under paragraph 320(7B)  for  using  deception  on  your
         previous  application.   The  refusal   under   paragraph   320(7B)
         attracted a ten year ban,  meaning  that  any  future  applications
         would be automatically  refused  under  paragraph  320(7B)  of  the
         Immigration Rules until 18/03/2021.

         I am therefore refusing you entry clearance under paragraph 320(7B)
         of  the  Immigration  Rules  for  using  deception  in  a  previous
         application...In light of the above I also refuse your  application
         under paragraph 319(C) (a) of the Immigration Rules."

 5. The claimant appealed this decision to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Britton and allowed in  a
    determination promulgated on 3 February 2014.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge set out the evidence before him, as  well
    as the submissions of the parties, and concluded:

         "26. I am satisfied  the  appellant  knowingly  used  deception  to
             obtain entry clearance as a tourist  to  the  United  Kingdom.
             She cannot blame the agent as she knew  what  she  was  doing,
             especially in her telephone call with the  Visa  Officer.   In
             her favour she did leave the United Kingdom in  terms  of  her
             visa.  She also realises now the seriousness of what  she  has
             done.  The immigration system is based on  applicants  telling
             the truth in accordance with the declaration they signed.   If
             they tell lies they can expect severe penalties such as a  ten
             year ban.

         27.  The appellant's husband is in  stable  employment  and  not  a
             burden on the state.  I have taken into consideration all  the
             evidence before me and the Tribunal decision is Ozhogina.   In
             relation to paragraph 320(7B) I am satisfied the appellant was
             not attempting to secure an advantage  on  immigration  terms.
             The applicant's intention was to obtain admission to  be  with
             her husband.  He is only able to visit twice a year.  She  was
             not obtaining financial gain or an immigration advantage."

 7. The Entry Clearance Officer applied for permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal significantly out of time.  By way of a decision  of  13
    May 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge Kamara extended time for lodging the
    application for permission and then  granted  the  application  itself;
    stating as follows when doing so:

         "The application is out of time and the explanation for  the  delay
         is that the Entry Clearance Officer was awaiting  advice  from  the
         Presenting  Officers  Unit  as  to   whether   to   challenge   the
         determination. Nonetheless, in the circumstances,  I  am  satisfied
         that the aforementioned facts amount to special circumstances which
         would cause me to admit the application...

         ...In his determination the judge arguably erred in law in  finding
         that the appellant knowingly used deception in order to  enter  the
         United Kingdom as a visitor but that she did not do  so  to  secure
         immigration advantage..."

 8. Thus the matter came before me.

Preliminary Issue

 9. In written submissions filed prior to the  hearing,  and  in  her  oral
    submissions at the hearing, Ms Targonska asserted that Judge Kamara had
    erred in granting permission because she  had  failed  to  give  proper
    consideration and proper reasons  for  extending  time  for  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer's application.  She submitted that the Upper Tribunal
    should set aside the grant  of  permission  and  re-make  the  decision
    refusing the ECO  permission  to  appeal.   Ms  Targonska  was  unable,
    however, to cite any authority in support of the  submission  that  the
    Upper Tribunal had jurisdiction to take such a course.

10. In response Ms Isherwood asserted that once permission  to  appeal  had
    been granted the Upper Tribunal's function was to determine the  appeal
    before it. It did  not  have  jurisdiction  to  re-visit  the  decision
    granting permission to appeal.

11. I conclude that Ms Isherwood is correct on this issue.  As far as I  am
    aware there is no authoritative decision to guide me on whether or  not
    I have the power that Ms Targonska asserts  that  I  have.   The  Upper
    Tribunal alluded to this issue in Wang & Chin (extension  of  time  for
    appealing) [2013] UKUT 00343 but it was unnecessary for it to go on and
    determine it.

12. In Ogundimu (Article 8 - new rules)  Nigeria  [2013]  UKUT  00060  (the
    President and Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor), the Upper Tribunal record
    that it was common ground between the parties that there was  no  power
    to revoke a grant of permission to appeal if a judge had power to grant
    it.  It proceeded upon the basis that this agreement was  correct,  and
    did not analyse the issue further.

13. A decision granting or refusing  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal cannot be appealed to the  Court  of  Appeal  (see  Tribunals,
    Courts and Enforcement Act 2007, Section 13(8)(c)).  This fact, though,
    does little to assist me in determining whether I  have  power  to  set
    such a decision aside.

14. Whilst the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 give  express
    powers to the Upper Tribunal to set aside "a decision which disposes of
    proceedings" (Rule 43), again this is of no assistance to the  claimant
    because the decision complained of most certainly did  not  dispose  of
    the proceedings, permission to appeal having been granted.

15. In the absence of more detailed submissions,  and  in  the  absence  of
    being drawn to any provision which it is said gives the Upper  Tribunal
    jurisdiction to take the course suggested, I find that it has not  been
    demonstrated, and neither am I satisfied, that  I  have  power  to  set
    aside the decision granting the ECO  permission  to  appeal.  For  this
    reason I do not accede to the request to do so.

Error of law

16. I now turn to look at the merits of  the  appeal  brought  by  the  ECO
    against the First-tier Tribunal's determination.

17. Ms Isherwood maintains the position set out in  the  ECO's  grounds  of
    appeal i.e. that the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  in  relation  to
    paragraph  320(7B)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  was  irrational   when
    considered in the context of the findings made by  the  Tribunal  as  a
    whole and in particular the conclusion that the claimant  had  employed
    deception in her, successful, attempt to obtain entry  clearance  as  a
    visitor in November 2011.

18. In response Ms Targonska submitted that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    given adequate reasons for its conclusions, and  that  its  conclusions
    were open to it on the evidence available; drawing particular attention
    when doing so to the decision of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Ozhogina  &
    Tarasova (deception within para 320(7B) - nannies) Russia  [2011]  UKUT
    00197 (Burton J and UTJ Eshun).

19. Ms Targonska further submitted that it was plain from the evidence that
    the purpose of the claimant's deception,  when  seeking  to  enter  the
    United Kingdom as a visitor, was not to secure an immigration advantage
    but simply to see her then  boyfriend.   The  deception  in  2011,  she
    asserted, was not capable of being material to the decision of  whether
    or not to grant entry clearance on that occasion.

20. Having carefully considered  both  the  written  and  oral  submissions
    before me I conclude that the First-tier Tribunal's determination  does
    contain an error on a point of law such as to lead me to set it  aside.
    I do so for the following reasons.

21. Paragraph 320(7B) of the Immigration Rules requires  refusal  of  entry
    clearance in circumstances where the applicant has previously  breached
    UK's immigration laws by:

        "(d) using deception  in  an  application  for  entry  clearance...
        (whether successful or not)..."

22. In Ozhogina & Tarasova the Tribunal  held  that  where  the  respondent
    relies on paragraph 320(7B)(d)  to  refuse  an  application  for  entry
    clearance  it  is  necessary  to  show  that  a  false  statement   was
    deliberately  made  for  the  purposes  of  securing  an  advantage  in
    immigration terms.

23. Given (i) the First-tier Tribunal's conclusions in paragraph 26 of  its
    determination that the claimant "knowingly  used  deception  to  obtain
    entry clearance as a tourist  to  the  United  Kingdom"  and  (ii)  the
    acceptance  by  the  claimant,  as  recorded  in  paragraph  9  of  the
    determination, that "the travel agency had told her that if she gets  a
    call from the embassy she cannot say she has a boyfriend in the  United
    Kingdom or else she will be refused for sure",  in  my  conclusion  the
    First-tier Tribunal's finding in paragraph 27 of the determination that
    the claimant was not attempting to secure an advantage "on  immigration
    terms", is so devoid of reasoning so as to be unlawful.

24. The First-tier Tribunal  conclude  that  the  claimant's  intention  in
    misleading the ECO  in  2011  was  to  ensure  that  she  could  secure
    admission to the United Kingdom to be with her, now, husband. This  may
    be so but the fact that the ultimate goal of the  claimant  was  to  be
    with her, now, husband is not determinative of the question before  the
    First-tier Tribunal  i.e.  whether  the  claimant  intended  to  secure
    immigration advantage by producing a false  itinerary,  a  false  hotel
    booking and by misleading the Entry Clearance  Officer  when  asserting
    that she knows no-one in the United Kingdom.

25. The First-tier Tribunal's determination makes a leap from  findings  of
    fact which on there face support a conclusion  that  paragraph  320(7B)
    has been made out by the Entry Clearance Officer, to a conclusion  that
    it has not  been  made  out;  without  interposing  adequate  reasoning
    explaining that leap. Whether the ECO would, in any event, have granted
    the applicant entry clearance in 2011 had there been no  deception  is,
    in my view irrelevant. The relevant issue was the claimant's intention.
     I accept that the ECO cannot understand, from the reasoning set out by
    the First-tier Tribunal, why the core issue in the appeal was concluded
    against her.

26. I therefore set aside the determination of the First-tier Tribunal.

Re-making of decision

27. I directed at the hearing that I would re-make the decision  on  appeal
    for myself. Neither party sought to persuade me  to  take  a  different
    course.

28. On all of the information before me, which includes brief oral evidence
    from the sponsor, and given the conclusions of the First-tier  Tribunal
    that  (i)  the  claimant  knowingly  used  deception  to  obtain  entry
    clearance as a tourist in 2011; and ii) that she was told by the travel
    agency in 2011 that  she  needed  to  employ  deception  otherwise  her
    application for admission would be refused, I  am  satisfied  that  the
    Entry Clearance Officer has demonstrated to the required standard  that
    paragraph 320(7B) has been made out and that  the  claimant  previously
    breached UK's immigration laws by using deception in an application for
    entry clearance and that she deliberately made a  false  statement  for
    the purposes of securing an advantage  in  immigration  terms  i.e.  in
    order to ensure she gained admission to the United Kingdom so she could
    see her then boyfriend.

29. The appeal brought in relation to paragraph 319C Immigration  Rules  is
    consequently dismissed.

30. I now turn to Article 8 ECHR.  At the hearing  Ms  Targonska  submitted
    that the First-tier Tribunal  had  allowed  the  claimant's  appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds and that the Entry Clearance Officer  had  failed  to
    appeal against that decision.  I reject this submission.

31. Although (i) in the body of the determination the  First-tier  Tribunal
    refer to the submissions made by the claimant in relation to Article 8,
    as to which see paragraph 24 of the determination, and (ii)  under  the
    heading "Decision", the First-tier Tribunal "allow the  appeal",  there
    is no reference in the determination itself to findings being  made  in
    relation to Article 8 ECHR whether  within  the  Immigration  Rules  or
    outwith the Rules.  It is clear to  me  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    judge only allowed the claimant's appeal under paragraph  319C  of  the
    Immigration Rules (with reference to paragraph 320(7B)) and that he did
    not go  on  to  consider  as  a  separate  issue  the  Article  8  ECHR
    submissions that had been made by the claimant.

32. I now go on to consider this issue for myself.

33. I accept that the claimant met the sponsor in October 2010 and that the
    relationship between them quickly  developed.   The  claimant  met  the
    sponsor's family at the Spring Festival in 2011 and shortly thereafter,
    in April 2011, the sponsor was transferred by his company to the United
    Kingdom.  The claimant  and  the  sponsor  nevertheless  kept  a  close
    connection after the sponsor's arrival in the  United  Kingdom  and  he
    called her almost every  day  during  his  lunch  break.   The  sponsor
    returned to China to spend Christmas and New Year with the claimant  in
    2011/2012. He again returned at the  end  of  September  2012  for  two
    weeks.

34. The marriage certificate in the applicant's  bundle  was  issued  on  9
    October 2012.  I have no doubt from the evidence  before  me  that  the
    claimant and  sponsor  are  in  a  genuine,  subsisting  and  committed
    marriage.  They  engage  in  regular  telephone,  Skype  and  MSN  chat
    contact.  The sponsor  travels  back  to  China  to  see  the  claimant
    whenever he can, this being roughly twice a year for 2  weeks  on  each
    occasion.

35.  Of course I am only entitled  to  take  into  account  evidence  which
    appertains to the date of the Entry Clearance Officer's decision,  i.e.
    13 March 2013, but nevertheless it seems to me that  the  post-decision
    visits reflect on the fact that  this  was  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    marriage as of the date of the ECO's decision.

36. As to the sponsor, I have already set out above that he remains in  the
    United Kingdom as a Tier 2 inter-company transfer migrant.  As  of  the
    date of the Entry Clearance Officer's decision he had leave  to  remain
    in the United Kingdom until 6 July 2014 (that  leave  now  having  been
    extended as identified above)

37. There is ample evidence before me that the sponsor has  a  good  income
    and certainly more than sufficient to adequately maintain  himself  and
    the claimant without recourse to public funds should she  come  to  the
    United Kingdom. There would also be  adequate  accommodation  available
    for the couple.

38. Save for paragraph 319C, my conclusions on which I have set out  above,
    it is not submitted by the claimant that she meets  any  other  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  In particular it is  not  now  contended  that  the
    claimant meets the requirements  of  Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.   There  is  no  discretion,  whether   based   on   exceptional
    circumstances or otherwise, arising under the terms of the relevant and
    applicable Immigration Rules.

39. This, though, is not the end of the matter.  I  must  consider  whether
    the ECO's decision is compatible with the  claimant's  Article  8  ECHR
    rights, as is now well established by authority-  see  for  example  MF
    (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192, R (Nagre) v SSHD [2013] EWHC 720
    and, most recently, MM (Lebanon) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 985.

40. In Nagre Sales J said of the assessment outwith the Rules as follows:

         "29. ...New Rules  do  provide  better  explicit  coverage  of  the
             factors identified in case law  as  relevant  to  analysis  of
             claims under Article 8 and was formerly the position, so  many
             cases the main points for consideration in relation to Article
             8 will be addressed by decision makers applying the new Rules.
              It is only if, after doing that, there  remains  an  arguable
             case that there may be good  grounds  for  granting  leave  to
             remain outside the Rules by reference to  Article  8  that  it
             will be necessary for Article 8 purposes to go on to  consider
             whether there are compelling  circumstances  not  sufficiently
             recognised under  the  new  Rules  to  require  the  grant  of
             leave...

         30.  ...If, after the process of applying the new Rules and finding
             that the claim for leave  to  remain  under  them  fails,  the
             relevant official or Tribunal Judge considers it is clear that
             the consideration under the  Rules  has  fully  addressed  any
             family or private life issues arising under Article 8, it will
             be sufficient simply to say that; they would not  have  to  go
             on, in addition, to consider  the  case  separately  from  the
             Rules. ..."

41. On the facts of the instant case I have  no  hesitation  in  concluding
    that the claimant and sponsor share a family  life  together.   I  also
    have no hesitation in concluding that by refusing  the  claimant  entry
    clearance there will be  sufficiently  severe  interference  with  that
    family life so as to engage Article 8.   However,  the  maintenance  of
    effective immigration control is in the public  interest  (see  Section
    117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002).

42. Turning to the issue of proportionality, in MF (Nigeria) (paragraphs 44
    to 45) the Court of Appeal frame the approach to be taken by a decision
    maker as follows:

         "44. ...The exceptional  circumstances  to  be  considered  in  the
             balancing   exercise   involves   the   application    of    a
             proportionality    test    as    required    by     Strasbourg
             jurisprudence..."

43. It is important to recognise that proportionality must be considered in
    the context of the now particularised public interest as set out in the
    Immigration Rules,  and  there  is  a  compelling  public  interest  in
    refusing permission to enter  to  those  persons  who  have  failed  to
    establish a right to enter under those Rules.

44. I have set out  above  the  nature  of  the  relationship  between  the
    claimant and the  sponsor.   They  are  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    marriage but are currently  living  in  separate  countries,  with  the
    sponsor being able to visit the claimant  on  perhaps  a  twice  yearly
    basis for approximately two weeks  on  each  visit.   The  claimant  is
    unable to enter the UK under the  Immigration  Rules  to  be  with  her
    husband.

45. I weigh in the balancing exercise the  fact  that  this  situation  has
    arisen because of the claimant's deception of an ECO in  2011.   Whilst
    it is correct  to  say  that  the  claimant  was  persuaded  to  deploy
    deception in 2011  by  a  travel  agent,  the  fact  remains  that  she
    undertook such actions knowingly. I do, however, remind myself and take
    into account the fact that despite  deploying  deception  in  2011  the
    claimant in fact left the United Kingdom in accordance with  the  terms
    of her entry clearance at that time. She has also now shown remorse for
    her actions.  In addition I remind myself that the applicant  would  be
    adequately maintained and accommodated if  she  were  to  come  to  the
    United Kingdom to live with her husband.

46. Ms Isherwood submitted it to be of significance that  no  evidence  had
    been provided to the Tribunal to the effect that the sponsor could  not
    obtain a transfer back to China  from  his  current  employer  and,  in
    particular, no evidence had  been  provided  of  any  attempts  by  the
    sponsor to secure such a transfer.  I agree with Ms Isherwood  in  this
    respect.  Neither, I observe,  is  there  any  evidence  before  me  of
    consideration  having  been  given  by  the  sponsor  to  leaving   his
    employment with his current employer and returning to China so that  he
    can live with his wife there; this  only  being  relevant,  of  course,
    should the sponsor's current employer not accede to  a  request  for  a
    transfer.

47. Looking at all of the facts of this case in the round, I find,  in  the
    absence of evidence to the contrary, that it is  reasonable  to  expect
    the sponsor to return to China to live with his  wife  (the  claimant),
    thus alleviating the current  difficulties  that  the  couple  have  in
    engaging  in  any  meaningful  family  life.   Whilst   this   is   not
    determinative of the issue of proportionality it is a matter which,  in
    this case, I consider to be of some significance and, when taken in the
    round with all other relevant features of this case, including, but not
    restricted to, (i) the fact that the sponsor  played  no  part  in  the
    deception, (ii) that the claimant used deception on advice and that she
    then left the United Kingdom in accordance with the requirements of her
    leave, and (iii) if the claimant were to move  to  the  United  Kingdom
    there would be  adequate  maintenance  and  accommodation  for  her  I,
    nevertheless, find that in circumstances  where  it  is  reasonable  to
    expect the claimant's husband to relocate back to his homeland,  it  is
    proportionate to refuse the claimant leave to join her husband  in  the
    United Kingdom.

48. Even if it were not reasonable to expect the sponsor to  move  back  to
    his homeland, I would still find, having looked at all the facts of the
    case as a whole, that the Entry Clearance Officer's decision to  refuse
    entry clearance to the claimant to be proportionate to  the  legitimate
    aim of maintaining effective immigration control.  The sponsor has been
    making, and can continue to make, visits  back  to  China  to  see  the
    claimant.  There is, as yet, no  child  of  the  relationship  and  the
    marriage took place after the sponsor was  transferred  to  the  United
    Kingdom and after the deception employed by the claimant  in  order  to
    ensure that she could visit the United Kingdom  to  be  with  her  then
    boyfriend.

Decision

For the reasons set out above the determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal
is set aside. Upon re-making the decision on appeal for  myself,  I  dismiss
it on all grounds.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 11 August 2014








