
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA095632015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 May 2016                                |On 26 May 2016                |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA

                                   Between

                                    [d o]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Cole of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on [ ]  2009.   He  made  an
    application on 5 March 2015 for entry clearance to the  United  Kingdom
    as the dependant of his father [OO] who has limited leave to remain  in
    the United Kingdom until 7 August 2017 as the spouse of [KB].

2.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal and  the
    appellant appealed against that decision. First-tier Tribunal  Frankish
    on  24  February  2016  refused  permission  to  appeal  but   it   was
    subsequently granted by Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy on 25 March  2016
    stating that it is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in
    law in finding that the sponsor did not have  sole  responsibility  for
    the appellant pointing to the fact that  the concerns of the  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal were not put to the sponsor  whose  replies  to
    all relevant questions showed that he  did  have  full  responsibility.
    Moreover, permission Judge stated that the judge might  have  erred  in
    law in requiring corroborative evidence and that he was wrong to reject
    unchallenged evidence. Furthermore, the judge may  have  erred  in  not
    applying relevant case law and making findings on a  matter  which  was
    not raised in the refusal.

3.   Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made the  following  findings  in  her
    determination promulgated on 17 November 2015 which I  summarise.   She
    set out the case of TD (paragraph 297(1)(e) sole responsibility)  Yemen
    [2006] UKAIT 00049 which sets out what sole responsibility means  under
    the Immigration Rules which is basically to identify the person who has
    responsibility for a child's upbringing and whether the  responsibility
    is sole is a factual matter to be decided upon all the evidence.

4.   Initially the application had been  refused  by  the  respondent  under
    paragraph 320(7A) of the  Immigration  Rules  on  the  basis  that  the
    respondent  found  that  the  appellant  had  provided  a  false  birth
    certificate.  This however was later rectified and the judge considered
    the appeal under the appropriate section of the Immigration Rules which
    is EC-C of Appendix FM.  Nothing rests on this because it was  accepted
    that the judge was entitled to  consider  the  appellant's  application
    under the new Rule.  This hearing  was  concerned  with  several  other
    issues, one being that no respondent's  bundle  was  produced  and  the
    Immigration Rule being a  different  one  from  that  under  which  the
    application had been refused.

5.   The judge found that on a balance of probabilities that  the  appellant
    is the sponsor's son and who is the sole surviving  parent.  The  judge
    stated however at paragraph 27 that this does not necessarily mean that
    he has sole responsibility for his son's upbringing within the  meaning
    of the Immigration Rules.  He  noted  that  the  responsibility  for  a
    child's upbringing may be undertaken by individuals  other  than  their
    parents.  He noted  that  the  appellant  currently  resides  with  his
    paternal grandparents, his grandmother [BO] who is his legal  guardian.
    The central issue the judge said in this appeal is whether the de facto
    care given by the sponsor to the grandmother and other relatives of the
    child left behind in the country of origin has  been  given  under  the
    direction of the sponsoring parent in the UK to justify the  conclusion
    that the latter has had sole responsibility  despite  the  geographical
    separation.  This is a question of fact.

6.   The judge found that there was  very  little  documentary  evidence  to
    substantiate the sponsor's claims that he had sole responsibility.   He
    set out the evidence at paragraph 29 which consisted of a  letter  from
    the doctor and the letter dated 25 February 2015 from the principal  of
    the Living World Academy,  where  the  appellant  goes  to  school  and
    evidence that the sponsor had  paid  the  school  fees  and  has  taken
    responsibility  for  making  decisions  as  to  his  son's   schooling,
    religious upbringing. The judge stated that there  was  no  documentary
    evidence to show that any financial  support  for  the  child's  living
    expenses has emanated from the sponsor, [OO].

7.   At paragraph 31 the  judge  stated  that  in  his  judgment  the  facts
    demonstrated fall short of establishing that [OO]  has  exercised  sole
    responsibility  for  the  appellant  in  the  sense  that  he  has  had
    continuing control and direction  of  his  son's  upbringing  including
    making all the important decisions in his life.  He stated "in my  view
    it is more probable than not that the responsibility is shared with the
    sponsor's mother.  I am not satisfied the requirements of EC-ECC 1.6(b)
    have been met", then he sets out the requirements.

8.   The judge considered the case of Mundeba and stated that  according  to
    the sponsor the appellant's grandmother who he says is 65 was extremely
    unwell and unable adequately to look after the appellant.  He noted the
    two letters submitted to show that and the doctor who states  that  the
    grandmother's heart disease has rendered her  helpless.   She  set  out
    that when the sponsor was asked at the hearing what problems his mother
    had the sponsor says that she had arthritis and sometimes found it hard
    to breathe.  When asked what was the cause of this  breathing  problem,
    the sponsor said he thought it  was  contamination  in  the  air  or  a
    disease that his mother had caught when working in farming.  The  judge
    noted that the sponsor did not mention that his  mother  was  suffering
    from heart disease which calls into question  the  credibility  of  the
    comments and diagnosis of Dr Collins.  It is apparent the  judge  found
    that [BO] is not in fact helpless given that she drives  the  appellant
    to school daily albeit in an automatic car.

9.   The judge then went on to consider the  appellant's  living  conditions
    in Nigeria and found that there is no evidence or suggestion that he is
    living in any substandard accommodation in his home country. The  judge
    stated that the  appellant  appears  to  be  in  good  health,  has  no
    education needs, enjoys the emotional support of his  grandparents,  he
    has two aunts living in Port Harcourt which the sponsor's  evidence  is
    that this is about  three  hours'  drive.   The  appellant's  aunt  [P]
    accompanied the appellant when he went for his DNA test.  The sponsor's
    father has two wives, both of whom live in separate houses on the  same
    compound and clearly the appellant  has  a  large  extended  family  in
    Nigeria.

10.  The judge said that having  given  careful  consideration  to  all  the
    evidence written  and  oral  he  is  not  satisfied  on  a  balance  of
    probabilities that the appellant has discharged  the  burden  of  proof
    under the Rules and that there is no compelling evidence of any adverse
    circumstances such as to amount to serious  and  compelling  family  or
    other considerations which make  the  appellant's  exclusion  from  the
    United Kingdom undesirable.

11.  The judge then went on to consider the financial  requirements  of  the
    immigration rules and said that he also fails  for  refusal  under  the
    financial requirements.  He then considered Article  8  and  stated  at
    paragraph 41 that the appellant's rights under Article 8  would  be  in
    accordance with the law and in pursuit of a legitimate objective namely
    the maintenance of immigration control.  He found the exclusion of  the
    appellant proportionate and that the  appellant  and  his  sponsor  can
    continue contact with each other through  telephone,  Skype  calls  and
    visits.  He then dismissed the appeal under all the  Immigration  Rules
    and under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

12.  The grounds of appeal state  the  following  which  I  summarise.   The
    First-tier Tribunal Judge finds that the sponsor  does  not  have  full
    responsibility for the appellant and stated "In  my  view  it  is  more
    probable than not that the responsibility is shared with the  sponsor's
    mother". In the decision to judge  sets  out  the  appellant's  sponsor
    evidence at the hearing which was that he pays the  appellant's  school
    fees, makes the decision about his healthcare and makes decisions about
    his religious upbringing.

13.   The  judge  stated  in  his  decision  that  in  cross-examination  no
    questions were put to the sponsor by the respondent's representative to
    challenge any of his answers to these questions.   The  only  questions
    that were put to the sponsor was as to how his son travels to school in
    which he answered that his grandmother drives him in an automatic  car.
    In re-examination the  sponsor  confirmed  that  when  the  appellant's
    grandmother is ill the appellant does not  attend  school.   In  cross-
    examination when the sponsor was asked who would his son stay  with  if
    his grandmother could not look after him, he replied that there was no-
    one.  The sponsor talked about the  appellant's  medical  treatment  by
    taking regular malaria  tablets.   No  questions  were  put  about  the
    appellant's faith at all and the  evidence  shows  that  the  appellant
    attends a catholic school.  No challenge  was  made  to  the  sponsor's
    assertion that it is he who makes the  decisions  about  his  religious
    upbringing, healthcare, school fees and that he provides everything for
    the appellant.

14.  It was stated in TD (Yemen) at paragraph 21 that responsibility may  be
    shared if the sponsor parent has allowed relatives abroad to make  some
    important decisions in the child's life.  There was no evidence  before
    the First-tier Tribunal at all to suggest that the grandmother has made
    any important decisions for the appellant nor was this suggested to the
    sponsor in cross-examination.  In the circumstances it is not  open  to
    the judge to conclude that responsibility was shared.

15.  Ground 3 goes on to say that  the  judge  was  erroneous  in  requiring
    corroborative documentary evidence  for  the  sponsor's  oral  evidence
    which was unchallenged evidence by the respondent at the  hearing.  The
    judge also fell in error by considering the maintenance requirement  of
    the immigration  rules  when  that  was  not  an  issue  taken  by  the
    respondent.   The  judge  also  erred  in  disregarding   supplementary
    questions put to the sponsor at the hearing such as if the appellant is
    in trouble or does something naughty what happens and the evidence  was
    that the sponsor's mother calls him and then  the  sponsor  disciplines
    the appellant over the telephone and he seems to listen to his  father.
    No mention was made of this evidence in the determination.

16.  There was also an error in the  judge's  approach  to  the  appellant's
    sponsor's medical knowledge about his mother's medical condition.   The
    judge found that the sponsor  did  not  mention  that  his  mother  was
    suffering from heart disease which calls into question the  credibility
    of the comments and diagnosis from Dr Collins  who  did  say  that  his
    mother suffers from chronic  osteoarthritis  and  hypersensitive  heart
    disease.

17.  Further it was argued in the grounds of appeal that  the  judge  failed
    to apply the case law of Mundeba appropriately in  finding  that  there
    are no compelling circumstances which would make the exclusion  of  the
    child from the United Kingdom undesirable. It states that as a starting
    point the best interests of the child are best  served  by  being  with
    both or at least one of their parents.  The judge's assessment does not
    address the elements set out in Mundeba.  The judge did not  take  into
    account the evidence before her that the best interests  of  the  child
    are to be with his father particularly given that at  5  years  old  he
    does not have the social awareness to make continued residence  a  real
    feature.  The sponsor's evidence that when his  mother  was  not  well,
    that the appellant does not go to school meaning that  his  educational
    needs are sometimes not met.  There  was  evidence  of  a  serious  and
    deteriorating health condition of  the  appellant's  grandmother  which
    makes caring for a 5-year-old active child increasingly  difficult  and
    this shows that the judge only looked at one side of the coin in making
    her findings  at  paragraph  36  of  the  determination.   The  judge's
    findings are not adequately reasoned and case law has not been properly
    applied.

18.  The sixth ground of appeal is that the judge made findings on a  matter
    not raised at any stage.  This is the financial requirement.

19.  Ground seven is in respect of the  procedural  error  in  applying  the
    wrong immigration Rule and ground eight is  the  alternative  modes  of
    conducting parent and child  life,  the  reasonableness  of  a  British
    citizen relocating saying that the best interests of the child,  is  to
    live with his father. The sponsor's wife cannot live  in  Nigeria,  the
    evidence was that she was in terror of the possible kidnappings and has
    had no tie or contact with that particular country and she is a British
    citizen and there should be no reason for her to go to Nigeria with the
    sponsor to be with the appellant.

20.  At the hearing I heard submissions from  both  parties  as  to  whether
    there is an error of law in the determination.   Mr  Cole  adopted  his
    grounds of appeal which are very detailed and I  will  say  no  further
    about them.  Mr Avery on behalf of the respondent said that  the  issue
    has to be  looked  at  in  context.   He  accepted  that  there  is  no
    respondent's  bundle  but  nevertheless  argued  that   the   appellant
    nevertheless wanted to proceed with the  appeal.  Mr  Avery  said  that
    there was evidence that there was  shared  responsibility  between  the
    sponsor  and  the  grandmother  but  there  was  no  evidence  of  sole
    responsibility by the sponsor for the appellant.

21.  Mr Avery further submitted that the judge took  into  account  all  the
    evidence, knew that the burden is on the appellant and stated that  the
    appellant did give false information and  therefore  did  not  have  an
    unblemished record in respect of credibility.  He reiterated  that  the
    prime issue was sole responsibility and the burden was  not  discharged
    by  the  appellant  and  therefore  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.

Decision as to Whether there is an Error of Law in the Determination of  the
First-tier Tribunal Judge

22.  The issue in  this  appeal  was  whether  the  appellant  has  provided
    sufficient evidence to prove on  a  balance  of  probability  that  his
    sponsor,  his  father  living  in  the  United  Kingdom  has  had  sole
    responsibility for him since his sponsor left Nigeria and came to  this
    country when the appellant was 3 years of age.  The  appellant  is  now
    nearly 6 years of age. The question  was  whether  during  those  three
    years when the appellant remained in Nigeria, did his sponsor have sole
    responsibility for him as he lived with his grandmother.

23.  The judge took into account and understood the issues  in  the  appeal.
    The judge correctly stated that the question of sole responsibility  is
    set out or elaborated in the case of  TD  (sole  responsibility)  Yemen
    [2006] UKAIT 00049 which is set out at paragraph 9.  The judge sets out
    in detail the issue of sole responsibility but  nevertheless  found  on
    the  evidence  that  the  appellant's  sponsor  did   not   have   sole
    responsibility for the appellant and stated at paragraph 27:

         "I am satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the sponsor is
         David's sole surviving parent.  However, this does not  necessarily
         mean that he has  sole  responsibility  for  his  son's  upbringing
         within the meaning of the Immigration Rules".

24.  As found in TD (Yemen) responsibility for a child's upbringing  may  be
    undertaken by individuals other  than  their  parents.   The  appellant
    currently resides with his parental grandparents, his grandmother  [BO]
    is his legal guardian.  The central issue in this appeal is whether the
    de facto care given by the grandmother and other relatives to the child
    left behind in the country of origin has been given under the direction
    of the sponsoring parent in the United Kingdom so  as  to  justify  the
    conclusion that the latter has  had  sole  responsibility  despite  the
    geographical separation and which is a question of fact.

25.  The judge  made  adverse  credibility  findings  against  the  sponsors
    because he found that sponsor's evidence about his mother's health  was
    not consistent with the evidence and diagnosis of Dr Collins about  the
    appellant's grandmother's  health  conditions.  The  evidence  from  Dr
    Collins was that the appellant's grandmother has a heart condition  and
    hypertension.  The judge failed to appreciate that the  real  issue  in
    this appeal is not the appellant's grandmother's illness or the  nature
    of that illness or  any  contradiction  or  inconsistencies  about  the
    nature of the illness  but  whether  the  appellant's  father  in  this
    country has played a central part in his child's upbringing in  Nigeria
    whereby sole responsibility has been demonstrated.

26. The sponsor's evidence at the hearing was very  much  in  line  with  a
    notion of sole responsibility for the main decisions and welfare of his
    child living in Nigeria with his mother.  There  was  evidence  by  the
    sponsor's witness at the hearing who said  that  if  the  appellant  is
    naughty or does not do anything correctly it  is  the  father  in  this
    country who gives him a telling off or advises him about whatever  that
    needs to be done.

27. The judge failed to appreciate that the important issue in this  appeal
    is that the appellant is the biological son of the sponsor who lives in
    the United Kingdom and who is now married to a British citizen.


28. I therefore find that the First-tier Tribunal Judge has made a material
    error of law in the determination in equating day to day  care  of  the
    appellant by his grandmother as being  inconsistent  with  his  sponsor
    having had sole responsibility for the appellant. The  judge  erred  in
    not taking into account that responsibility can be shared because it is
    inevitable that the person who is looking after a child as said  in  TD
    (Yemen) will have day to day care towards a child of 5 such as  bathing
    him, caring for him, driving him to school but that is not the kind  of
    responsibility that is being considered. The issue in this  appeal  was
    whether sponsor has been making the main decisions  for  the  appellant
    notwithstanding that there is day-to-day care by some other  member  of
    the family in Nigeria.  This care given by the person looking after the
    appellant  in  Nigeria  is  not  conclusive  on  the  issue   of   sole
    responsibility.  The grandmother will inevitably  make  sure  that  the
    child  cleans  his  teeth,  goes  to  bed,  does   his   homework   and
    responsibility will to that extent be shared. That  does  not  preclude
    the sponsor from having sole responsibility for the appellant.


29. The unchallenged sponsor's evidence before the Judge was that he  makes
    all the decisions in the appellant's life and that the grandmother does
    whatever he wants her to do looking after the  appellant.  The  sponsor
    stated that he has had a continuing interest  and  involvement  in  his
    child and that he is consulted and involved  and  makes  the  decisions
    about the child's upbringing.


30. I find that the judge heard in his finding that the appellant's  father
    does not have sole responsibility despite  ample  evidence  before  the
    judge that he does. The judge fell into error by accepting that  shared
    responsibility is inconsistent with sole responsibility.


  31. I therefore set aside the decision  of  the  first-tier  Tribunal  and
      remake the decision.


32. I find that the appellant's sponsor came to this  country  three  years
    ago on a student visa.  He remained in this country  and  married.   He
    left his child in the care of his mother in  Nigeria  and  the  culture
    from which the sponsor comes from it is not unusual that  mothers  will
    care for their children's children but this by no means indicates  that
    the  appellant's  father  has  relinquished  care,  responsibility   or
    otherwise for his child.  I therefore find that the appellant meets the
    requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  for  entry  clearance  as  a
    dependant of his father in this country which leaves me with  the  only
    issue which is one of maintenance.


33. Mr Avery's position  at  the  hearing  was  that  maintenance  was  not
    considered because initially when the decision was taken,  it  has  not
    been accepted by the respondent that the appellant was  the  biological
    son of the sponsor in the United Kingdom and  therefore  the  issue  of
    maintenance would not have arisen.  I have  been  pointed  to  evidence
    that the appellant's sponsor and his wife earns well over  the  minimum
    amount required of �18,600. There was no issue taken by Mr  Avery  that
    the appellant  does  not  meet  the  maintenance  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules.


34. I therefore set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  I
    substitute my decision and I allow the appellant's appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed Mrs S Chana                                    Date 25th day  of  May
    2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have allowed the appeal and I make an order to the amount of fees paid.





Signed        Mrs S Chana                        Date 25th day of May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana
