
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/09983/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21st June 2016                             |On 18th July 2016             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge DEANS

                                   Between

                    the Entry Clearance Officer - nairobi
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          mr Michel Kapela Kandolo
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Rahman, ATM Law Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Entry Clearance Officer against a decision  by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Stewart dismissing an  appeal  against
    the refusal of entry clearance.  Before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the
    Appellant was Mr Michel Kapela Kandolo (hereinafter referred to as "the
    applicant").  The applicant was  born  on  14th  June  1979  and  is  a
    national of the Democratic Republic of Congo.

 2. The applicant had applied on 30th May 2014 for entry clearance to  come
    to the UK as the spouse of a British citizen,  Ms  Luyindula  Mongwele.
    The couple were married at a church wedding in England on  2nd  October
    2010 and then had a civil ceremony in Kinshasa.  The  couple  have  two
    children, one born in April 2011 and a second  born  in  January  2014.
    Both children are British citizens.

 3. The applicant could not succeed under the Immigration Rules in Appendix
    FM because in January 2006 he had been convicted of a criminal  offence
    in the UK and had been sentenced to imprisonment  for  42  months.   He
    therefore could not meet the suitability requirement  in  paragraph  S-
    EC.1.4.(b) of Appendix FM, which  states  that  the  exclusion  of  the
    applicant from the UK is conducive to the public good  because  he  has
    been convicted of an offence for which  he  has  been  sentenced  to  a
    period of imprisonment of at least twelve months  but  less  than  four
    years, unless a period of ten years has passed since  the  end  of  the
    sentence.

 4. The Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  considered  the  appeal  under
    Article 8, having regard to the children's best  interests  as  British
    citizens.  Before the First-tier Tribunal it was submitted on behalf of
    the ECO that it was open to the Sponsor to leave the UK and go  to  the
    DRC taking the children with her.  In the view of the judge the welfare
    of the children was neither safeguarded nor  promoted  by  having  them
    forego the benefits which British citizenship entitled them to in order
    to have the benefit of living with two parents.  The  judge  also  took
    into account  that  the  Sponsor  through  working  provides  financial
    support for the applicant and she would face  considerable  uncertainty
    in seeking employment in DRC.  It was in  the  best  interests  of  the
    children to live in the UK and have  the  benefit  of  two  parents  to
    provide them with financial and emotional support.  This outweighed the
    public interest.

 5. In the application for permission to  appeal  it  was  pointed  out  on
    behalf of the ECO that the applicant had been charged with  murder  and
    was convicted of manslaughter.  He had been deported from the UK on 7th
    June 2012, and had not made a voluntary departure  as  alleged  by  the
    Sponsor.  The Tribunal did not explain why  with  this  conviction  the
    applicant would be suitable to live with the children and there was  no
    professional  opinion  to  support  the  Tribunal's  conclusions.   The
    Tribunal had simply disregarded the public interest in  its  assessment
    of the rights of the children.

 6. Furthermore, the ECO pointed out that there was an  extant  deportation
    order in respect of the applicant and no application for  a  revocation
    of this had been made.  The Tribunal's findings were irrelevant because
    the Tribunal had failed to address the single most important aspect  of
    the case.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that  the  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal had  made  no  reference  to  the  applicant  being
    subject to a deportation order and this was an arguable error  of  law.
    It was also arguable that the judge had erred  by  giving  insufficient
    weight to the public interest, particularly  taking  into  account  the
    criminal offence the applicant had committed.





Submissions

 8. At the hearing before me Mr Bramble relied  upon  the  grounds  of  the
    application.  The conviction was live and no consideration was given to
    the conviction in the decision.

 9. For the applicant, Mr Rahman said he had little information  about  the
    conviction.  The applicant had been released and had been free  in  the
    UK for a period.  According to the ECO he had been deported  but  there
    was no evidence of this.

10. In response to this Mr Bramble produced a printout from the Home Office
    computerised records showing that the applicant  was  deported  on  7th
    June 2012.

11. Mr Rahman continued that the Presenting Officer had not relied on  this
    point before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  where  the  evidence  for  the
    applicant was that he had made a voluntary return.

12. It was pointed out that the deportation order was referred  to  in  the
    review dated 27th January 2015 by the Entry Clearance Manager and  this
    was before the First-tier Tribunal.

13. Mr Rahman continued that it was necessary to look both  at  the  public
    interest and the  best  interests  of  the  children.   The  judge  had
    referred to the case of MF (Nigeria) [2014] EWCA Civ 1192.  The Sponsor
    was a full-time nurse and there were two  children  involved.   If  the
    applicant was not allowed to enter the UK then the  family  would  fall
    apart.

14. The question was raised whether the judge had given  any  consideration
    to the existence of the deportation order.  Mr Rahman agreed that there
    was no direct reference to this in the decision but the judge had given
    proper reasons and relied upon the reported cases.  This was  a  unique
    situation.  It was not  possible  to  formulate  everything  in  rules.
    Justice was a broader concept and it was necessary to  have  regard  to
    the particular context of the case.  The best interests of the children
    were linked to the public interest and the children would  be  severely
    affected.

Discussion

15. I am satisfied that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  law
    and that because of this the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  must
    be set aside.  The existence of the deportation order  was  a  relevant
    and material factor.  It was referred to not only in the review by  the
    Entry Clearance Manager but also in the refusal decision itself by  the
    ECO, dated 16th July 2014, which states in its very first sentence that
    the applicant is currently subject to a  deportation  order  signed  on
    12th December 2006.  Nevertheless, as Mr Rahman acknowledged, there  is
    no mention of this deportation order in the judge's decision.

16. There may be occasions when it can be inferred that the judge  did  not
    mention a particular factor because the judge did not consider it to be
    material or did not consider  that  it  should  carry  any  significant
    weight.  This is not such a case.  The deportation  order,  because  of
    its  significance  to  the  public  interest,  was   bound   to   carry
    considerable weight and had to be addressed by the judge if  the  judge
    were to give adequate reasons for the decision.  The judge was  clearly
    aware that the applicant  had  a  criminal  conviction,  as  the  judge
    records at paragraph 4 that the  applicant  had  been  convicted  of  a
    criminal offence on 5th January 2006 and been sentenced to imprisonment
    for 42 months, but nowhere does the judge address  the  fact  that  the
    applicant was subject to a deportation order.  The failure  to  address
    the deportation order is a fundamental error in the judge's reasoning.

17. At the hearing before me Mr  Rahman  understandably  was  not  able  to
    counter this  point  head  on  but  instead  relied  upon  the  judge's
    assessment of the best interests of the children.  It may be that it is
    in the best interests of the children for the  applicant  to  join  his
    family in the UK, but in order for a proper decision to be made to this
    effect all relevant factors must be taken into consideration, not  only
    under the Immigration Rules but also when carrying  out  the  balancing
    exercise under Article 8.  It is  for  this  reason  that  the  judge's
    decision must be set aside.

18. The application for  permission  to  appeal  contains  certain  further
    grounds that are worthy of consideration.  The ECO raised the issue  of
    whether the Sponsor was fully aware of the nature  of  the  applicant's
    conviction and also the question of the applicant's suitability,  given
    the nature of his conviction, to act as a father to the  children.   It
    was pointed out that there was no  professional  evidence  relating  to
    this latter point.  Although these issues were not argued before me and
    there is nothing in the decision to show that they were  argued  before
    the First-tier Tribunal, they are nevertheless points which it might be
    appropriate for the parties to address in further proceedings.

19. In the circumstances the appropriate course is for  the  appeal  to  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  further  hearing  before  a
    different judge with no findings preserved from  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal of 12th December 2015.

Conclusions

20. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

21. I set aside the decision.

22. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a  hearing  before  a
    different judge with no findings preserved.









Anonymity

23. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for  anonymity.   I  have
    not been asked to make such an order and I see no reason  of  substance
    for doing so.




Signed                              Date 18th July 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Deans

