

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/09102/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                          |Determination Promulgated   |
|On 1 October 2014                            |On 2 October 2014           |
|                                             |                            |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                     AO
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Atuegbe (Leslie Charles solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr McVitty (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


       1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria.  He is  the  minor  son  of
          his mother who resides in Nigeria and his father  ('the  sponsor')
          who  resides  in  the  United  Kingdom.   He  resides   with   his
          grandparents in Nigeria.



       2. The appellant appeals with permission against a decision of First-
          tier Tribunal Judge Beach dated 13  February  2014  in  which  his
          appeal against the  refusal  of  entry  clearance  was  dismissed.
          Judge Beach found that the appellant had not displaced the  burden
          upon  him   of   demonstrating   that   the   sponsor   had   sole
          responsibility and there were no serious or compelling  family  or
          other reasons which make it undesirable for  him  to  be  excluded
          from the UK.

       3. When granting permission to appeal Judge PJG White  observed  that
          in reaching his decision the Judge may  have  provided  inadequate
          reasons for finding on the evidence that  the  appellant's  mother
          played a role in his life, such that the  appellant's  father  was
          not exercising sole responsibility.

       4. In oral submissions Mr Atuegbe relied upon the grounds of  appeal.
           He submitted that  the  Judge  erred  in  his  approach  to  sole
          responsibility.   Mr Atuegbe struggled to  identify  an  error  of
          law and seemed to simply disagree with the Judge's findings.

       5. In my view Judge Beach has provided entirely adequate reasons  for
          concluding that the appellant has  not  displaced  the  burden  of
          establishing that his father  has  sole  responsibility  for  him.
          The Judge was plainly  concerned  that  there  was  "very  little"
          evidence before him to show the sponsor  has  sole  responsibility
          [14].  The Judge was entitled  to  reach  this  finding.   I  have
          considered the evidence and it is indeed very sparse indeed.

       6. In my judgment the Judge was entitled to find  that  the  evidence
          strongly suggested that both the  appellant's  parents  have  been
          involved in making important decisions in  the  appellant's  life.
          The Judge was entitled to  draw  this  inference  on  the  limited
          material available.  That material included an affidavit from  the
          mother that states that she sees her  son  regularly  [12].   That
          affidavit is also significant in what it does not  say.   It  does
          not say that the sponsor makes most of the important decisions  in
          the appellant's life  but  that  he  has  performed  his  fatherly
          duties including paying school  fees  and  other  expenses.     In
          short, the affidavit does not  support  the  contention  that  the
          father has sole responsibility but focuses upon giving  permission
          for the appellant to join his father in the United Kingdom.

       7. The grounds of appeal really do  no  more  than  disagree  with  a
          determination that is sufficiently reasoned.

Decision

       8. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
          involve the making of an error on a point of law.


       9. I do not set aside the decision.

      10. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity order but  I  do
          so  because  this  determination  refers  to   sensitive   matters
          relevant to the appellant, who is a child.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
1 October 2014


