
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/09190/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 January 2017                   |On 19 January 2017                   |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             AAMERUDDIN MOHAMMED
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Whitwell a Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No representation

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

    1. For the purpose of continuity with the determination in  the  First-
       tier Tribunal I will hereinafter refer to the Secretary of State  as
       the Respondent and Mr Mohammed as the Appellant.

    2. The Respondent cancelled  the  Appellant's  leave  to  remain  as  a
       student on 12 September 2014. His appeal against this was allowed by
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Fitzgibbon QC ("the  Judge")  following  a
       hearing on 14 June 2016.

    3. In summary the Judge found that the Respondent had  failed  to  show
       that the Appellant had acted dishonestly in relation to the  English
       Language test as  no  evidence  was  produced  to  support  such  an
       assertion.

The grant of permission

    4. Upper Tribunal Judge  McWilliam  granted  permission  to  appeal  (5
       December 2016) on the ground that it is arguable that the Respondent
       had served evidence on the Tribunal prior to the hearing but it  had
       not been linked to the file.

Appellant's position

    5. The Appellant did not attend this hearing as  he  had  been  removed
       from the United Kingdom. No  one  appeared  on  his  behalf.  I  was
       satisfied that he had been served with  notice  of  the  hearing  by
       airmail on 23 December  2016  to  the  address  in  India  where  he
       identified  he  resided.  He  had  sufficient   time   to   instruct
       representatives for this hearing or make submissions in  writing.  I
       was therefore satisfied that it was appropriate and fair to  proceed
       in his absence.

Discussion

    6. There is on file a bundle of documents dated  20  January  2016  for
       this matter sent by the Respondent to the Tribunal. It was therefore
       served well before the hearing. I  have  no  idea  why  it  was  not
       attached to the relevant file. In those  circumstances,  through  no
       fault of the Judge,  a  material  error  of  law  occurred  in  that
       evidence that had been filed by the Respondent was not  able  to  be
       considered by him.

    7. I am therefore satisfied that the Judge made  a  material  error  of
       law.

    8. Mr Whitwell conceded that the matter should be remitted to the First-
       tier Tribunal as there had never been a proper hearing and that  was
       the appropriate venue for the evidence  to  be  considered  in  such
       circumstances. I agree.

Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision.

    I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal on the 1st available date
    for it to be reheard by a Judge other than Judge Fitzgibbon.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
19 January 2017
