
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/09190/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 12 May 2014                                  |On 21 July 2014            |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                SAMEER ASHRAF
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C T Durham Hall, instructed by RKS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Sameer Ashraf, was born on 22 January 1986 and is a male
    citizen of Pakistan.  On 30 March 2013, a decision was made  to  refuse
    to grant the appellant entry to the United Kingdom  as  the  spouse  of
    Irran Akhtar (hereafter referred to as  the  sponsor).   The  appellant
    appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Henderson)  which,  in  a
    determination promulgated on 12 February 2014,  dismissed  the  appeal.
    The appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2.  Judge  Henderson  found  the  appellant  could  not  comply  with  the
    Immigration Rules.  Part of her  reason  for  doing  so  was  that  the
    sponsor had failed to prove that she had a second job as claimed.   The
    grounds of appeal take issue with the judge's findings  and  also  with
    the application of MM and Others  [2013]  EWHC  1900.   However,  Judge
    Keane, granting permission in the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  a  lengthy
    decision explains in detail why he was not prepared to grant permission
    in  respect  of  the  challenge  to  the  judge's  findings  under  the
    Immigration Rules and to the application of MM.  Judge Keane went on to
    deal with the second limb of the grounds, namely the challenge  to  the
    judge's determination of the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds:

         The judge's resolution of the Article 8 issue was to  be  found  at
         paragraphs 24, 25, 26, 27, 28 and  30  of  her  determination.   At
         paragraph 22 ... the judge had found the appellant and sponsor were
         party to a genuine relationship stating as she did, 'my  conclusion
         is that this is an arranged marriage and that the couple are  in  a
         genuine relationship following an arranged marriage and  that  they
         have the intention to live  together  permanently  as  husband  and
         wife.'  Nowhere in her determination did  the  judge  consider  the
         circumstances of the sponsor nor did she consider whether it  would
         be reasonable for the sponsor, a British citizen who had been  born
         in the United Kingdom, to abandon her life in the United Kingdom in
         order to settle in Pakistan for the purpose of carrying  on  family
         life with the  appellant.   Such  a  case  had  been  canvassed  at
         paragraph 13 of the sponsor's witness statement and in  failing  to
         take into account such  evidence  and  to  arrive  at  findings  in
         respect of the sponsor the judge made an arguable error of law  but
         for which the outcome of the human rights appeal  might  have  been
         different.  The  application  for  permission  is  granted  but  is
         limited to such a ground.

 3. I made it clear to Mr Durham Hall, for the appellant, that  I  did  not
    consider that permission had been granted to challenge the  Immigration
    Rules decision or the  application  of  MM.   I  heard  submissions  in
    respect of Article 8 ECHR only.

 4. The relevant passage  of  the  sponsor's  witness  statement  reads  as
    follows:

         I am settled in the UK and my entire family is  here;  I  was  born
         here and I cannot live elsewhere.  I  am  employed  here  and  have
         spent my entire life here;  we  have  no  resources  or  employment
         opportunities in Pakistan.  My husband and I have  been  forced  to
         live apart  from  one  another  even  though  we  satisfy  all  the
         requirements.  It would be disproportionate to expect us to live in
         Pakistan; we have been separate for a long period of time  and  any
         further separation would also be disproportionate.

 5. Mr Durham Hall, in  his  skeleton  argument,  relied  in  part  on  the
    authorities of VW (Uganda) [2009] EWCA Civ 5 and Chikwamba [2008]  UKHL
    40.  In VW, the Court of Appeal considered "whether it is reasonable to
    expect the family [of the appellant] to leave with  the  appellant  [to
    settle abroad." [24].  Similarly, Chikwamba concerned  the  requirement
    imposed by the Secretary of State on an appellant living in the  United
    Kingdom with his family to return to his country of origin in order  to
    make  an  out  of  country  application  for  entry  clearance.   Those
    circumstances are not relevant in the present  appeal  given  that  the
    appellant remains living  in  Pakistan.   Relevant  jurisprudence  (eg.
    Sanade [2012] UKUT 48 (IAC) ) likewise deals with the circumstances  of
    appellants and their families living in the United  Kingdom  who  faced
    with decisions to remove them from the country.  It is correct  to  say
    that Judge Henderson, having decided that she should deal with  Article
    8 notwithstanding the failure of  the  appellant  to  comply  with  the
    Immigration Rules at [24] then proceeded to deal in her analysis almost
    entirely with the application of MM; she did not expressly consider the
    impact of the immigration decision on the sponsor, a  British  citizen.
    Was she wrong to fail to do so?   In  all  the  circumstances,  I  have
    concluded that Judge Henderson did not perpetrate  any  error  of  law.
    Had she proceeded to deal in detail with  the  sponsor's  circumstances
    (other than her employment and  income  position)  as  Mr  Durham  Hall
    argued she should have done, the result would have been the same.   The
    appellant and sponsor have chosen to marry in the  full  knowledge,  in
    order to gain admission to the United Kingdom, the appellant would have
    to satisfy the relevant Immigration Rules.  Indeed, the sponsor in  the
    passage of her statement which I have quoted above, indicates as  much.
    If the appellant's arguments in this appeal are correct then  it  would
    follow that any genuine  and  subsisting  marriage  between  a  foreign
    national and a British citizen would have to result  in  the  grant  of
    entry clearance to the foreign national on the grounds that the British
    citizen sponsor could not be expected to live abroad; the  requirements
    imposed by the Immigration  Rules  would  thereby  be  rendered  wholly
    otiose.  That is  not  the  effect  of  the  decisions  in  Sanade  and
    Zambrano.  Whilst the appellant and sponsor in the present  appeal  may
    be parties to a genuine relationship any interference  caused  to  that
    relationship has been of their own making because they have  chosen  to
    marry and to enter the relationship when the appellant  was  unable  to
    satisfy the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules.   Other  than  the
    relatively brief periods they have spent  physically  in  each  other's
    company, their enjoyment of family  life  has  been  exactly  the  same
    following the immigration decision as it was before the application for
    entry clearance was made.  With those matters  in  mind,  I  find  that
    Judge Henderson would have concluded that the Article 8  appeal  should
    be dismissed even if she had carried out a more  detailed  analysis  of
    the factual matrix.  Indeed, I do not believe that she would have erred
    in law had she refrained from considering Article 8  at  all  following
    the authority of MF (Nigeria) and also Gulshan [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC).

    DECISION

    This appeal is dismissed.




Signed                              Date 10 June 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

