
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/09589/2013
                                                               OA/09587/2013
                                                               OA/09588/2013
                                                               OA/09586/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25th June 2015                    |On 16th July 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

      MUHAMMAD FAISAL NADEEM First Respondent
      MUHHAMMAD ASAD NADEEM  Second Respondent
      QUDSIA AMIN      Third Respondent
      MASSIRA AMIN     Fourth Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C McGinley, of Gray & Co, solicitors.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.    For the purposes of this decision, we refer to the Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department as the respondent and to Mr M F Nadeem, Mr M  A
    Nadeem, Miss Q Amin & Miss M Amin as the appellants,  reflecting  their
    position before the First-tier Tribunal.

2.    This is an appeal by the respondent against a decision  of  the  First
    Tier Tribunal Judge Widdup ("the Judge"),  promulgated  on  5  February
    2014, which dismissed the first and second appellants' appeals  against
    refusal of entry clearance as  dependent  relatives,  but  allowed  the
    appeals of the third and fourth appellants under the Immigration Rules.
    The respondent's appeal is directed at the decision in relation to  the
    third and fourth appellants.

Background

3.    The third appellant was born on 7 August 1996.  The  fourth  appellant
    was born on 5 December 1998. The first and second  appellants  are  the
    older siblings of the third and fourth appellants. All four  appellants
    are nationals of Pakistan.

4.    The mother and step-father of all four appellants are present  in  the
    UK and were  granted  discretionary  leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  in
    September 2012. The first and second appellants made  applications  for
    entry clearance to join their parents in the UK as the adult  dependent
    relatives of their parents. Those applications were made under Appendix
    FM to the Statement of Changes to the Immigration Rules,  HC  395.  The
    third and fourth appellants, at the same time,  made  applications  for
    entry clearance to join their parents  as  the  dependent  children  of
    parents present and settled in  the  UK.  All  four  applications  were
    refused by the respondent on 19 March 2013.

5.    The respondent refused the first and second  appellants'  applications
    because they could not satisfy the requirements  of  Appendix  FM  (EC-
    DR1.1(d)). The applications of the third  and  fourth  appellants  were
    refused on the ground that there was no satisfactory evidence that they
    were serious and compelling family or other considerations relating  to
    their applications. The entry clearance officer was not satisfied  that
    their step-father could maintain them without recourse to public funds.
    The entry clearance officer drew the conclusion that  the  requirements
    of Paragraph 301 of the Immigration Rules were not met.

The Judge's Decision

6.    All four appellants appealed to the First  Tier  Tribunal.  The  Judge
    dismissed the appeals in relation to the first  and  second  appellants
    but after considering Paragraph 352D of the Immigration Rules,  granted
    the third and fourth appellants' appeals.

7.    The Judge's decision was promulgated on 5 February  2014.  Grounds  of
    appeal were not lodged by the respondent until 4 September 2014.  On  8
    October 2014, First Tier Tribunal Judge Ransley granted  permission  to
    appeal. In doing so, FTTJ Ransley granted  an  extension  of  the  time
    limit for seeking permission to appeal. In this case,  the  application
    for permission to appeal was almost seven months late.  It  would  have
    been helpful if FTTJ Ransley had commented more fully  on  the  reasons
    for granting an extension of the time limit.  We  remind  ourselves  of
    what is said in SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387.   FTTJ Ransley accepted
    that the explanation given by the  respondent  amounts  to  exceptional
    circumstances. The grounds of appeal clearly identify an arguable error
    of law which should be ventilated before the  Upper  Tribunal.  We  are
    confident that if the  application  for  extension  of  time  had  been
    properly considered, the same conclusion would have been reached.

The Hearing

8.    Mr Duffy for the respondent focused on [11], [12], [13]  and  [14]  of
    the Judge's decision. It is clear there that the Judge proceeds on  the
    basis that the appellants' parents have been granted refugee status and
    goes on to consider  Paragraph  352D  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  The
    respondent relies on copies of the immigration status documents for the
    parents of the appellants which quite clearly show that the appellants'
    parents have been granted discretionary leave to remain  and  have  not
    been granted refugee status.

9.    Mr McGinley conceded that the appellants'  parents  are  not  refugees
    but have been granted discretionary leave to remain.

Analysis

10.    It  is  clear  that  the  appellants'  parents  have   been   granted
    discretionary leave to remain in the UK "...for a reason not covered by
    the Immigration Rules..." They are not refugees. Paragraph 352D of  the
    Immigration Rules is entirely irrelevant in this  appeal.  The  correct
    Immigration Rule to be  considered  is  Paragraph  301.  That  was  not
    considered by the Judge. Indeed at [14], the Judge states "If Paragraph
    301 were the applicable Rule to consider in this case, the  appeals  of
    the third and fourth appellants could not succeed in  that  they  could
    not meet the maintenance and accommodation requirements of the Rule".

Decision

11.   Paragraph 301 of the Immigration  Rules  is  the  applicable  Rule  to
    consider in relation to the third and fourth appellants.  We  therefore
    reach the conclusion that the  decision  of  the  First  Tier  Tribunal
    contains a material error of law so that the determination in  relation
    to the third and fourth appellants cannot stand and must be set aside.

12.   We remake the decision and dismiss the  appeals  in  relation  to  all
    four appellants under the Immigration Rules.

13.   For the avoidance of doubt, we  note  that  the  First  Tier  Tribunal
    Judge did not reach a conclusion in relation to Article 8  ECHR.  There
    is no finding adverse to a claim in relation to the Article 8 rights of
    the fourth appellant (the youngest member of this family).


Signed      Date

                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
