
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/09474/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 22 July 2014                               |On 07 August 2014            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY

                                   Between

                              ms Rukhsana begum

                                                        Appellant/Respondent
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                        Respondent/Appellant


Representation:

For the Appellant/Respondent:   Miss M Jarvis Legg of Counsel
For the Respondent/Appellant:   Mr E Tufan, a Home Office Presenting
Officer


        DETERMINATION AND REASONS FOR FINDING A MATERIAL ERROR OF LAW

Introduction

1.   This is an  appeal  by  the  respondent  in  the  Tribunal  below,  the
    appellant in this Tribunal.  I will refer to  the  respondent/appellant
    as "the Secretary of State" and the appellant below/respondent in  this
    Tribunal as "the appellant ".

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh  who  was  born  on  16  March
    1994.  On 20 February 2012 she applied for settlement to the UK to join
    her mother, who is a British citizen.  However, the respondent  refused
    her application on 24 April 2012.  In  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's
    refusal dated 24 April 2012 he explains  that  the  appellant  did  not
    qualify under paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules because there  was
    no evidence to demonstrate that the appellant was living alone  outside
    the UK in the most  exceptional  compassionate  circumstances  and  was
    mainly  dependent  financially  on  relatives  settled   in   the   UK.
    Furthermore, she provided no satisfactory  evidence  of  her  sponsor's
    financial circumstances and the ECO was  not  satisfied  the  appellant
    could be maintained adequately in the UK.  He had regard to  her  human
    rights under Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights
    (ECHR).  However, having considered the need to exercise proper control
    over immigration  the  ECO  was  satisfied  there  was  no  unjustified
    interference with her human rights.

Appeal Proceedings

3.   The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and  a  hearing  took
    place at Hatton Cross on 18 February 2014.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Raymond  (the  Immigration  Judge)  dismissed  the  appeal  under   the
    Immigration Rules but allowed it under Article 8.  This is  because  he
    was not satisfied that it would be necessary and in accordance  with  a
    legitimate aim of immigration control to refuse Mrs Begum entry to  the
    UK, where she could continue  to  nurture  her  natural  affection  and
    support  for  her  mother.   The  Immigration  Judge  noted  that   the
    appellant's father, who lived  in  Bangladesh,  suffered  from  serious
    mental illness and the best interests of the appellant were  served  by
    allowing her admission to the UK.

4.   The Secretary of State made her application for  permission  to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal on the appropriate form.  This was received on 30
    April 2014.  It is contended on her behalf that the  Immigration  Judge
    materially  misdirected   himself   by   finding   a   disproportionate
    interference with the appellant's human rights.  He should have started
    by considering Appendix FM  at  paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  Even if the Immigration Judge was correct in finding  that  the
    appellant's  case  should  only  be  considered  under  Article  8  the
    Immigration Judge nevertheless misdirected himself  on  the  law.   The
    correct test was set out in VW Uganda [2008] UKAIT 21.   The  appellant
    had to demonstrate that there were insurmountable obstacles  to  family
    members accompanying the appellant abroad and no good reason  had  been
    shown for finding that the  interference  with  the  appellant's  human
    rights would be disproportionate.

5.   Designated Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  McClure  considered  the
    grounds of appeal to be at least arguable in that VW and the  case  law
    that has developed since make the point that the Rules are to  be  seen
    as the response in  a  democratic  society  to  the  obligations  under
    Article 8.  The sponsor came to the UK in 2010 leaving the appellant in
    Bangladesh.  There had never been an expectation that the  sponsor  and
    appellant would be allowed to remain in the UK outside the Rules.

6.   Judge Southern caused  to  be  sent  out  standard  directions  to  the
    parties on 23 May 2014 indicating that the Tribunal would not hear  new
    evidence which had not been produced  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    without an appropriate application.

The Hearing

7.   At the hearing  I  heard  submissions  by  both  representatives.   The
    Secretary  of  State  explained  that  the  appellant  had   made   the
    application on 20th February 2012, just before her 18th birthday on  19
    March 2012.  The sponsor only came to the UK four years ago leaving her
    husband and the appellant in Bangladesh. According to  the  appellant's
    application form her mother is a British national. Mr  Tufan  submitted
    that there were two criticisms of the Immigration Judge:

    (1)  The effect of Appendix FM did not  apply  directly  to  this  case
         since the application had been made before it came into force on  9
         July 2012.  However, the decision was not in accordance with recent
         case law which is informed by the changes in the Immigration  Rules
         that have taken place.


    (2)  Even if exceptional or  compassionate  circumstances  existed  for
         granting the appellant  entry  clearance  to  the  UK  outside  the
         Immigration Rules, the assessment of the  free-standing  Article  8
         claim was flawed.


    (3)  Mr Tufan did not seek to go  behind  the  favourable  findings  in
         favour of the appellant but did challenge the Razgar assessment  at
         paragraph  37.   The  Immigration  Judge  had  failed   to   attach
         sufficient importance to  the  economic  factors  inherent  in  the
         balancing exercise conducted by the  Secretary  of  State.   Merely
         because the appellant had a mother with a right of abode in the  UK
         did not make it  disproportionate  to  refuse  her  entry  to  that
         country.  The decision was irrational and unreasoned and it  lacked
         analysis.

8.   The appellant, on the other hand submitted that the first and  foremost
    consideration was whether the Immigration Judge had  been  entitled  to
    consider a free-standing Article 8 claim.  The answer was that he  had,
    given that this application predated the introduction  of  the  current
    Immigration Rules.  An error of law that follows a proper  analysis  of
    Article 8 would be immaterial.  The Immigration Judge had  applied  the
    correct test having considered the relevant case law.  It was submitted
    that the correct test was: whether there were insurmountable  obstacles
    to family life continuing from abroad or  whether  there  were  special
    reasons why it would be unlawful  to  break  up  the  family?   It  was
    submitted that the Immigration Judge had analysed the matter  in  terms
    of "special reasons" and concluded that the various factors  that  were
    relevant had been set out in paragraph 35 of  the  determination.   The
    appellant's  mother  had  now  been  in  the   UK   for   four   years.
    Proportionality was a discretionary tool.  It had to be assessed in the
    round taking into account all  relevant  factors.   This  determination
    contained a comprehensive analysis by the Immigration Judge  which  the
    Upper Tribunal should  not  interfere  with.   The  appellant  had  not
    entered the UK illegally.  I was referred to the case of Halamunden  at
    paragraph 61 but not given a copy or the full reference.   This  was  a
    factual judgment and a balancing exercise.  The Immigration  Judge  had
    correctly applied Razgar.  The Rules did not apply and the  Immigration
    Judge's decision to consider a "free-standing" article 8 claim did  not
    amount to a material error of law. The Immigration Judge had considered
    all relevant matters therefore.

9.   Mr Tufan replied to say that just because the  sponsor  had  employment
    in the UK did not mean the economic considerations which the  Secretary
    of State had to weigh in the balance had been properly considered.   No
    satisfactory reasons had been given for permitting the appellant  entry
    to the UK to join her mother.

10.  At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved the decision as to  whether
    or not there was a material error of law.

Discussion

11.  In her Grounds of Appeal the Secretary of  State  recognises  that  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules now found in Appendix FM were not
    in force at the time of this application  (see  paragraph  4  of  those
    grounds).  However, with respect, this does not  mean  the  Immigration
    Judge could  simply  ignore  the  Immigration  Rules  altogether.   The
    Immigration Rules in their pre 9 July 2012 state  provided  recognition
    of the need to facilitate family reunion in certain  circumstances  and
    the ECO gave detailed consideration to the family  circumstances.   The
    Entry  Clearance  Manager  also  noted  the  family  circumstances   in
    Bangladesh but found that the application did not comply with paragraph
    297 of the Immigration Rules and that the Secretary of State's decision
    was not such as to unlawfully interfere with the appellant's  protected
    human rights under Article 8.  This family had a choice as to where  to
    conduct their family life.

12.   Having  carefully  considered  the  matter,  the  Immigration  Judge's
    Article 8 assessment, particularly in paragraph 37, appears flawed.

13.  Her mother had lived in the UK for a relatively short  period  of  time
    in modest financial circumstances.  The appellant had a  father  living
    in Bangladesh.  By the date of the hearing the appellant was an  adult.
    There were, in my view, no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life
    continuing abroad.

14.  Miss Jarvis-Legg correctly submits that the test is not simply  one  of
    "insurmountable obstacles" in entry clearance cases.  As she submitted,
    "special  reasons"  may  be   shown   why   the   decision   would   be
    disproportionate.  However, it seemed to be accepted that the appellant
    had the burden of showing that a  degree  of  hardship  if  she  is  to
    succeed in establishing that exceptionally her  application  should  be
    allowed under Article 8 where it fails under the Rules.   It  is  clear
    from  a  number  of  cases  since  Razgar  that  the   courts   require
    insurmountable obstacles or special reasons to be shown.

15.  The appellant had a father and  brothers  living  in  Bangladesh.   The
    fact that her mother had developed a close relationship  with  her  did
    not mean that there was probably going to  be  a  "grave"  interference
    with family life if the appellant were prevented from coming to the UK.



16.  Secondly, to suggest that there was no  legitimate  aim  is  served  by
    putting effective immigration controls in  place,  as  the  Immigration
    Judge appears to have suggested in paragraph 37 of  his  determination,
    appears to be wrong.  It has been accepted in a number  of  the  recent
    cases that immigration has both cultural and financial costs associated
    with it. This informs the policies pursued by the Secretary  of  State.
    Provided they are properly and consistently applied  between  different
    cases the Secretary of State would be able to discharge the  burden  of
    showing that the requirements of  Article  8(2)  of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention were met.  I find that the Secretary of State discharged the
    burden of showing that Article  8  (2)  was  satisfied  in  this  case.
    Specifically she had shown that the decision was in accordance with the
    need to have proper immigration controls in place.

Conclusions

17.  The Immigration Judge was plainly wrong in a number of respects as  the
    discussion above makes clear.  The Immigration Judge  was  entitled  to
    make a favourable assessment of the appellant and the sponsor  and  the
    degree of their relationship.  None of  that  is  the  subject  of  the
    present appeal which purely relates to the application of  the  law  to
    the facts as found.  I find that the interference with human rights was
    modest and in any event the insurmountable obstacles or special reasons
    test plainly was not met.  Furthermore, the Immigration Judge failed to
    attach proper weight to those factors considered by  the  Secretary  of
    State to be important in cases of this type. In the  circumstances  the
    Immigration Judge erred in law.

My Decision

 18. The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed.  Having  found  that  there
    was a material error of law in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    that decision is set aside and the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    to refuse entry clearance is reinstated.

19.  I set aside the fee award as this appeal has been successful.






Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury
