
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/09329/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 5 June 2014                                  |On 15 July 2014            |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                              Farai Gijima Hove
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - PRETORIA

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss S Khan instructed by Ison Harrison, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Farai Gijima Hove, was born on 30 October 1996 and is  a
    male citizen of Zimbabwe.  The appellant appealed against the  decision
    of the Entry Clearance Officer, Pretoria, dated 26 March 2013 to refuse
    him entry clearance to the United Kingdom as the child  of  a  relative
    (his father, Christopher Hove - hereafter referred to as  the  sponsor)
    present and settled in the United  Kingdom.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Crawford) in a determination promulgated on  18  December  2013,
    dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant was required to satisfy the requirements of paragraph 297
    of HC 395 (as amended). Judge  Crawford  found  [17]  that  the  United
    Kingdom sponsor had not had sole responsibility for the appellant.   As
    a consequence, the appellant  could  only  succeed  by  satisfying  the
    requirement of paragraph 297(i)(f).  The  judge's  finding  as  regards
    sole responsibility has not been challenged by the appellant.

 3. The appellant's mother, with whom he lives,  has  been  suffering  from
    cancer.  The judge noted that the appellant's mother has  chronic  pain
    and that it was contended that the appellant "does not live the life of
    a normal teenage son" on account of the difficulties of living with his
    mother [7].  The judge heard the oral evidence of  the  United  Kingdom
    sponsor  and  records  in  detail  the   submissions   made   by   both
    representatives.  He indicated that he had "considered all the material
    supplied to me in the case file"  and  provides  particulars  of  those
    materials at [4].

 4. The appellant now asserts that  the  judge  at  [18]  singled  out  the
    positive aspects of the appellant's life in Zimbabwe  but  ignored  the
    difficulties he faces there living with his mother.  I  note,  however,
    that the judge recorded that "the sponsor maintains that the life  that
    the appellant is living is not suitable for a teenage  boy  because  he
    has heavy responsibility for his mother's care and she  is  'terminally
    ill'".  The judge found that

         the medical evidence that has been produced does not show that [the
         mother] is terminally ill.  I accept that she has  chronic  illness
         and a colostomy.  I accept the evidence of Dr  Mthombeni  that  she
         needs care and the support of relatives.

    The judge went on to reiterate in the same paragraph he did not  accept
    "on the evidence before me" that the appellant's mother was dying  from
    cancer.

 5. The judge noted that the United Kingdom sponsor works and  sends  funds
    to  Zimbabwe  for  the  support  of  the  appellant's  mother  and  the
    appellant.

 6. In her renewed grounds to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  Miss  Khan,  for  the
    appellant, refers to a letter in the appellant's  bundle  of  documents
    written by the appellant himself detailing his life  in  Zimbabwe  with
    his mother.  At [9], the  grounds  refer  to  the  "vivid  picture  the
    appellant painted of his life with mother" which, it is  asserted,  the
    judge failed to take into account.  The appellant is of an age when his
    views should be considered by the Tribunal.  The  grounds  assert  that
    "this evidence clearly points towards  unmet  emotional  needs  of  the
    appellant that his father is meeting."  (The appellant, in  his  letter
    states that, "[my father] is always there for me it's as though  he  is
    right here to  help  me  emotionally").   The  appellant  asserts  that
    although he refers to it in the determination the judge failed to  have
    proper regard for the Tribunal's decision in Mundeba  (Section  55  and
    paragraph 297(i)(f) [2013] UKUT 88  (IAC).   The  headnote  of  Mundeba
    provides:




   (i)                The exercise of  the  duty  by  the  Entry  Clearance
        Officer to assess an  application under the Immigration Rules as to
        whether there are family or other considerations making the child's
        exclusion undesirable inevitably involves an assessment of what the
        child's welfare and best interests require.

   ii)              Where an immigration decision engages Article 8 rights,
        due regard must be had to the UN Convention on the  Rights  of  the
        Child. An entry clearance decision for the  admission  of  a  child
        under   18   is   "an   action   concerning   children...undertaken
        by...administrative authorities" and so  by  Article  3  "the  best
        interests of the child shall be a primary consideration".

   iii)            Although the statutory duty under s.55  UK  Borders  Act
        2009 only applies to children  within  the  UK,  the  broader  duty
        doubtless explains why the Secretary of State's IDI  invites  Entry
        Clearance Officers to consider the statutory guidance issued  under
        s.55.

   iv)  Family considerations require an evaluation of the  child's  welfare
        including emotional needs.  'Other considerations' come in to  play
        where there are other aspects of a child's life  that  are  serious
        and compelling for example where  an  applicant  is  living  in  an
        unacceptable social and economic environment.  The focus  needs  to
        be on the circumstances of the child in the light  of  his  or  her
        age, social backgrounds and developmental history and will  involve
        inquiry as to whether:-

                 a there is evidence of neglect or abuse;

                 b.  there are unmet needs that should be catered for;

                 c.  there are stable arrangements for the child's  physical
                  care;

        The assessment involves consideration as to whether the combination
        of circumstances are sufficiently serious and compelling to require
        admission.

   v)  As a starting point the best interests of a child  are  usually  best
        served by being with  both  or  at  least  one  of  their  parents.
        Continuity of residence is another factor; change in the  place  of
        residence where a child has grown up for a  number  of  years  when
        socially aware is important: see also SG (child  of  a  polygamous
        marriage) Nepal [2012] UKUT 265 (IAC) [2012] Imm AR 939 .




 7. I find that the judge did not err in law as asserted in the grounds  or
    at all.  As regards the application of Mundeba, I find that  the  judge
    has made it clear in his determination  that  he  has  considered  this
    case; he has not simply referred to it without applying its  principle.
    I say that because at [20], the judge wrote this,

         I have considered the appellant's family situation and his welfare,
         including his emotional needs.  He  has  been  brought  up  by  his
         mother.  There is no evidence that he has ever  been  neglected  or
         abused.  There are no unmet  needs  that  should  be  catered  for.
         There  are  stable  arrangements  for  his  care.   He   lives   in
         comfortable circumstances.  I do not accept there  are  serious  or
         compelling  family  or  other   considerations   which   make   the
         appellant's exclusion from the UK undesirable.

 8. The language used in that paragraph (for example "no unmet  needs  that
    should be catered for...") is taken directly from Mundeba and indicates
    to me that the  judge  has  sought  to  apply  the  principles  of  law
    contained in that decision to the  present  appellant's  circumstances.
    The judge did not refer in terms to the "circumstances of the child  in
    the light of his  or  her  age,  social  background  and  developmental
    history" but he was well aware that the appellant is a teenager on  the
    verge of adulthood and that his development does  not  appear  to  have
    been hindered by living with his mother,  notwithstanding  her  medical
    difficulties.  The judge directly addressed the "arrangements  for  the
    child's physical care" and clearly found that these were  not  lacking.
    The appellant's own evidence in his letter indicated that his emotional
    needs were being catered for by his father (see above) albeit  that  he
    is physically separated from him.  The question of  neglect  and  abuse
    was also directly addressed by the judge.  In making his assessment  as
    to whether "the combination of circumstances are  sufficiently  serious
    and compelling to require admission" I find  that  the  judge  has  had
    regard to all the relevant evidence.  This is  not  a  case  where  the
    judge has reeled  off  a  list  of  cases  only  to  ignore  the  legal
    principles which they contain.  On the contrary, I find that the  judge
    has carefully  applied  the  relevant  law  to  the  case  before  him.
    Accordingly, I find that the appellant has failed to establish that the
    judge has erred in law.

DECISION

 9. This appeal is dismissed.




Signed                              Date 30 June 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

