


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/09536/2013
                                                               OA/09524/2013
                                                               OA/09532/2013
                                                               OA/09522/2013
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 6 November 2014                        |On 14 November 2014              |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between
|1  |Jarah Ibrahim Mohamed                      |   |
|2  |Ali Ibrahim Mohammed                       |   |
|3  |Mohamed Ibrahim Mohammed                   |   |
|4  |Osman Abdulla Ibrahim                      |   |
|   |(anonymity direction NOT made)             |   |


                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                        ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER-AMMAN
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr I Palmer, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although this case touches on the welfare of young people I see no need
    for any restraint on publication.

 2. This is an appeal by four young people described as  stateless  Bidoons
    originating from Kuwait.  I understand they  are  presently  living  in
    Jordan.  They appealed to the First-tier Tribunal the decision  of  the
    Entry Clearance Officer refusing them entry  clearance  to  join  their
    sponsor, a refugee in the United Kingdom.  The first  three  appellants
    are the children of  the  sponsor  and  the  fourth  appellant  is  the
    grandchild of the sponsor.

 3. The appellants and their mother or  grandmother  as  the  case  may  be
    applied at the same time for entry clearance.  They  were  all  refused
    but when DNA evidence showed that they were related  as  claimed  there
    was no reason to doubt the claim of their mother to be the wife of  the
    sponsor. She entered  the  United  Kingdom  with  permission  and  gave
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. The appellants were not given entry clearance.   In  the  case  of  the
    first three appellants it was not accepted that they were  of  the  age
    claimed.  In the case of the fourth appellant, the grandchild,  it  was
    not accepted that he would have established any rights under the  Rules
    or on Article 8 grounds to join his grandparents.

 5. I deal with the appeal of the fourth  appellant  first  because  it  is
    rather different from the other three  and  I  have  no  hesitation  in
    saying that his appeal to the Upper Tribunal must  be  dismissed.   The
    First-tier Tribunal did  not  believe  the  evidence  given  about  his
    circumstances.  Reasons were given for this.  In particular there was a
    contrast in the evidence between that of the sponsor and  that  of  the
    sponsor's wife.  They could not agree about the age of the  child  when
    the child started to live with them.  Neither could they agree with the
    reasons for only one of the grandchildren remaining and the other being
    taken  apparently  to  the  United  Kingdom.   These  were  points   of
    considerable importance in which consistency could reasonably have been
    expected.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge also found the alleged  arrangements  for
    the care of the young child being given over to the grandparents to  be
    unbelievably lax.

 7.  The main reason for challenging the findings raised in the grounds  is
    an attack on a rather loose remark by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    when he expressed himself "doubtful" about the fourth appellant's claim
    to be part of the sponsor's pre-flight family.  Mr Palmer, who  settled
    the grounds, was able to say that "doubtful" is an  unfortunate  phrase
    as it is not clear what kind of doubt the judge experienced.  When  the
    balance of proof  is  the  balance  of  probabilities  it  is  entirely
    possible that the judge might be "doubtful" but still may be satisfied.

 8. However there  was  a  correct  self-direction  about  the  burden  and
    standard of proof at paragraph 5. Paragraph 26  has  to  be  read  with
    paragraph 28.  The judge says in paragraph 26 that he is  doubtful  and
    goes on to say in paragraph 28 that it had not been shown properly that
    the fourth appellant was  part  of  the  sponsor's  pre-flight  family.
    Coupled with the correct direction in paragraph 5 about the  burden  of
    proof and the absence of anything to undermine the suggestion that  the
    judge had failed to follow his correct self-directions other  than  the
    use of the word "doubtful" I see no basis for criticising that part  of
    the decision.

 9.  Once  the  fourth  appellant  failed  to  establish  the  social  (not
    biological) relationship alleged then the appeal had to be dismissed.

10. The other three appellants are in the same position as each  other  but
    in a different position from the fourth appellant.  Their  case  turned
    entirely on their age.  If they were minors their appeals  should  have
    been allowed but if they were not then it should have  been  dismissed.
    The critical date was the date of application.

11. It is often extremely to  prove  a  person's  age  and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge expressed his own frustrations  of  the  unenviable  and
    very difficult task  before  him.   The  evidence  of  their  ages  was
    comprised an assertion made out in the application  form  supported  by
    the evidence of their parents and the evidence  of  birth  certificates
    used to support the application.

12. None of that evidence was  particularly  good.   The  evidence  in  the
    application form and the documents merely shows  consistency.  It  does
    not show truthfulness.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  I  find  for
    perfectly lawful reasons, did not feel able to give very much weight if
    any to the birth certificates.  His  point  was  that  the  mother  and
    father of the appellants could not give a consistent  sensible  account
    about how the documents  came  to  be  in  their  possession.   He  was
    entitled to expect this to be something that they could explain easily.
    Certainly, absent extraordinary circumstances, it would not  have  been
    hard  to  have  explained  how   regularly   obtained   genuine   birth
    certificates were issued. The judge found that the parents had not been
    truthful and were unreliable witnesses about the appellants' ages.

13. There was one  point  in  particular  that  the  judge  missed  in  his
    determination and I have reflected hard on it because it  does  concern
    me. When the appellants' father claimed asylum in the United Kingdom in
    2011 he responded to a screening interview. Such interviews  are  brisk
    and intended to help categorise an application  rather  than  establish
    the detail. Both applicants  and  immigration  officers  can  often  be
    excused  for  making  mistakes  about  the  details   of   the   claim.
    Nevertheless the sponsor gave a detailed account  of  his  family,  not
    only about these appellants but about his grandchildren as  well,  that
    was consistent with his later evidence. I  wish  this  point  had  been
    addressed in the determination. As I indicated in  exchanges  with  the
    representatives, such consistency does not prove  truthfulness  but  it
    does defeat a suggestion of recent fabrication.

14. The First-tier Tribunal Judge had a photograph of the three appellants.
     In fact there were two sets  of  photographs.  One  set  were  on  the
    application forms. It was not clear when they were taken and so they do
    not really assist anybody. The second was a  photograph  of  the  three
    appellants standing side by side the embassy when their application was
    made. Mr Palmer said that when the photograph was taken the  appellants
    should have been aged 14, 15 and 16 years.

15. The First-tier Tribunal Judge said at paragraph 19:

         "I find the photographic evidence to be compelling in this case and
         I am of the firm view, having had the benefit of  looking  at  this
         evidence, that these appellants were over the age of  18  years  at
         the date of decision."

16. I am no hesitation in saying that the photograph does not appear to  me
    to show boy aged 14, 15 and 16.  They look to me  like  photographs  of
    young men significantly older than that.  However, I also remind myself
    that my observation on the photograph is  based  on  my  experience  of
    young people who have grown up in the United  Kingdom  and  it  is  not
    obvious to me that that transfers necessarily fairly or  accurately  to
    young people who have grown up in the difficult circumstances of  being
    stateless in Kuwait or Jordan or other places in between.  It  may  not
    be entirely surprising if they matured more quickly but I do not  know.
    That would be speculation on my part.

17. I also know because of guidance given in age assessment  cases  in  the
    United Kingdom that  a  decision  maker  cannot  give  much  weight  to
    evidence based on appearance and particularly not to a photograph which
    can only give an impression based on  an  instant  in  time.  Certainly
    those of us who have experience in, for example,  prosecutions  arising
    out of selling alcoholic drinks to people under the age of 18 know that
    a young person who wants to appear older than is really  the  case  can
    often do that successfully, at least initially, although  the  pretence
    is much harder to sustain if the person is interviewed and examined.

18. It really comes to this.  The judge had  got  before  him  photographic
    evidence tending, but only tending, to suggest that the appellants were
    older than they claim, consistent evidence from the  father  about  the
    age of the children  that  was  not  supported  by  the  mother's  oral
    evidence, and  documentary  evidence  that  was  unreliable.  Mr  Avery
    reminded me, perfectly properly, that the judge  was  not  allowed  the
    luxury of indecision.  He had to come down one way or the other.

19. I remind myself, as I suspect the judge  reminded  himself,  that  this
    decision is of considerable importance.  It is very undesirable  indeed
    that young people who are entitled to be united with their  parents  in
    the United Kingdom are separated from them but it is  also  undesirable
    that three grown men living independently in Jordan should  be  allowed
    into the United Kingdom because they have pretended to be much  younger
    than they really are.

20. Not for the first time in appeals of this kind I find it just  slightly
    alarming  how  very  important  decisions  have  to  be  made  on  very
    unsatisfactory evidence.

21. Mr Palmer showed how the appeal could have been decided differently. Mr
    Avery reminded me that I have to ask myself if the judge was  wrong  in
    law.  I am not persuaded that he erred. Rather, I find that he did  the
    best that he could in very difficult circumstances.   He  did  set  the
    case in the matrix of the evidence as a whole.  He did  appreciate  the
    poor quality of any of  the  evidence  before  him  and  he  reached  a
    permissible  decision.   It  follows  therefore  that  the  appellants'
    appeals to the Upper Tribunal must be dismissed and are.

22. There is a rider I add  to  this.  The  determination  contains  rather
    alarming reference to photographic evidence being  provided  after  the
    hearing.  Mr Palmer very fairly and helpfully explained that black  and
    white photocopies were available at the hearing but that the Presenting
    Officer had colour photographs on his mobile 'phone which he showed  to
    the judge. No doubt in an effort to be helpful the  Presenting  Officer
    provided a printed copy of those photographs after  the  event.   Taken
    out of context the Presenting Officer's  behaviour  might  have  seemed
    alarming if not bizarre but was actually the result of  someone  trying
    to be helpful  and  fair.  No-one  suggested  that  there  is  anything
    improper about it or anything adverse turned on it.  I only mention  it
    because it concerned me when I read  the  papers  and  my  concern  was
    misplaced.

23. I also record here, as I explained to the parties at the  hearing,  the
    papers before me  were  incomplete.  The  appellants'  bundle  and  the
    photographs were missing. I took time during the  hearing  to  consider
    the bundle. I mention its absence in case the files  attract  attention
    elsewhere.

24. Neither party asked for a fee award and so I make no order.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 12 November 2014               |





