
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/09534/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 December 2014                          |On 5 January 2015             |
|                                             |..............................|
|                                             |.........                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                               mr santosh pun
                       (ANonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           Entry Clearance Officer
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Duncan, Counsel instructed by N C Brothers & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal on Article 8 grounds  against
    the refusal of entry clearance for the  purposes  of  settlement  as  a
    dependent of a Gurkha veteran.  The First-tier Tribunal did not make an
    anonymity direction, and I do not consider that  such  a  direction  is
    warranted for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a national of Nepal, whose date of birth is 24 October
    1985.  His father, Mr Kesh Bhadur Pun, is a former Gurkha soldier.   In
    2006 he entered the United  Kingdom  with  his  wife,  the  appellant's
    mother, as a visitor.  He then made an in-country application for leave
    to remain as a former Gurkha  soldier,  and  his  wife  joined  in  the
    application as his dependant.  The application was successful.

The refusal of entry clearance on 24 October 2007

 3. Just over a year after he had last  seen  his  parents  in  Nepal,  the
    appellant's application to join them  in  the  UK  was  refused  on  24
    October 2007.  The Entry Clearance Officer's reasons were that  he  was
    22 years old and claimed to be studying in full-time education in class
    10.  He was aware that the average age for students in class 10 was  16
    or 17.  He had submitted a letter from his school stating he was unable
    to complete his class 9 examinations in 2004  because  of  ill  health.
    However, he had also submitted a letter from a doctor dated 27th  March
    2005 which stated he was suffering from an anxiety disorder and he  had
    been advised to rest for a month.  There was  no  evidence  to  support
    what he had been doing since then.  As such, he could not be  satisfied
    that his enrolment to class 10 at this time was not simply  an  attempt
    by him to make it  appear  that  he  was  in  full-time  education  and
    dependent on his sponsor.  In any event,  he  noted  he  had  an  older
    sister age 25 who was living in Nepal.  He was not satisfied  that  the
    appellant was not leading an  independent  life  and  that  there  were
    compelling family or other  considerations  which  made  his  exclusion
    undesirable, as required by paragraph 276X of the Rules.

 4.  The  appellant's  solicitors  settled  a  notice  of  appeal  on   the
    appellant's behalf in November 2007 arguing that  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer had failed to apply the  discretionary  criteria  contained  in
    chapter 29 of  the  Diplomatic  Service  Procedures.   Accordingly  the
    refusal decision was  unlawful,  and  it  also  was  a  breach  of  the
    appellant's rights under Article 8 of the ECHR.

The decision of Judge Kimnell in July 2010

 5. The appeal eventually came before Judge Kimnell sitting at Hatton Cross
    on 21 July 2010.  Both parties were legally represented.   The  sponsor
    gave oral evidence.  He had arrived in the UK in  September  2006.   He
    had previously lived in the United Kingdom  in  1979  and  1986  whilst
    serving in the British Army.  His son had recovered  by  October  2007.
    From time to time after 2005 his son's health had not been  okay.   But
    he was able to work.  The appellant had left school  and  had  begun  a
    computer course.

 6. In closing submissions on behalf of the  Entry  Clearance  Officer,  Ms
    Ellis submitted that there were no  more  than  normal  emotional  ties
    between the appellant and his parents in  the  UK.   Contact  could  be
    continued as before, and the  appellant  enjoyed  the  society  of  his
    sister who still lived with him.  The sponsor had decided  to  separate
    himself from his children when he decided to immigrate to the UK.

 7. In his subsequent determination, Judge Kimnell  directed  himself  that
    the relevant date for the determination of the facts was  the  date  of
    decision, namely 24 October 2007.  The judge found  that  the  evidence
    that the appellant was not leading an independent life in October  2007
    was extremely thin, and consisted of  assertions  from  witnesses  with
    virtually no documentary support.  However he accepted, by  the  finest
    possible margin, that at the date of decision  the  appellant  was  not
    leading an independent life in that he was being supported  financially
    by his father.  But the appellant was not living alone.   He  shared  a
    house with his sister, and there was no reason to suppose they did  not
    enjoy one another's society, and that there was an element of  (mutual)
    emotional support.  With regard to the Article 8 claim, he agreed  with
    Ms Ellis's submission there was nothing  beyond  normal  emotional  and
    financial dependency. At the age of 22, which was his age at  the  date
    of decision, he really could not see why the appellant was incapable of
    living independently of his parents.  The sponsor himself said that  he
    was fit and able to work.  The judge continued:

         In fact I do not find proportionality to be an issue since I do not
         accept that Article 8 is engaged in a case such as this  where  the
         appellant is a young man  of  22  capable  of  working  and  living
         independently of his parents.  Moreover, it has not been  shown  to
         be unreasonable for the appellant's parents to continue  to  reside
         in Nepal, of which country both are nationals, and the  country  in
         which they have an established home, and adult  children  residing.
         The parents have made a choice  to  live  in  the  UK  without  any
         guarantee that their adult children can join them.  The UK  is  not
         obliged to acquiesce to that choice.

 8. The judge went on to dismiss the appeal under the Rules and also  under
    Article 8 ECHR.  However he allowed the appeal  on  the  limited  basis
    that the decision was not  in  accordance  with  the  law  because  the
    respondent had failed  to  take  into  account  published  policy  when
    deciding the application.

The Decision under the Published Policy

 9. On 25 October 2010 the Entry Clearance  Manager  at  the  British  High
    Commission in New  Delhi  gave  his  reasons  for  refusing  him  entry
    clearance under the discretionary policy outlined in chapter  29.14  of
    the IDIs.  In assessing whether settlement in the  UK  was  appropriate
    the ECO should consider the following factors:

       . one parent or relative of the applicant is present and  settled  in
         the UK under the HM Forces Rule;  the applicant has previously been
         granted limited leave as a dependent of a member of HM Forces;

       . the applicant has been, and wishes to continue,  pursuing  a  full-
         time course of studies in the UK;

       . refusal of the application would mean that the applicant  would  be
         living alone outside the UK and is  financially  dependent  on  the
         parent or relative present and settled  in  the  UK  under  the  HM
         Forces Rule;

       . the applicant would find it very difficult to function  because  of
         illness or disability without the help and support of their  parent
         or close relative in the UK.

10. If one or more of the factors listed above were present, the ECO  might
    exercise discretion and grant entry clearance for settlement to the UK.

11. The ECM said he had carefully considered the appellant's  case  against
    the instructions in chapter 29.14 which he had set out above.   He  had
    considered matters afresh in accordance with the spirit of the  judge's
    determination.  The criteria  were  not  prescriptive.   There  was  no
    evidence that the appellant suffered from any  illness  or  disability.
    The ECM went on to cite various findings made by  Judge  Kimnell.   The
    ECM concluded that the appellant  had  not  demonstrated  that  he  was
    living alone outside the UK, or he would find it difficult to  function
    because of illness.  He was also  not  satisfied  that  he  was  solely
    dependent upon his father in the UK other than by choice.  The exercise
    of discretion in his favour was not justified.

The Appeal against the Decision of 25 October 2010

12. The appellant appealed against this decision  on  8  April  2013.   The
    explanation for the lateness of the  appeal  was  that  the  notice  of
    decision had not been received by the appellant until 24 March 2013.

13. It is not clear how this procedural question was resolved.   The  email
    traffic disclosed by the  appellant's  solicitors  indicates  that  the
    British High Commission in New Delhi maintained the position  that  the
    decision letter had been sent to the appellant by registered post on 17
    December 2010, and the letter had not been returned as undelivered.

14. Moreover, in an ECM review dated 20  January  2014  the  appellant  was
    treated as having made a  fresh  application  under  the  discretionary
    policy on 28 May 2013, which had triggered a fresh refusal decision  on
    14 June 2013, leading to a fresh notice of appeal on 21 November 2013.

The Hearing before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

15. The matter came before Judge Britton sitting at Newport in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal on 28 March 2014.  The case advanced  by  Mr  Howells  on
    behalf of the appellant was that the appellant was appealing on Article
    8 grounds only from the decision dated 25 October 2010.

16. In his skeleton argument, Mr Howells said  that  at  the  date  of  the
    refusal the appellant was a young adult age 25.  He  had  always  lived
    with his mother until his  parents  relocated  to  the  UK  to  settle.
    During the period apart, the nature of the dependency did  not  change.
    The appellant had not  founded  a  family  of  his  own.   He  remained
    dependent emotionally, practically and financially.  At the time of the
    decision in October 2010, the  appellant  was  still  living  with  his
    sister and was not alone.  There had been  a  change  of  circumstances
    since then, as his sister was now married  and  living  an  independent
    life of her own.  As Tomlinson LJ had made clear in UG  (Nepal)  [2012]
    EWCA Civ 58, where a decision was remitted  for  reconsideration  under
    the policy, the ECM must not allow the passage of time to act  unfairly
    against the appellant.

17. In his subsequent determination, Judge Britton quoted extensively  from
    Judge  Kimnell's  determination,  including  his   finding   that   the
    appellant's ties to his parents did  not  go  beyond  normal  emotional
    ties, and he was capable of living independently of his parents.

18. In paragraph [26], he rejected Mr Howells' argument that there had been
    a material change of circumstances  since  2010.   He  found  that  the
    appellant still enjoyed a brother and sister  relationship,  and  there
    would still be emotional support for one another even though the sister
    was now married.  They lived in the same town, and therefore they  were
    not at a great distance from one another.  The appellant's  sister  had
    never supported the appellant financially.

19. In paragraph [28] the judge held that the psychiatric illness claim had
    not been pursued by the appellant or the sponsor.  In  any  event,  the
    appellant was fit enough to be able to undertake training to be a chef.
     He was satisfied that the appellant would not have a problem obtaining
    employment in Nepal in the catering business.

20. The judge went on to find that the appellant was leading an independent
    life, and he "would not succeed" under  Article  8.   He  concluded  by
    saying that any interference with the appellant's  private  and  family
    life  was  proportionate  to  the  legitimate  aims  of  applying   the
    immigration policy of the United Kingdom.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

21. The appellant applied for permission to appeal, arguing the  judge  had
    erred in law by failing to consider the principles set out  in  Ghising
    (Family life - adults - Gurkha policy) Nepal [2012] UKUT 160 (IAC).

The Initial Refusal of Permission

22. On 6 August  2014  Judge  Chohan  refused  permission  as  overall  the
    findings made by the judge were open  to  the  judge  on  the  evidence
    before him.  Adequate reasons had been given.  Even if  the  judge  had
    specifically referred to the case of  Ghising,  there  was  nothing  to
    suggest that his findings would have been any different.  The appellant
    had not been prejudiced.

The Eventual Grant of Permission

23. On a renewed application for permission to the  Upper  Tribunal,  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Macleman granted permission on 30 October  2014.   While
    granting permission, he observed that the submissions for the appellant
    were   rather   inconsistent   about   whether   the   assessment    of
    proportionality should be as at 24 October 2007, or as  at  25  October
    2010 or based on a subsequent material change of circumstances.  On the
    last point, Judge Britton  had  made  a  factual  finding  against  the
    appellant, and the extract now quoted from UG [2012] EWCA Civ  58  said
    that such matters could cut both ways.  Although the facts were not  at
    all complicated, this was not an easy case to untangle, with  evidence,
    decisions and submissions going to various points in time.  However, he
    thought there was enough in the grounds to suggest the judge might  not
    have made the basis of decision as clear as it needed to be.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

24. At the hearing before me, Mr Duncan submitted it was not clear  whether
    the judge was referring to the circumstances appertaining in 2007, 2010
    or 2013.  He had erred in law in not applying Ghising to the  2007  set
    of facts.  This was the set of facts most favourable to the  appellant,
    as then he had been physically separated from his parents for one  year
    and one month.

25. In reply, Mr Tufan submitted that  the  circumstances  appertaining  in
    2010 were the only ones which were  relevant.   Article  8(1)  was  not
    engaged, and this disposed of the Article 8 appeal.

Discussion

26. Between 2010 and the date of the hearing  before  Judge  Britton  there
    were two developments in the law relevant to Gurkha dependants, one  of
    which has a direct bearing on this appeal, and the other of which  does
    not.

27. The development which does not have a direct bearing on this appeal  is
    the finding by the Court of Appeal in Gurung and Others [2013] EWCA Civ
    8 that the weight to be accorded to the historic wrong  in  Gurkha  ex-
    servicemen cases was not to  be  regarded  as  less  than  that  to  be
    accorded for the historic wrong suffered by British overseas  citizens.
    The effect of that, as analysed in Ghising  and  Others  (Gurkhas/BACs:
    historic wrong: wage) [2013] UKUT 00567 (IAC) is set  out  in  headnote
    [4] of that decision:

         Accordingly, where it is found that Article 8 is engaged  and,  but
         for the historic wrong, the appellant would have settled in the  UK
         long ago, this will ordinarily determine the outcome of the Article
         8 proportionality assessment in an appellant's  favour,  where  the
         matters relied on by the Secretary of State/Entry Clearance Officer
         consist solely  of  the  public  interest  in  maintaining  a  firm
         immigration policy.

28. While this development in the law assists an  applicant  such  as  this
    appellant on the issue of proportionality, it  does  not  make  it  any
    easier for someone in his position to establish that Article  8(1)  was
    engaged at the relevant date of decision.

29. On this issue, Mr Howells before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  relied  on
    Ghising (Family life - adults - Gurkha policy) [2012] UKUT 00160 (IAC),
    a decision of the Upper Tribunal chaired  by  Mrs  Justice  Lang.   She
    considered Kugathas v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003]
    EWCA Civ 31 and made the following observation  at  paragraph  56:  "We
    accepted the appellant's submission that the judgments in Kugathas have
    been interpreted too restrictively in the past and ought to be read  in
    the light of  subsequent  decisions  of  the  domestic  and  Strasbourg
    courts."

30. She went on to give a series of examples where the Court of Appeal  and
    the Strasbourg Court had found, or had upheld a finding, that  a  young
    adult who continued to live with his parents enjoyed family  life  with
    them for the purposes of Article 8(1).

31. In his skeleton  argument  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  Mr  Howells
    submitted that, applying Ghising,  Article  8(1)  was  engaged  at  the
    relevant date of decision (25 October 2010) as the  appellant  had  not
    founded a family  of  his  own,  and  remained  dependent  emotionally,
    practically and financially on his parents in the UK.

32. However, Mr Howells muddied the waters by going on to rely on the  fact
    that his sister was now married and living an independent  life.   This
    was irrelevant, as the Article 8 claim had to be  assessed  as  at  the
    date of the decision under appeal, and not by reference to the state of
    affairs at the hearing.

33. I note that in his renewed application  for  permission  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, Mr Howells submits that Judge Britton fell into error because
    he did not apply Ghising to the 2007 set of facts.  In my judgment this
    is an unfair  criticism  of  Judge  Britton  as  Mr  Howells'  skeleton
    argument before the First-tier Tribunal plainly  directed  the  judge's
    attention to the circumstances appertaining in 2010, when the appellant
    was age 25, and not to the circumstances appertaining in 2007, when the
    appellant was 22; and when the period of separation  from  his  parents
    was one year and one month rather than four years, as it was in 2010.

34. But the criticism is academic, as on analysis  the  appellant  was  not
    disadvantaged by Judge Britton's approach.  Judge Britton rightly  took
    the findings of fact made by Judge Kimnell as his  starting  point,  in
    line with Devaseelan.

35. As it happens,  the  findings  of  fact  made  by  Judge  Kimnell  were
    expressly directed to the state of affairs in 2007, not  the  state  of
    affairs in 2010.  So Judge Britton was focusing on the most  favourable
    set of facts for the appellant, which were those appertaining in 2007.

36. The difficulty for the appellant is that Judge Kimnell had given  clear
    reasons for finding that the appellant did not enjoy family  life  with
    his parents for the purposes  of  Article  8(1)  as  of  October  2007.
    Moreover, his clear findings of fact had not been challenged by way  of
    appeal.

37. A further difficulty for the appellant's case was that no  attempt  was
    made before the First-tier Tribunal to bring forward new evidence which
    rebutted Judge Kimnell's findings of fact as to the absence  of  family
    life in 2007.  The only new evidence that was brought  forward  was  in
    respect of developments since 2010 which did not shed any further light
    on the appellant's circumstances in 2007.  Mr Howells simply relied  on
    the proposition that if Judge Kimnell had approached  his  fact-finding
    exercise applying the guidance given by Mrs Justice Lang in Ghising, he
    would have, or should have, found that the appellant continued to enjoy
    family life with his parents in the UK in  2010  (as  he  had  done  in
    2007).

38. As submitted by Mr Tufan, this line of argument is misconceived.   This
    is apparent from Gurung [2013] EWCA Civ 8  where,  giving  the  leading
    judgment of the court, the Master of the Rolls addressed  the  question
    of what constitutes family life within the meaning of Article 8(1) from
    paragraph [44] onwards.  At paragraph [45] he said:

         Ultimately, the question whether an individual enjoys  family  life
         is one of fact and depends on a careful consideration  of  all  the
         relevant  facts  of  a  particular  case.   Ms   McGahey   submits,
         therefore, that the case law, both domestic and European, can be of
         only limited assistance.  She rightly accepts that, as a matter  of
         law, in some instances an adult child (particularly if he does  not
         have a partner or children of his own) may establish that he has  a
         family life with his parents.  It all  depends  on  the  facts  (my
         emphasis)

39. He went on to find that the First-tier Tribunal in the  appeals  of  NL
    and SL had not erred in law in rejecting a family  life  claim  because
    there was no evidence to suggest a bond over and above that usually  to
    be expected from the  relationship  between  adult  parents  and  their
    children.  The sponsor stated that they had regular contact  with  each
    other, but there was no real evidence about how the appellants  related
    to their parents or about the effect on them of  being  separated  from
    their parents and what emotional sustenance  that  they  received  from
    their parents (paragraph 48).

40. There was thus no error of law in Judge Kimnell rejecting the Article 8
    claim in 2010 on the grounds that it  had  not  been  proved  that  the
    appellant had more than normal emotional ties to his parents in the  UK
    in October 2007.  It follows there is no error of law in Judge  Britton
    taking this crucial finding of fact as his starting point, and also  as
    in effect his end point.  For, as previously discussed, no attempt  was
    made to show by way of new evidence that the ties between the appellant
    and his parents went beyond normal emotional ties as of  October  2007,
    or indeed as of October 2010.  Merely asserting that the appellant  was
    emotionally dependent on his parents  at  all  material  times  is  not
    evidence, especially when there is a judicial  finding  of  fact  which
    directly contradicts this assertion.

41. The judge's reasoning on this crucial issue could  have  been  clearer.
    But it is tolerably clear that, by  endorsing  the  findings  of  Judge
    Kimnell, Judge Britton was making a finding that Article 8(1)  was  not
    engaged as of 2007 and/or 2010.

42. If I am wrong about that, I find that the lack of  reasoning  does  not
    translate into a material  error  of  law  as  no  reasonable  Tribunal
    properly directed could have reached any other conclusion (in the light
    of the unappealed findings of fact made by Judge Kimnell) that  Article
    8(1) was not engaged as of 2007 and/or 2010.

43. Judge Britton  was  invited  to  address  an  additional  and  separate
    question, which was whether the appellant's circumstances had  worsened
    between 2010 and the date of the hearing before him.  He was encouraged
    to do so by the evidence which was led as to  the  appellant's  current
    circumstances, and also  by  Mr  Howells'  reliance  on  the  following
    passage in the judgment of Tomlinson LJ in UG (Nepal) and Others [2012]
    EWCA Civ 58 at 28:

         The ECO is entitled to take into account developments subsequent to
         the date of the initial application, insofar as they  amount  to  a
         material change of circumstances.  In so proceeding the  ECO  would
         of course be mindful of the need not to permit a material change of
         circumstances to lead to unfair treatment of applicant.  Changes of
         circumstance  can  cut  both  ways.   Serious  illness   may   have
         intervened which was not present at the time  of  the  application.
         There would be no unfairness in denying settlement rights in the UK
         to a once dependent  applicant  who  has  subsequently  married  or
         formed some liaison with a millionaire overseas.

44. The unfair treatment point might have been relevant if there had been a
    material change of circumstances between 2007 and  2010.   But  neither
    party contended that there had been and, as previously discussed, Judge
    Kimnell had assessed the Article 8(1) question  on  the  set  of  facts
    potentially  most  favourable  to  the  appellant,  namely  the   facts
    appertaining in 2007.

45.  The  enquiry  into  whether  there  had  been  a  material  change  of
    circumstances since 2010 was irrelevant for  three  reasons.   Firstly,
    whatever had happened since 2010, this could not change  the  facts  as
    they stood in 2010, or indeed as they stood in  2007.   Secondly,  this
    was not a case  where  the  stance  of  the  respondent  was  that  the
    appellant had qualified for entry clearance for settlement on Article 8
    grounds in 2007 and/or 2010, but no longer  qualified  because  he  had
    established an independent life between 2010 and 2014.  Thirdly, it was
    not contended that the appellant's circumstances  had  so  deteriorated
    since 2010 that he now qualified for leave to enter.

46. However, insofar as it is material, I find that the judge gave adequate
    reasons for finding that since 2010 there had been no  material  change
    for the worse in the appellant's circumstances.

Notice of Decision

47. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  contain  an  error  of
    law, and accordingly the decision stands.  This  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

