
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/09247/2015
                                                               OA/09251/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Priory Courts, Birmingham            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th January 2019                          |On 11th February 2019         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

               The Secretary of State for the home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     BBA
                                     OBA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr M Bradshaw of Counsel instructed by J Benson
                    Solicitors Limited


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary  of  State  appeals  against  the  decision  of  Judge  J
    Macdonald (the Judge) of the First-tier Tribunal (the FTT)  promulgated
    on 28th September 2017.

 2. The Respondents before the Upper Tribunal were  the  Appellants  before
    the FTT and I will refer to them as the Claimants.

 3. The Claimants are sisters and nationals of  Nigeria  born  8th  October
    2001 and 12th July 1998 respectively.  They are now 17 and 20 years  of
    age.

 4. The Claimants were both minors when they applied for entry clearance to
    enable them to join their father (to whom I shall refer as the Sponsor)
    in the UK.

 5. The applications were refused on 8th May 2015.

 6. The appeals were initially heard on 21st July 2016  and  dismissed  but
    that decision was subsequently set aside by the Upper Tribunal and  the
    appeals remitted back to the FTT to be heard afresh.

 7. The judge heard the appeals together on 19th September 2017  and  heard
    evidence from the Sponsor and  his  son.   The  judge  found  that  the
    Sponsor had exercised sole responsibility for  the  upbringing  of  the
    Claimants  and  paragraph  297(i)(e)  of  the  Immigration  Rules   was
    satisfied.  The judge therefore did not go  on  to  consider  paragraph
    297(i)(f).  The judge  found  that  Article  8  of  the  1950  European
    Convention on Human Rights was engaged and placed weight upon the  fact
    that the Immigration  Rules  were  satisfied.   The  judge  found  that
    refusal to grant leave to  enter  the  UK  was  neither  necessary  nor
    proportionate  and  therefore  allowed  the  appeals  on  human  rights
    grounds.

 8. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The grounds are summarised below.

 9. It was submitted that the judge had applied an  incorrect  standard  of
    proof, having applied too low a standard.

10. It was submitted that the judge had failed  to  make  a  finding  on  a
    material matter.  The evidence indicated that  the  children  had  been
    left completely alone by their grandmother for months at a time and  it
    had been submitted, as there was no evidence  of  neglect,  that  their
    mother was involved in looking after them.  It was contended  that  the
    judge had failed  completely  to  deal  with  this  submission  or  the
    submission that there were alternative care arrangements.

11. It was submitted that the judge had erred in rejecting  the  submission
    that the Claimants' mother was involved in their upbringing, given  the
    evidence of communication between the Claimants and  Sponsor  in  which
    the Claimants refer to their mother.  It was submitted that it was  not
    open to the judge, on a balance of probabilities, to accept as credible
    the claim that the children in fact called  their  grandmother  mother.
    There was no supporting evidence to confirm this.

12. It was submitted that  the  judge  had  erred  by  failing  to  provide
    adequate reasons for allowing the appeals.

13. Permission to appeal was initially refused by Judge Pickup of the  FTT.



14. The application was renewed to the Upper Tribunal.   It  was  submitted
    that if the Claimants' mother  was  not  looking  after  the  children,
    somebody else was.  That was relevant to a finding as to the  issue  of
    sole responsibility.  If the Sponsor had  abdicated  responsibility  to
    someone else, then the finding that the Sponsor had sole responsibility
    was  clearly  unsustainable.   It  was  submitted  that  in  an  appeal
    involving children, it cannot be  dismissed  as  irrelevant,  that  the
    Sponsor may not have given an accurate picture as to the true  position
    in Nigeria.  If an accurate picture had not  been  given,  the  finding
    could not be made that the Sponsor genuinely  had  sole  responsibility
    for the Claimants' upbringing.

15. Permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Chamberlain in the following terms:

         "2.  It is arguable that the judge has failed  to  give  sufficient
             reasons  for  his  finding   that   the   Sponsor   had   sole
             responsibility for his children.  He has failed to engage with
             the evidence that the Appellants  were  left  alone  for  long
             periods of time and the implications of this  finding  on  who
             was responsible for them during  these  long  periods.   Given
             that it appears that the judge did not have a full picture  of
             the Appellants' circumstances, it  is  arguable  that  he  has
             given inadequate reasons for finding that the Sponsor had sole
             responsibility for them.  The grounds are arguable  and  merit
             the grant of permission to appeal."

16. Following the grant of  permission  the  Claimants  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.  In brief summary it was contended that the judge had  not  erred
    in law, and had made findings open  to  him  and  provided  sustainable
    reasons for those findings.

17. Directions were issued that there should be an oral hearing before  the
    Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether the FTT had erred in law such  that
    the decision must be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

18. Mr Mills relied upon the grounds upon which permission  to  appeal  had
    been granted.  It was submitted that the incorrect  standard  of  proof
    had been used and that was fatal to the  decision  which  must  be  set
    aside.

19. Mr Bradshaw accepted that the standard of  proof  referred  to  by  the
    judge at paragraph 45 was incorrect.  It was accepted that the  correct
    standard should be a balance  of  probabilities.   Notwithstanding  the
    incorrect standard of proof, I was asked to  find  that  there  was  no
    material error of law in the decision, and that the Secretary of  State
    was seeking to  reargue  the  case.   I  was  asked  to  find  that  an
    explanation had been given by the Sponsor and his son as to  why  there
    was reference to "mum", this reference was in  fact  referring  to  the
    Claimants' grandmother, and I was asked to find that the judge had made
    findings open to him on the evidence and provided adequate reasons.   I
    was asked to dismiss the appeal of the Secretary of State.

20. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Findings and Conclusions

21. I find the judge erred in law and did so  materially,  in  applying  an
    incorrect standard of proof.  At paragraph 45 the  judge  recorded  the
    standard of proof as follows;

         "It is for each Appellant to satisfy me that she has an  Article  8
         family or private  life  which  will  be  interfered  with  by  the
         decision under appeal.  The appropriate standard of proof  is  that
         there should be substantial grounds for believing that there  is  a
         real risk of the Appellants' human rights being breached.  If  that
         is shown, the  Respondent  must  establish  that  the  decision  is
         lawful, taken in pursuit of a  legitimate  aim  and  necessary  and
         proportionate in a democratic society."

22. As conceded by Mr Bradshaw the correct standard of  proof  when  making
    findings of fact, and when deciding whether the Immigration  Rules  are
    satisfied is a balance of probability.  The  standard  applied  by  the
    judge is a lower standard than the balance of probability.

23. This appeal involved substantial fact-finding.  Therefore, the standard
    of proof applied to fact-finding should be  the  civil  standard  of  a
    balance of probabilities not the lower  standard  referred  to  by  the
    judge.  In my view the application  of  the  lower  standard  of  proof
    renders the findings made by  the  judge  unsafe.   This  without  more
    amounts to a material error of law.

24. I also find that the judge gave inadequate reasons for finding that the
    Sponsor had exercised sole responsibility.   The judge at paragraph  60
    described the documentary evidence submitted on behalf of the Claimants
    as not extensive.  At paragraph 59 the judge found that the grandmother
    frequently went to the United States to stay with her daughter  leaving
    the Claimants on their own for substantial periods of time.   While  in
    the United States  the  grandmother  was  not  exercising  control  and
    direction or even day-to-day responsibility.  The judge found that day-
    to-day  responsibility  did  not  appear  to  have  devolved  upon  any
    particular person although it was said that next door  neighbours  kept
    an eye on the Claimants.

25. During this period of time the Claimants would  have  been  12  and  15
    years of age.  The judge did not give adequate reasons for accepting as
    credible the account that the Sponsor was content for this situation to
    carry on and did not provide adequate reasons for considering that  the
    Claimants'  mother  was  not  involved   in   their   care   in   those
    circumstances, given the frequent reference by the  Claimants  and  the
    reference by the Sponsor in WhatsApp communications to "mum".

26. The incorrect standard of proof and inadequacy of reasoning means  that
    the decision must be set aside.

27. The decision must be remade.  I have  considered  paragraph  7  of  the
    Senior President's Practice Statements.   I  am  conscious  that  these
    appeals have previously  been  heard  on  two  occasions  in  the  FTT.
    However, there are no findings which can be preserved.  There  will  be
    extensive judicial fact-finding required.  The  appropriate  forum  for
    such fact-finding is the FTT rather than the Upper Tribunal.

28. I therefore find that it is appropriate to remit these appeals  to  the
    FTT to be heard afresh.

29. It would seem appropriate, given the address of the  Sponsor,  for  the
    appeals to be heard at the Birmingham Hearing Centre.  If that  is  not
    appropriate representations will need to be made to the Tribunal.   The
    appeals are to be heard by an FTT Judge  other  than  Judge  Moore  and
    Judge J Macdonald.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FTT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
is set aside.  The appeals are allowed to the extent of remittal to the  FTT
with no findings of fact preserved.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Claimants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member of their family.  Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             18th January 2019




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award. The issue of any fee award will need to  be  considered
by the FTT.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             18th January 2019

