
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: OA/09208/2013
                                                               OA/09278/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On March 26, 2015                    |On March 30, 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                     KS
                                     UK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant   Dr Thorndike, Counsel, instructed by Prestige Solicitors
Respondent  Mr McVeety (Home Office Presenting Officer)
Interpreter Mr Ahmed


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of Pakistan. They both  applied  for  entry
    clearance under paragraph 297 HC  396  as  dependent  children  of  the
    sponsor on December 24, 2012. The respondent eventually  refused  their
    applications under the Immigration Rules  albeit  the  application  had
    originally been refused under Appendix FM on March 14, 2013.

 2. The appellants appealed on April 9, 2013 under  section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 3. The  matter  came  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Davies
    (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ") on  June  30,  2014  and  in  a
    decision promulgated on July 7, 2014 he  refused  their  appeals  under
    paragraph 320(7A) HC 395  and  for  not  meeting  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 297 HC 395.

 4. The appellants lodged grounds of appeal on August  5,  2014  submitting
    the FtTJ had erred in his approach to paragraph 320(7A) HC 395  and  by
    failing to consider the appeal under article 8 ECHR.

 5. On August 14, 2014 Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal McCarthy
    refused permission to appeal finding the FtTJ had reached findings open
    to him. Leave to appeal was  renewed  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  on
    December 8, 2014 Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul refused permission  under
    the Immigration Rules but  granted  permission  on  article  8  grounds
    finding it arguable the FtTj erred in failing to  give  proper  reasons
    for dismissing the appeal pursuant to article 8. Leave  to  appeal  was
    limited to this issue.

 6. The matter came before me on  the  above  date  and  the  parties  were
    represented as set out above. The sponsor was in attendance.

    ERROR OF LAW SUBMISSIONS

 7. Dr Thorndike accepted the death certificate was not genuine and  had  a
    date of death that was incorrect.  He  submitted  that  the  respondent
    accepted the father had died in  March  2013  and  whilst  he  accepted
    article 8 had never been raised in the application, grounds  of  appeal
    or at the hearing he submitted the FtTJ should have addressed the issue
    as it was "Robinson" obvious in light of  the  family  matrix  and  the
    evidence that had been submitted.

 8. Mr McVeety submitted the appellants had never raised article 8 prior to
    permission being sought. The original grounds of appeal did  not  raise
    article 8 and when the appeal  was  listed  in  the  Tribunal  and  the
    respondent varied the grounds of refusal to include  paragraph  320(7A)
    HC 395 the appellants did not  expand  their  grounds  of  appeal.  The
    sponsor's witness statement did not raise article 8 and their  counsel,
    Mr Karnik, did not argue the article 8 point before the FtTJ. Whilst Dr
    Thorndike submitted the ground was "Robinson" obvious this was  clearly
    not the case to  two  previous  firms  of  solicitors  and  experienced
    counsel. In any event, the FtTJ found the sponsor had lied in paragraph
    [22] of his determination and his short  statement  in  paragraph  [24]
    reflected the absence of any arguments before him. This was a new issue
    that should be made by way of fresh application.

    ERROR OF LAW ASSESSMENT

 9. Dr Thorndike accepted that article 8 had not been raised prior to today
    but invited me to find it was a "Robinson" obvious point.

10. In R v SSHD ex parte Robinson (1998) QB 929 the Court  of  Appeal  held
    that, although in seeking to appeal an immigration decision a  claimant
    was required to state the grounds of appeal, the appellate  authorities
    were neither limited by the arguments actually advanced nor required to
    engage in a search for  new  grounds.   However,  since  the  appellate
    authorities were obliged to ensure that the  claimant's  removal  would
    not breach the UK's obligations  under  the  Refugee  Convention  where
    there was a readily discernible and obvious point in his favour,  which
    had not been taken  on  his  behalf,  the  appellate  authority  should
    nevertheless apply it.  An obvious point, per Lord Woolf MR at 946  was
    one that has a strong prospect of success.

11. Dr Thorndike submitted that article 8 fell within what  Lord  Woolf  MR
    was talking about and the FtTJ had erred by failing to  deal  with  the
    article 8 claim.

12. I have considered the FtTJ's record of proceedings and it is clear  the
    appellants' counsel did not pursue any article 8 claim on their behalf.
    This is consistent with what happened before the hearing.

13. The Immigration Counseling Service initially wrote to the British  High
    Commission on December 24, 2012 indicating  the  appellants  wished  to
    apply under paragraph 297 HC 395. Family or private life was not raised
    in that letter. The sponsor's declaration dated December  9,  2012  did
    not mention either family or private life. When the  applications  were
    refused form IAFT1 was filed and whilst the grounds run  to  two  pages
    there was no reference to human rights as a ground of  appeal.  By  the
    time the case was listed for  a  hearing  the  appellants  had  changed
    representatives. There was nothing adduced  that  indicated  article  8
    would be argued. Finally, at the hearing the  appellants'  counsel  did
    not argue article 8.

14. The Tribunal has considered the position where a  particular  claim  is
    not pursued in the lower court and the argument is  then  raised  in  a
    higher court. In Sarkar v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2014] EWCA Civ 195, the  Court  of  Appeal  indicated  that,  although
    Article 8 and section 55 were mentioned in the Notice of Appeal,  where
    no evidence had been adduced or submissions made before the  First-tier
    Tribunal to support a claim under Article 8 of the ECHR,  it  could  be
    treated as abandoned.  The Court of Appeal said that even if  that  was
    wrong there was evidential basis for the First tier Tribunal to find in
    the appellant's favour in those circumstances. The Upper Tribunal could
    not be said to have erred in refusing to allow permission to appeal  on
    that ground.

15. I am satisfied that for whatever reason decisions  were  taken  not  to
    argue the claim under article 8. That decision may have been the  wrong
    decision although any judge considering such a claim would have to have
    regard to the adverse findings made by the FtTJ in paragraph [22]  when
    he found the sponsor to be evasive and  that  she  gave  evidence  that
    contradicted  evidence  given  in  her  asylum  claim.  These   factors
    undermined her overall credibility.

16. Case law confirms that if a party does  not  pursue  an  argument  then
    unless it is "Robinson" obvious the upper Tribunal is not the venue  to
    raise it for the first time. Whilst the FtTJ stated in  paragraph  [24]
    that he felt no need to consider article 8 in  light  of  the  evidence
    this does not amount to an acceptance that he was obliged  to  consider
    article 8.

17. The appellants did not argue this and in the  circumstances  I  do  not
    find any error in law. It remains open for the appellants to  renew  an
    application for settlement bearing in mind the evidence is their father
    has died but the hurdles contained in paragraph 297 HC 395 would  still
    need to be overcome if their appeals were to succeed under the Rules.

    DECISION

18. There was no material error. The original decision shall stand.

19. The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction pursuant to Rule 14
    of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and I extend that
    order.



Signed:     Dated: March 26, 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed the appeal I I make no fee award.



Signed:     Dated: March 26, 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

