
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/09634/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23rd June 2016                             |On 11th August, 2016          |
|Signed 24th June, 2016                        |                              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                   aya [g]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Wells Counsel instructed by Cham Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant is a Syrian national and she claims  to  be  married  to
    [HH] ("the sponsor") who is present and settled in this  country  as  a
    recognised refugee.  He was given leave to remain until 2018.

2.    The appellant asserted that she had entered into a proxy  marriage  in
    Syria with the sponsor on 17th December, 2014, with the  sponsor  being
    represented by his father.  The sponsor's father, [KH], is an  attorney
    and it is perhaps not surprising that,  before  the  sponsor  left  his
    homeland and came to the United Kingdom to claim asylum, he granted his
    father a Power of Attorney.  This was dated 11th August, 2011.

3.    The appellant applied for entry  clearance  as  the  partner  of  [HH]
    under the  provisions  of  Appendix  FM  of  Statement  of  Changes  in
    Immigration Rules, HC 395, as amended.  The application was refused  on
    15th May, 2015, and the appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    against that decision.  Her appeal was  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Scott, sitting in Birmingham on 7th March, 2016.

4.    In English law it does seem rather strange that the law of  a  foreign
    country would permit individuals to marry using a  Power  of  Attorney.
    It is not the sort of use to which a Power of Attorney could be put  to
    in the United Kingdom but, when one looks at the document in  question,
    it is quite clear that it has been drafted  in  very  wide  terms.   It
    certainly would not prohibit marriage by the donee, on  behalf  of  the
    donor, and so it is necessary to consider what the law  in  Syria  says
    about marriage by proxy.

5.    In this appeal the judge had before him evidence  in  the  form  of  a
    translated request from the sponsor's father, as an attorney, requiring
    a statement  confirming  that  the  sponsor  can  conclude  a  marriage
    contract with his wife either personally, or using a legal attorney  at
    law, and that the Power of Attorney is valid according to  the  law  of
    the  Syrian  Arab  Republic.   The  endorsement  made  by  the  "Senior
    Matrimonial Judge in Aleppo", whose name does not appear to  have  been
    translated, confirms that apparently  marriage  is  possible  using  an
    attorney at law and that the Power of Attorney is valid.

6.    The judge, in making his findings, suggested at paragraph  18  of  his
    determination that he did not accept that the Power of Attorney entered
    into by the sponsor contained provisions making it clear that the donee
    of the power can act as a proxy in a marriage being conducted in Syria.
     He is quite right in that the Power of Attorney does not  specifically
    contain that power, but, as I have indicated, it has  been  drafted  in
    very wide terms and, according to the evidence before the  judge,  such
    marriages are permitted under the law of the Syrian Arab Republic.  The
    First Tier Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal.

7.    The appellant sought and was  granted  leave  to  appeal  the  judge's
    decision.

8.    I briefly heard submissions.  The power of attorney was  extensive  in
    the powers it donated to the sponsor's father to act on behalf  of  the
    sponsor.  The translated request from the  sponsor's  father,  together
    with the endorsement by someone described  as  the  Senior  Matrimonial
    Judge in Aleppo confirming that the marriage is legal under the law  of
    the Syrian Arab Republic was sufficient to satisfy  the  judge  on  the
    balance of probabilities.  The only  issue  was  the  question  of  the
    registration of the marriage certificate.

6.    There were also other challenges to  the  determination,  but  in  the
    light of my finding I do not believe it is necessary for me to go on to
    deal with them.  They do in fact duplicate each other in any event.  It
    is clear that the First Tier Tribunal Judge  did  err  in  law  in  his
    determination  by  failing  to  accept  the  translated   request   and
    endorsement as evidence that it is lawful to marry in the  Syrian  Arab
    Republic by one of the parties acting  as  the  donee  of  a  power  of
    attorney.  I set aside the determination.

7.    The bundle placed before me  today  from  the  appellant's  solicitors
    includes evidence which was not placed before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.  Unfortunately, it comprised a copy of a letter from a lawyer in
    Damascus, rather than the original with further evidence which,  it  is
    said, is capable of corroborating other evidence.  I do  not  have  the
    original letter and was told that it takes a long time for documents to
    be obtained from Aleppo because of the current difficulties  in  Syria.
    It was clear to me that the appellant's representatives were not  in  a
    position to proceed with the second stage of the hearing today  and  in
    all the circumstances I remit this appeal for hearing afresh by a judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal other than Judge Scott.   This  will  enable
    the appellant's lawyers to obtain the evidence that they will  require.
    The burden of proof is of course the balance of probabilities  and  how
    they discharge that burden is a matter for them.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is remitted to the First Tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing  by  a
judge of the First-tier Tribunal other than Judge Scott.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

