
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/09939/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28th November 2017                |On 14th December 2017                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                                  G A BLACK


                                   Between

                        Master Michael anthony harvey
                           NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A. Hussain (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr P. Kotas (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   I shall refer to the parties as "the appellant" and  "the  Respondent".
    This is an error of law hearing.  I consider whether or not there is  a
    material error of law in the decision the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Frazer) ("FTT") promulgated on 23.11.2016 in which  the  FTT  dismissed
    the appeal against a refusal of entry  clearance  to  join  his  parent
    settled in the UK, under the rules and on human rights grounds.

Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica who was under  18  years  at  the
    date of application but at  the  date  of  hearing  he  was  an  adult,
    although in full time education.  His mother was granted  discretionary
    leave in the UK and was married to a British citizen.   The  respondent
    refused the application on the grounds that paragraph 320 applied.  The
    application was made for a purpose not covered by the Rules. There were
    no exceptional circumstances. The respondent refused the application on
    1st June 2015 under paragraph 320(1) of the Rules on the  grounds  that
    the sponsor had discretionary leave in the UK until  25.2.2017.   There
    was no consideration of paragraph 301 which covered  joining  a  parent
    with limited leave to remain.

FTT decision

3.   The FTT concluded that the  Immigration  Rules  were  not  met  as  the
    sponsor had discretionary leave. In deciding if Article 8  was  engaged
    the FTT referenced SM & Others (Somalia) 2015 EWCA Civ  223  (Bean  J.)
    and the FTT concluded that the interference was not serious  to  engage
    Article 8.1. as the relationship could  be  continued  on  the  current
    basis [18]. In the alternative if Article 8 was engaged the  FTT  found
    that the appellant was living independently in Jamaica since his father
    died and that family life could continue on the current basis by  means
    of communication.  Although the appellant's father had  died  in  2014,
    the appellant remained living in Jamaica.  The sponsor could return  to
    Jamaica to visit the appellant.  The FTT found that the  appellant  was
    dependent  on  his  mother  emotionally  and  financially.    The   FTT
    considered factors under section 117B Nationality, Immigration & Asylum
    Act 2002  as  amended.   He  spoke  English  but  was  not  financially
    independent, and the balance lay in favour of the public interest.

Application for permission to appeal

4.   In grounds it was contended that  Article  8  factors  were  not  fully
    addressed including the reasonableness  of  the  sponsor  returning  to
    Jamaica. Further in considering Article 8 the  FTT  took  into  account
    erroneous considerations namely that the appellant had not visited  the
    UK, when in fact his visitor applications had been refused.  There  was
    family life over and above the normal level of dependency.

Permission grant

5.   Permission was granted on renewal by UTJ Latter who  found  that  there
    were arguable grounds  shown  in  the  grounds  and  a  letter  to  the
    sponsor's MP, that the FTT erred in concluding that  it  had  not  been
    show that the interference was sufficiently serious  to  engage  family
    life. And if engaged the FTT failed to properly consider  all  relevant
    matters.





Rule 24 Response

6.   The respondent  opposed  the  application  arguing  that  the  FTT  had
    considered all relevant matters and had made an  "in  the  alternative"
    decision under Article 8.

Submissions

7.   In submissions Mr Hussain argued that the FTT ought to have  considered
    the rules first and looked at paragraph 301 and then Article 8. The old
    rules applied and the FTT should have considered  all  issues  such  as
    sole responsibility  etc.  and  the  death  of  the  father.  Mr  Kotas
    responded that even if the FTT had failed to consider  the  Rules  this
    did not mean that it was an error in law as the FTT had dealt with  the
    issues identified.  It was notable that nowhere in the decision was any
    reference made to issues such as sole  responsibility.   The  case  had
    been put on the basis of Article 8.  The FTT may  have  been  wrong  to
    have applied the new rules under Appendix FM but had considered Article
    8 outside of the Rules from the perspective that the separation between
    the appellant and his mother had been voluntary.

Discussion and conclusion

8.   It seems to me that paragraph 301 was not considered  at  the  Tribunal
    hearing and there is certainly no reference made in  the  decision  and
    indeed it was not referred to in the  grounds  of  appeal,  although  I
    accept that in the renewed grounds for permission to appeal to  the  UT
    it has been included at the end.  The new rules were considered by  the
    FTT under E.EC.C 1.6.  The grounds  on  which  permission  was  granted
    relate to Article 8 only and it is on that basis that I deal  with  the
    error of law application.  As its starting  point  the  FTT  failed  to
    consider  if   there   were   compelling   circumstances   to   justify
    consideration of Article 8. I am satisfied that the FTT  erred  in  its
    consideration of the first question posed  in  Razgar.   There  was  no
    proper consideration of the nature of the family life  as  between  the
    appellant and the sponsor. That question is worded as  to  whether  the
    interference has consequences of such gravity to engage Article 8.   In
    AG (Eritrea) V SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 801  (28)  it  was  held  that  the
    threshold for entry clearance cases was less stringent and it posits no
    specifically high threshold.  Further such cases must be viewed in  the
    context  of  the  State's  positive  obligation  to  facilitate  family
    reunion. Thereafter I am  satisfied  that  the  FTT  failed  to  assess
    proportionality with regard to all relevant matters including that fact
    that the appellant was under 18 at the date of  application,  his  best
    interest, that he is in full time education, dependent in  the  sponsor
    financially and that the decision to live in Jamaica was made when  the
    appellant was living with his father who at the time of the application
    had died.  The FTT further failed to give sufficient attention  to  the
    reasonableness of the sponsor moving to Jamaica in  order  to  maintain
    family life.  In such cases it is important to make clear  findings  of
    fact in order to follow the Razgar questions.  The  FTT  sets  out  the
    detailed evidence but does not make findings of  fact.  The  degree  to
    which the appellant failed to meet the immigration rules will  also  be
    of relevance and which  will  require  proper  consideration.   I  have
    decided that the decision should be  set  aside  and  that  the  appeal
    remitted for hearing afresh before the First-tier Tribunal at Newport.

Decision

9.   There is a material error of law in the decision  which  shall  be  set
    aside.

The appeal is to be remitted to Newport for  hearing  de  novo  (not  before
    Judge Frazer).




                               Signed   Date 6.12.2017


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal







                               NO ANONYMITY ORDER

                               NO FEE AWARD




                               Signed   Date 6.12.2017


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


