
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
OA/09802/2014

                                                oa/09805/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                   |   Decision & Reasons           |
|                                      |Promulgated                     |
|On 28 January 2016                    |   On 4 March 2016              |
|                                      |                                |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD

                                   Between


                               Mr BALWANT GILL
                              Mrs INDERJIT GILL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr H Samra, Solicitor, Harbans Singh Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This matter  comes  before  me  pursuant  to  permission  having  been
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lambert dated  25  May  2015.  The
    appeal relates to a  decision  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hussain
    promulgated on 11 March 2015.  The Judge at the First-tier Tribunal had
    dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

2.    The Appellant had appealed against  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    decision and relied on grounds which can be summarised as follows:
    1) The Judge had failed to identify what evidence or reliance or weight
       he was placing on documents served at the hearing by the Home Office
       Presenting Officer;
    2) The Judge failed to make relevant findings at paragraphs 21 to 24 of
       his decision;
    3) The Judge failed to take  into  account  the  Appellant's  excellent
       immigration history since 2003 and  the  Sponsors'  credibility  and
       oral evidence;
    4) The statements and witness statements had to  be  accompanied  by  a
       statement of truth otherwise little or no  reliance  can  be  placed
       upon them.


3.    At the hearing before me Mr Samra said  there  was  an  error  of  law
    because the Judge did not adequately deal  with  visitors  entering  in
    respect of Paragraph 41 of the Rules.   There  was  no  description  at
    paragraph 4 or 5 of whether the questions were in English.  There  were
    no witness statements or statements  of  truth  from  the  Respondent's
    side. In the interview transcript there was no reference in respect  of
    who it was referring to. The signatures were postdating  the  interview
    so how could they be contemporaneous? They are  really  events  some  6
    months later. It was not clear who the  Judge  was  referring  to.  His
    findings begin at paragraph 21. They did not seem like findings.

4.    In his submissions Mr Richards said that this was  simply  an  attempt
    to re-argue the case. This was the conduct of  the  two  Appellants  in
    assisting an illegal entrant and it was for the Judge to make  what  he
    would of the evidence. It was for the Appellants to rebut the  evidence
    and they failed to do so. There were clear findings of fact which  were
    set out at paragraph 26 of the decision. The  Judge  made  no  material
    error of law. The findings were clearly  explained  and  there  was  no
    error of law disclosed. I should dismiss the appeal.

5.    I heard  from  Mr  Samra  in  reply.  He  said  that  the  immigration
    officer's notes are taken  into  consideration  as  there  are  British
    passports. They had a British passport.

6.    I had reserved my decision.

7.    As I had indicated during the hearing, I would  not  countenance  this
    appeal being dressed up as an appeal alleging a material error  of  law
    if, in reality, it was no more than  an  appeal  based  on  a  tactical
    mistake. What I had  meant  by  that  was  that  it  was  open  to  the
    Appellants to seek an adjournment at the First-tier  Tribunal  if  they
    had thought they  were  surprised  or  ambushed  by  the  new  evidence
    presented on the day by the Presenting Officer for the first  time.  It
    is clear though  that  the  Appellants  sought  to  continue  with  the
    hearing. Therefore as I stressed during Mr Samra's  submissions,  there
    cannot be a material error of law "just  because"  the  Appellants  now
    wished they had taken a different approach to  the  case  and  if  they
    believed they would have been better  off  seeking  an  adjournment  to
    address the new evidence.

8.    As I also explained during the hearing, I found the grounds of  appeal
    and their attempted amplification at the hearing somewhat unclear.

9.    Ultimately, having reflected on matters, it comes to this.  The  Judge
    found at paragraph 7 of his decision that the Secretary  of  State  had
    been ordered to serve a bundle in readiness for the hearing before  him
    but had only done so a few minutes before the hearing. The  Judge  said
    this was dilatory on the part of the Respondent. It clearly was.

10.   Serious allegations were being against  the  Appellants.  Namely  that
    they had attempted to  facilitate  the  illegal  entry  to  the  United
    Kingdom an Indian national travelling on a British passport  which  did
    not belong to him.

11.   There is a sub-heading in the  Judge's  decision  above  paragraph  21
    "Findings of Fact" but those are not findings (or  cannot  be)  because
    there is no reasoning. Paragraphs 21 to  24,  in  reality,  recite  the
    Respondent's case.

12.   The findings, such as they are, are to be found at  paragraphs  26  to
    27 of the Judge's decision. I have  struggled  to  follow  the  Judge's
    decision as to why the line of authority which the Judge  was  referred
    to and which he set out at paragraph 12 of his decision (save  for  the
    case of Shen (paper appeals:  proving  dishonesty)  [2014]  UKUT  00236
    which was wrongly distinguished too) was not adjudicated upon. This was
    a case in  which  serious  allegations  were  being  made  against  the
    Appellants. It was not for the  Appellants  to  have  to  "prove  their
    innocence" in their pre-filed witness statements. Not least because  at
    the time they had filed their witness statements the Respondent had not
    even served the evidence/bundle of documents. It was not clear at  that
    time precisely what the case was against the Appellants  and  what  the
    evidence against them was. It was therefore  not  surprising  that  the
    Appellants' witness statements did not contain a fuller explanation  of
    matters.

13.    The fact that one of the Appellant's said "I told  him  not  to  give
    him a lift but he did not listen to her" is not an admission  that  the
    Appellants were part of a conspiracy or plan to assist illegal entry.

14.   In my judgment the Judge's decision contains material errors  of  law.
    The burden of proof has been wrongly considered. Thereafter there  have
    been inadequate findings.

15.   Accordingly, I set aside the decision of the Judge and there shall  be
    a rehearing. None of the findings shall remain.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First tier Tribunal Judge contains  material  errors  of
law and is set aside.

The appeal shall be reheard at the First-tier Tribunal.

An anonymity direction is not made.


Signed                                       Date: 1 February 2016



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood







