
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/09295/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th October 2016                 |On 09th November 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                              Mr obaid maqsood
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Timpson, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan  born  on  9th  May  1986.   The
    Appellant had applied for entry clearance as a partner  under  Appendix
    FM of the Immigration Rules.  That application was refused by the Entry
    Clearance Officer on 14th April 2015 specifically on the basis that the
    Appellant had not provided the  specific  evidence  for  the  specified
    period as stated within Appendix FM-SE of  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    that the Entry Clearance Officer was not satisfied that  the  Appellant
    met  the   financial   requirement.    Consequently   the   Appellant's
    application was refused under paragraph EC-P.1.1(d) of Appendix FM.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Ennals sitting at Manchester on 8th April 2016.   In  a  decision
    and reasons promulgated on 13th April 2016 the Appellant's  appeal  was
    refused both  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  under  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.

 3. On 13th April 2016 Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper Tribunal.
     On  12th  September  2016  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Kelly  granted
    permission to appeal.  He noted that it was arguable  for  the  reasons
    set out in the Grounds of Appeal that the Tribunal  had  erred  in  its
    conclusion:

      a) that Appendix FM-SE required the letter from the Sponsor's employer
         to predate the application by no more than 28 days; and

      b) that  the  statutory  restrictions  upon  the  admission  of  post-
         application evidence applicable in PBS cases (Section 85 NIAA 2002)
         also extends to documents considered under Appendix FM-SE; and

      c) that the evidential flexibility  provisions  of  paragraph  (d)  of
         Appendix FM-SE did not apply to the facts of this appeal.

 4. On 29th September 2016 the Secretary of State responded to the  Grounds
    of Appeal under Rule 24.  Those grounds contended that the Respondent's
    position at the hearing was that  there  was  no  question  of  whether
    evidential flexibility was required because there was evidence that the
    letter submitted with the application was prepared for  an  anticipated
    application in October 2014.  At the date  of  application,  no  letter
    meeting  the  requirements  existed,  so  it  was  contended  that  the
    application would still have fallen for refusal as  the  Appellant  was
    unable to satisfy the Immigration Rules.  Further it was contended that
    the Entry Clearance Officer was not required to exercise discretion and
    that in any case had he done so the result would have been the same.

 5. It is on that  basis  that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  firstly  to
    determine whether or not there is a material error of law and  secondly
    if there is to give due consideration with regard to  the  remaking  of
    the decision.  The Appellant  appears  by  his  instructed  Counsel  Mr
    Timpson.  The Secretary of State appears by her Home Office  Presenting
    Officer Mr Harrison.

Submission/Discussion

 6. Both legal representatives acknowledge that the issue in question is  a
    narrow one.  Mr Timpson starts by pointing out that it was accepted  by
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge (at  paragraph  12)  that  the  Sponsor's
    income had gone in to her bank.  And, as set out  at  paragraph  14  of
    Judge Ennals' decision, providing the requirement for documentation  as
    set out in paragraph 1(1) of the relevant Immigration Rule is met  then
    the appeal  hearing  must  succeed.   Mr  Harrison  concedes  that  the
    financial requirements are met.

The Relevant Rule

 7. The relevant Rule is to  be  found  within  Appendix  FM-SE  under  the
    section evidence of financial requirements under Appendix FM.  Diluting
    the extensive paragraph to the relevant paragraphs it reads:

         "In relation to evidencing the financial requirements  in  Appendix
         FM the following general provisions must apply...

         (l)   where  this  Appendix  requires  the  applicant  to   provide
             specified evidence related to a period  which  ends  with  the
             date of application, that evidence, or the most recently dated
             part of it, must be dated no earlier than 28 days  before  the
             date of application."

Submission/Discussion on the Interpretation of the Statutory Provision

 8. Mr Timpson contends that that paragraph refers to the provision of bank
    statements and the reference to the word "period" also makes  reference
    to the provision of bank statements.  He emphasises that the employment
    letter does not relate to any specific period.

 9. Mr Harrison in response takes me to Appendix FM-SE  paragraph  2(b)  of
    the Immigration Rules.  That states:

         "2.  In respect of salaried employment in the UK ...,  all  of  the
             following evidence must be provided ...

             (b)  a letter from the employer(s) who issued  the  (payslips)
                  at paragraph 2(a) confirming:-

                  (i)  the person's employment and gross annual salary;

                  (ii) the length of their employment;

                  (iii)    the period over which they have been or were paid
                      the level of salary relied upon in  the  application;
                      and

                  (iv)  the  type  of  employment   (permanent,   fixed-term
                      contract or agency)."

10. Mr Timpson points out that there is no specific  period  stated  as  to
    when that letter must be  produced.   Mr  Harrison  contends  that  the
    letter needs to be relied upon in the  application  and  therefore  the
    letter must not predate the financial evidence.   Mr  Timpson  strongly
    opposes that view pointing out  that  the  letter  is  not  a  document
    covering a period, that it is a document testifying to  the  facts  set
    out  2(b)(i-iv),  and  consequently  it  would  be  possible  to   have
    information from a bank that covers these matters without disclosing it
    for a specific period and on a specific date.  He emphasises it is  the
    bank statements and payslips that are required to be covered within the
    28 day Rule and there is no need for the letter to cover that  specific
    period.



Discussion/Submissions on Evidential Flexibility

11. The legal representatives agree that discussion on this point is a fall
    back provision and that if I find in favour of Mr  Timpson's  arguments
    with regard to the letter and the timing of it then this matter becomes
    otiose.  It is the brief  submission  of  Mr  Timpson  that  the  Entry
    Clearance  Officer  has  not  exercised  evidential   flexibility   and
    consequently the decision is  not  in  accordance  with  the  law.   Mr
    Harrison briefly responds by reiterating the point made in the Rule  24
    response  that  at  the  hearing  there  was  no  question  of  whether
    evidential flexibility was required  because  there  was  evidence  the
    letter had been submitted when the application  was  prepared  for  the
    anticipated application in October 2014.

The Law

12.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

13. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

14. The fact of this case turns on whether or not it was a requirement  for
    the employer's letter to be dated no earlier than 28  days  before  the
    date of application.  That was the  finding  that  the  judge  made  at
    paragraph 14 of his decision and that was why he dismissed the  appeal.
    I consider that decision to be wrong  in  law.   As  a  starting  point
    paragraph A1(l) headed evidence of financial requirement under Appendix
    FM needs careful analysis.  I agree with  the  contention  made  by  Mr
    Timpson that this section refers to evidence of bank statements and not
    to a letter from employers.  Further it states  clearly  that  evidence
    "must be dated  no  earlier  than  28  days  before  the  date  of  the
    application".  It does not preclude the introduction of documents later
    than 28 days.  It is clear that the Rule is  aimed  to  prevent  people
    relying on events that are well passed and what the  intention  of  the
    Rule  is  that  the  decision-maker,  or  latterly  the  Tribunal,   is
    evaluating the position as it was or as near as possible as it  was  to
    the date of application.

15. Thereafter it is necessary  to  give  due  consideration  to  paragraph
    2(b)(iii).  Firstly there is no reference within that  paragraph  to  a
    specific date  for  the  letter  being  provided.   Secondly  it  makes
    reference to a level of salary set out within the letter  it  does  not
    refer to individual payslips.  It  makes  reference  to  the  level  of
    salary relied upon in the application.  It is clear that the  intention
    therefore was to give an overall evaluation of a level of salary rather
    than to specify what it was on a specific date and to take  account  of
    slight discrepancies that might arise on either  a  weekly  or  monthly
    basis.  In this case it is clear that the Appellant is consequently not
    being asked to evidence individual payslips and it is accepted  overall
    that the Sponsor's salary meets the requirements of Appendix FM-SE.

16. The 28 day period  position  is  covered  by  the  production  of  bank
    statements and payslips.  It does not specify that  it  refers  to  the
    employer's letter which is an overall matter and I  am  satisfied  that
    there is no further need for a letter to cover that period.   All  that
    it constitutes is a requirement for the provision of information.  When
    looked at in both an objective manner and as a matter  of  construction
    of the Rules it would be wrong to describe the provision of the  letter
    from the employer as being a document prescribed within  paragraph  (l)
    for all the reasons given above.

17. In such circumstances the decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained
    at paragraph 14 a material error of law.  I set aside the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge and I remake the  decision  allowing  the
    Appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules.

Notice of Decision

The Appellant's appeal is allowed under the Immigration Rules.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 1st November 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
