

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: oa 09262-11

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                            |Decision signed:   30.10.2013|
|on    29.10.2013                              |sent out:  6.11.2013         |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN

Between:
                              Yusuf Hussein Ali
                                                                   appellant
                                     and



                                                                  respondent
Representation:

For the appellant:  Anthony Vaughan (counsel instructed by Lawrence Lupin)
For the respondent: Mr John Parkinson


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Aftab Khawar), sitting at Hatton  Cross  on  3  October
    2011, to  a husband appeal by a citizen of Somalia, born 1 August 1976.
    Since the sponsor Ubah Ahmed Nur has been recognized as  a  refugee  in
    this country, the only issues  have  been  whether  they  were  validly
    married before she left Somalia in October 2008, and if so intended  to
    live together as husband and wife at the date  of  the  decision  under
    appeal.

 2. The first-tier judge took  a  number  of  negative  credibility  points
    against the appellant, in particular about the absence  of  documentary
    evidence to support his claim to  have  been  married  to  the  sponsor
    before an imam in Mogadishu in April 2008. Before me it was agreed that
    there was no effective government in Somalia at the time;  so  a  valid
    common-law marriage  (using  the  term  properly  for  once)  could  be
    effected by the customary exchange of vows before an imam.  Mr  Vaughan
    accepted that some documentary evidence of this ceremony would normally
    be expected, and the issues before me mainly concerned the  absence  of
    any in the present case, and the parties' explanation for  that,  which
    had also formed the basis on which permission to appeal was given.

 3. Judge Khawar however had also declined to accept the  evidence  of  two
    further witnesses, the  sponsor's  half-sister  Maryan  (they  share  a
    father, so have the same patronymics) and her friend  Farhiyo  Nur,  as
    supporting the appellant's case, on the basis that they had  only  been
    told about the marriage by the sponsor. This, on the basis that it  had
    involved unwarranted application of the rule against hearsay,  was  why
    deputy Upper Tribunal Judge David Kelly declared,  on  21  March  2012,
    that there had been a material error of law in Judge Khawar's decision,
    and resolved to re-make it himself,  on  a  hearing  to  be  listed  in
    September last year. As for some reason no such hearing  was  arranged,
    it fell to me to re-make the decision.

 4. Voluminous evidence was filed on behalf of the appellant; but the  case
    turned on  a  limited  number  of  issues,  mainly  covered  in  cross-
    examination; so I shall go directly to the oral evidence. This was  the
    sponsor's explanation for the lack of any documentary evidence  of  the
    marriage:

       I have no marriage certificate as there was no functioning government


       I have no paper signed by the imam: he issues certificate  and  signs
       it, which takes 3 - 4 weeks to arrive and we had to wait.
       The imam required a fee and we didn't have enough money
       We told him, and he told us to come back when we did
       We raised it in due course and went back to him; but there  had  been
       fighting and the imam was no longer  there:  neighbours  told  us  he
       left.
       We looked for him for over a week, but couldn't find him.

 5. The only trouble with this explanation was that the sponsor  had  never
    given  it  before,  even  during  the  first-tier  hearing.  Her   only
    explanation for that in cross-examination before me was that no-one had
    asked her about it at the hearing before Judge Khawar.  Since  she  had
    been represented by Mr Vaughan then, as before me, this explanation did
    not seem at all satisfactory to me when I heard it; nor did Mr  Vaughan
    ask  anything  in  re-examination  to  correct  the  impression  I  had
    received.

 6. It was not till Mr Vaughan's closing speech that he drew  my  attention
    to further evidence which had been filed, consisting in a statement  by
    a member of his instructing solicitors' firm called Anna  Hawkes.  Miss
    Hawkes had taken over  this  case  from  the  previous  worker,  Sophie
    Freeman (no relation), who had been  the  firm's  representative  at  a
    conference with counsel on 23 September  2011,  before  the  first-tier
    hearing. She did not annex Miss Freeman's notes of  the  conference  to
    her statement, as might  have  been  expected;  but  they  were  in  Mr
    Vaughan's possession at the hearing, so the relevant pages were  copied
    for Mr Parkinson and  me.  Having  seen  them,  Mr  Parkinson  did  not
    challenge the accuracy of the notes as a record of what was said at the
    conference.



 7. This is what the notes record the sponsor as saying on the question  of
    documentary evidence of the marriage: there was no official certificate
    to be had; one could get a letter to confirm it; but they  had  had  no
    money to pay the fee. As for finding the imam (referred to as a  sheikh
    in the notes), no-one knew where he was now. There is another  relevant
    point in the notes, to which I shall come when I  have  introduced  the
    issue with which it deals.

 8. This was the question of where the sponsor and the appellant  had  been
    living in Mogadishu after their marriage: she was cross-examined  about
    her original statement in support of the visa  application,  where  she
    simply says at paragraph 4 that they lived together there. This however
    had been corrected in another  statement,  taken  in  2011,  where  she
    explained that the appellant had stayed with her as much as he could at
    the house of a friend of her family called Halima,  where  the  wedding
    had also taken place; but sometimes he had had to be with his  children
    by his first wife, who had died in 2005. I shall return to the children
    in due course; however this was not only  the  account  of  events  the
    sponsor gave before Judge Khawar, by way of the 2011 statement, but  it
    had also been referred to in the conference notes, where the  appellant
    told Mr Vaughan that Halima's house was overcrowded already, and  there
    had been no room for the appellant and his children there.

 9. That brings in  the  evidence  of  Abdalla  Ibrahim  Mohd.,  a  distant
    relation of the sponsor's on her mother's  side:  he  gave  a  detailed
    account of the wedding ceremony, as did the sponsor  herself,  but  was
    disbelieved  by  Judge  Khawar  because  of  what  were  said   to   be
    contradictions between his evidence and the sponsor's about where  that
    had taken place. However, cross-examined on this point  before  me,  he
    said that the wedding had been held at the house where the sponsor  had
    been living (with Halima and her family), and her mother had  told  him
    on the day that the parties were going to be living there afterwards.

10. Coming on to the children themselves, the sponsor said  they  had  been
    13, 12 and 11 when she left Somalia in 2008: sadly  they  are  now  all
    dead. After she arrived  in  this  country  and  claimed  asylum  on  1
    October, she had mentioned about being married to the appellant at  her
    screening interview; but  she  had  given  his  age  as  "25  year  old
    approximately": of course this was quite  incompatible  with  his  then
    having children of those ages, though she hadn't been asked about  them
    at that  stage.  Again  she  had  corrected  that,  after  calling  the
    appellant and getting his correct date of birth,  at  her  main  asylum
    interview on 12 November. There she had given his date of  birth  as  1
    August 1976, making him 32 at the time in question.

11. Although the parties themselves  had  said  the  appellant  wanted  the
    sponsor to be a mother to his  children  (sponsor's  asylum  interview,
    concluding questions; appellant's statement 26 September 2011), she did
    not take either them or him with him when  she  left  Somalia,  by  air
    through Dubai. The sponsor said they couldn't afford to, though her own
    trip, with an agent, had been organized by her mother, and she  had  no
    idea how much it had cost: her mother had sold some land to  raise  the
    money.



12. Since then, the sponsor lost touch with the appellant  for  some  time,
    owing to difficulties in communication with Somalia, until he made  his
    way to Uganda in November 2010. The person who put them back  in  touch
    was the appellant's friend Farhiyo (see 3), who she had met at  college
    in this country, and told about her marriage and missing husband.  They
    were members of the  same  Ashraf  clan,  at  least  on  the  sponsor's
    mother's side, and Farhiyo gave  the  sponsor  contact  details  for  a
    cousin of hers in Uganda, who had been in touch with a number of  other
    asylum-seekers from the clan there. The sponsor rang the cousin, and in
    due course he put her in touch with the  appellant.  Farhiyo  confirmed
    this account of events in cross-examination before me; but she said her
    cousin was now in the United States, and there was no further  evidence
    from him.

13. Oral evidence was also given by the sponsor's half-sister  Maryan:  she
    had arrived in this country in 2001, and said she had heard  about  the
    sponsor's marriage and flight to this country from her own  mother,  by
    phone from Somalia in 2009. In her witness statement  she  simply  says
    "[The sponsor] told me about her husband as soon as we were reunited in
    this country", without mentioning how that happened: Maryan simply said
    she hadn't been asked about that, or about how the  sponsor  had  asked
    her for help in tracing the appellant, as she  also  mentioned  in  her
    oral evidence.

14. After the sponsor and the appellant got back in touch, they applied for
    a visa for him to join her on 28 January 2011.  Meanwhile,  and  since,
    they kept their contact going by post, e-mail and telephone:  a  number
    of telephone bills, as well as cards  and  e-mails,  were  produced  in
    support. The  one  on  which  the  sponsor  was  cross-examined  showed
    frequent calls to a local London number, which she said was the one for
    a calling card she had been using; and to a Ugandan mobile,  which  she
    said was the appellant's.  As  Mr  Parkinson  pointed  out,  there  was
    nothing to confirm that either of these numbers had involved  calls  to
    him. There is also evidence from a phone  shop,  by  way  of  a  letter
    saying the sponsor was a regular customer of theirs, and had called her
    husband in Uganda twice a week from October 2010 till now. They give  a
    slightly different spelling of  the  appellant's  name,  and  the  same
    mobile number, though again they cannot confirm that this was his.

15. Conclusions     The strongest point against the  sponsor's  credibility
    seemed at one stage to me her failure to mention at any previous  stage
    the explanation she  now  gave  about  why  there  was  no  documentary
    evidence of her marriage to the appellant. However, once the conference
    notes had been produced, and Mr Vaughan had  taken  responsibility  for
    not bringing out at the first-tier hearing the explanation the  sponsor
    had given then, this point seemed to me to fall away.  The  explanation
    did leave a question as to why there should have been no money  to  pay
    for a certificate from the imam, but not long after, plenty to pay  for
    the sponsor's travel all the way to this country by air. However, while
    it seems her mother sold family land to do that, this  might  not  have
    been done before the imam disappeared.





16. The important thing to me  seems  that  the  sponsor  did  mention  the
    appellant as her husband right from the  start  of  her  time  in  this
    country, at her screening interview. Though she then gave  an  age  for
    him, 25, at which he could not credibly have been the father  of  three
    children, of whom the eldest was 13, she did correct that at  her  main
    interview a few weeks later to one which made him 32. Though  that  may
    not be a very likely an age for a man to have children of  those  ages,
    in Somalia or anywhere else, it is certainly not an impossible one.

17. As for how the sponsor had come to make a mistake about the appellant's
    age in the first place, that might seem odd in this country; but  I  am
    not prepared to disbelieve her evidence on this point, on the basis  of
    any assumptions about social mores  in  Somalia:  it  would  have  been
    another matter if there had been no  correction  of  the  original  age
    given. I do not see any reason to suppose that the sponsor was  pressed
    for an age at her screening interview: she  was  simply  recorded,  and
    accepted as giving an approximate figure.

18. On the question of where and how the sponsor and  the  appellant  lived
    together after their marriage,  I  regard  the  point  about  where  as
    satisfactorily dealt with by the explanation about her  staying  for  a
    limited period before her departure with Halima, and when by  the  lack
    of room there for the appellant and his three children:  although  both
    the sponsor and Abdalla say there were about 40 people at the  wedding,
    there is no evidence about how many were actually living  at  Halima's,
    or how many rooms she had for people to sleep in.

19. As for how the parties were put in touch again, I do not see any reason
    not to accept Farhiyo's evidence about that: while a  letter  from  her
    cousin in the United States might have provided added  confirmation,  I
    do not think the absence  of  one  detracts  from  it.  While  Maryan's
    evidence about why there is nothing in  her  statement  about  how  she
    heard of the marriage from her mother might not seem  satisfactory,  it
    does appear from the terms of  her  original  statement  (29  September
    2011) that she was not asked about this. The statement  simply  records
    her not being at the wedding, but knowing about the marriage:  it  goes
    straight on to say the sponsor "... told me about her husband  as  soon
    as we were reunited in the United Kingdom". Clearly she was  not  asked
    by the person who took it about how that had happened. Though  Maryan's
    explanation on this point is less satisfactory, I  do  not  regard  any
    failure by her to mention being asked to help trace  the  appellant  as
    particularly important, since in any case it was not through  her  that
    this came about.

20. While neither the phone bill nor the phone shop  evidence  can  confirm
    the identity of  the  person  the  sponsor  called  when  she  and  the
    appellant were put in touch, so  that  this  must  depend  on  her  own
    credibility, that is an almost inevitable feature of such evidence, and
    does not subtract anything from hers. In the light of the evidence as a
    whole, I regarded it as more likely than not that the sponsor had  been
    regularly calling someone in Uganda with whom she was on close terms.





21. The sponsor and  her  witnesses,  with  the  reservation  about  Maryan
    already  mentioned,  impressed  me  as  generally  credible.  This  was
    particularly the case with Abdalla, who had been present at the wedding
    himself, and who was not cross-examined on his detailed account of  it.
    As already made clear,  I  regard  the  question  of  its  location  as
    satisfactorily resolved.

22. The result is that I accept that the sponsor  and  the  appellant  were
    validly married in Somalia in April 2008, at a  time  when  no  settled
    government existed there, and before she  left  that  country  to  seek
    asylum here. I also accept, in view of my findings on the contact  they
    have had since they were put back in touch  in  2010,  that  they  each
    intend to live together as husband and wife when they are  able  to  do
    so, so that their  marriage  was  'subsisting'  (to  use  the  peculiar
    language of the Immigration Rules) at the date of  the  decision  under
    appeal.

Appeal



                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)



