
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/09168/2013
                                                               OA/09162/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 27 March 2014                              |On 31 March 2014             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 saima iqbal
                                 Meera Iqbal

                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms Jarvis-Legg, instructed by Nationwide Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
The Appeal

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of  State  against  a  determination
    dated 21 January 2014 of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Gillespie  which
    allowed the Article 8 appeals of the respondents.

 2. For the purposes of this determination, I refer to the  respondents  as
    the appellants and  to  the  Secretary  of  State  as  the  respondent,
    reflecting their positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.



Background

 3. The background to this matter is that the two appellants are  nationals
    of Pakistan. The first appellant was born  on  18  June  1978  and  the
    second appellant, her daughter, was born on 23 March 2008.

 4. The first appellant is married to Mr Shoaib Iqbal, a British  national.
    The marriage took place in 2004 but the first  appellant  continued  to
    live in Pakistan afterwards, the sponsor visiting  her  there  twice  a
    year. After the couple had their daughter, Mr Iqbal continued to  visit
    and the family also went on pilgrimage together to Mecca.

 5. On 28 December 2012, the appellants applied for entry clearance to join
    the sponsor.  The applications were refused on 12 March 2013.

 6. It is common ground that the appellants could  not  succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules. This was because they could not meet  the  financial
    requirements. Specifically, and as set out by Judge Gillespie at  [11],
    Mr Iqbal did not provide the specified documents showing his income  as
    a self-employed person as required by paragraph 7 of Appendix FM-SE. Ms
    Jarvis-Legg conceded in terms before  me  that  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules had to fail and had been correctly refused  by  Judge
    Gillespie.

 7. For completeness sake I should also indicate that it was  not  disputed
    before me that the marriage was genuine and  subsisting,  as  found  by
    Judge Gillespie.

Error of Law

 8. Having refused the appeal under the Immigration Rules,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal allowed the  appeal  on  Article  8  grounds.  At  [12]  Judge
    Gillespie set out the correct legal test when addressing Article  8  in
    appeals that also concern the Immigration Rules in force since  9  July
    2012.

 9. The citation of case law included R (Nagre)  v  SSHD  [2013]  EWHC  720
    (Admin) which Judge Gillespie summarised, thus:

             "... if after application of the rules an appellant  is  found
             not to meet the requirements of the same then, if there remain
             arguably good grounds for granting  leave  to  remain,  it  is
             necessary to go on to consider whether  there  are  compelling
             circumstances not sufficiently  recognised  under  them  which
             would justify the grant of protection under article 8."

10. The First-tier Tribunal judge did not, however, go on to  identify  the
    "arguably good grounds" that could allow for a second stage  Article  8
    assessment applying the questions from Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27.

11. Instead, the passage from [12] set out above  is  followed  immediately
    by:

             "With this in mind, I consider whether, in the  light  of  the
             precise  rule  relied  upon  and  the  extent  to  which   the
             appellants fail to meet the requirements of  the  same,  there
             are compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised under
             the rule which justify the grant of protection  under  article
             8."

12. Having set out the need for "arguably  good  grounds",  therefore,  the
    determination  leapfrogs  any  identification  of  such  and  moves  on
    immediately in [13] to a second stage Article 8 assessment,  addressing
    the Razgar questions of whether family life exists and so on.

13. Further, as correctly set out in [12], when conducting the second stage
    Article  8  assessment  there  is   a   requirement   for   "compelling
    circumstances" for the appeal to succeed. Here,  the  judge  identified
    two relevant factors. The first, at [16], was the "the rigidity of  the
    requirement of specified documents". At [17] the best interests of  the
    child were found to be in being with both parents.

14. In support of the first point, the First-tier Tribunal Judge relied  on
    MM v SSHD [2013] EWHC 1900 and the comments of Mr Justice Blake therein
    on  the  proportionality  of  the  minimum  financial  requirement  for
    spouses. This case does not turn on the level of the minimum  financial
    requirement. MM v SSHD examines in detail a wide range of factors  that
    lead   to   the   conclusion   that   the   financial   threshold   was
    disproportionate. Judge Gillespie merely states at [16] that:

              "I consider that  similar  disproportionate  intrusiveness  is
             demonstrated in the peculiar circumstances of this  particular
             case  by  the  rigidity  of  the  requirement   of   specified
             documents".

15. That is merely disagreement with the documentary  requirements  of  the
    new Rules without  there  being  anything  at  all  to  show  that  the
    particular requirements here were disproportionate or other  such  that
    the full force of the statutory provisions did not  apply.   It  cannot
    amount to a compelling circumstance that outweighs the public  interest
    in  effective  immigration  control  and  proper  application  of   the
    Immigration Rules. The approach of the First-tier Tribunal to  the  new
    Rules in the proportionality assessment is incorrect and amounts to  an
    error on a point of law.

16. Also, when assessing the best interests of the child,  Judge  Gillespie
    indicates at [17] that he had no evidence on the point before  him.  He
    goes on, however, to make a finding but one  which  he  accepts  is  an
    "assumption", that the best interests of this child are to be with both
    parents. It is difficult to see how that finding was open to him  where
    there was nothing stating it to be so and nothing to suggest  that  the
    welfare of the child was not being equally  well-served  by  living  in
    Pakistan with her mother, seeing her father twice  a  year  and  having
    indirect contact with him. It is also  difficult  to  see  how  a  best
    interests assessment made on such an uninformed basis could be found to
    amount to a compelling factor that could outweigh the  public  interest
    effective immigration control.

17.  In  summary,  therefore,  the  Article  8  assessment  was  in  error,
    sufficiently so in my view that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    could not stand.

18. Ms Jarvis-Legg  pointed  out  quite  correctly  that  the  respondent's
    written grounds on which permission was granted were not in  the  terms
    set out above. In my judgement, however, the error in  approach  is  so
    clear and fundamental that it amounts to a  "Robinson-obvious  "  point
    which I had to, and did, take.

19. I therefore found that the determination of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Gillespie disclosed an error on a point of law such that it had  to  be
    set aside and remade.

Re-making of the Article 8 Appeal

20. It may already be clear from the matters set out  above  that  I  found
    nothing in the circumstances of  this  family  that  fell  outside  the
    provisions of the new Rules that could justify a second stage Article 8
    assessment. There are no "arguably good grounds" for  doing  so.  There
    was no evidence addressing the best interests of the child and  nothing
    to indicate that her welfare was not being properly  addressed  in  her
    current circumstances such that a second stage Article 8 assessment  is
    required.  Failing  to  meet  the  Immigration  Rules  because  of  the
    stringency of the documentary requirements of the Immigration Rules  is
    not a factor that can justify  of  itself  a  second  stage  Article  8
    assessment.

21. It is difficult to see how a second stage Article  8  assessment  could
    assist the appellants, in any event. As above, there was no evidence to
    show that the best interests of the child lie in being in the  UK  with
    both parents. In addition, it is open to the appellants to  reapply  at
    any time for entry clearance. Even if it could be said  with  certainty
    that it was in the second appellant's best interests to live with  both
    parents in the UK, that primary factor would have to be weighed against
    the limited interference arising from the decision where  there  is  an
    opportunity  to  apply  again  and  the  strong  public   interest   in
    maintaining an effective immigration system by  consistent  application
    of the Immigration Rules. The failure to  meet  the  Immigration  Rules
    arises as the application was made at a time sponsor had not been self-
    employed long enough to be able to provide the specified evidence. That
    cannot affect the weight to be afforded to the Immigration Rules in any
    proportionality assessment.

Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error on  a  point
    of law and is set aside.

17. I re-make the appeal, refusing it on all grounds.

Signed:[pic]                                 Date: 27 March 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
