
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/09525/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|on 11 December 2015                  |On 7 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                Z I B ABDALLA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, CAIRO
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Miller, of Hamilton Burns WS
For the Respondent:    Mr M Dinwycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Morrison,  dismissing  her  appeal  against  refusal  of   entry
    clearance as the spouse of a refugee.

 2. The first ground of appeal to the Upper Tribunal submits that the judge
    erred at paragraph 21 by summarising the submissions for the  appellant
    so as to "mirror exactly" the submission for the respondent.

 3. This ground is wrong.  The first sentence of  paragraph  21  records  a
    submission for the appellant.  The rest of the paragraph sets  out  the
    contrary submission for the respondent.  There is no confusion  between
    the two.

 4.  The  appellant's  submissions  are  also  noted   elsewhere   in   the
    determination,  in  particular   at   paragraph   13.     Reading   the
    determination fairly and as  a  whole,  it  is  clear  that  the  judge
    understood exactly the respective positions of the parties.

 5. Ground 2 alleges failure to take account of corroborative evidence, but
    the judge did consider the evidence mentioned, and explained why he was
    not much impressed by it.

 6. Ground 3 alleges that the judge approached the same  evidence  "with  a
    closed mind".  We find no trace of that in the determination.  This  is
    a strongly worded and serious criticism  to  make  of  any  judge.   It
    should  not  have  been  advanced   so   lightly   and,   we   suspect,
    thoughtlessly.

 7. The same ground goes on to say that  the  judge  has  not  sufficiently
    explained why he did not accept the sponsor's  evidence  that  apparent
    contradictions in his evidence  were  explained  by  misinterpretation.
    This part of the ground fails to acknowledge the judge's clear analysis
    of the issue at paragraph 23.

 8. Ground 4 alleges that the judge applied the wrong  standard  of  proof.
    The ground does not criticise the correct statement of the standard  of
    proof at paragraph 4, and does  not  say  that  it  is  wrongly  stated
    anywhere else.  This ground dresses up disagreement  in  the  guise  of
    language of legal error, when that error is nowhere identifiable.

 9. The grounds, separately  and  as  a  whole,  amount  to  no  more  than
    insistence and disagreement.  They disclose no error of law.   They  do
    not show that the determination is in any way legally defective  as  an
    explanation to the appellant of why the judge decided her  case  as  he
    did.

10. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

11. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.




           [pic]
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


           18 December 2015


