
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA097392014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Taylor House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 May 2016                                |On 15 June 2016               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                                 mohit singh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of India  born  on  22  November  1999.   He
    applied for entry clearance to settle in the United  Kingdom  with  his
    father, Abbal  Singh.   The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  considered  the
    application under paragraph 297 of the Rules and refused it on 22  July
    2014.  The appellant appealed the decision and his appeal  came  before
    the First-tier Tribunal on 10 August 2015.  The appellant's father  did
    not attend the hearing and the  judge  determined  the  appeal  in  the
    absence of the sponsor.  In paragraph 2 of the decision the  First-tier
    Judge stated as follows:

         "The decision  appealed  against  is  the  decision  of  the  Entry
         Clearance Officer dated 22 July 2014.  The Entry Clearance  Officer
         considered paragraph 297 of the United Kingdom  Immigration  Rules.
         However, the appellant's father Abbal Singh is a  British  citizen.
         He lives in the United Kingdom.  In  the  appellant's  application,
         the appellant states that his mother and siblings will  be  joining
         the appellant and his father at a later  date.   The  sponsor,  the
         appellant's  father  Mr  Abbal  Singh,  also  wrote  a  letter   of
         explanation stating that he is married to  the  appellant's  mother
         and that the  relationship  is  subsisting.   The  Entry  Clearance
         Officer considered paragraph 297.  It is possible  under  paragraph
         297(i)(a) for an application for leave to enter  to  succeed  where
         both parents are present and settled in the United  Kingdom.   That
         is plainly not the situation here and the Entry  Clearance  Officer
         states that  it  is  not  the  situation.   It  is  possible  under
         paragraph 297(i)(e) for leave to enter  to  be  granted  where  one
         parent is present and  settled  in  the  United  Kingdom  or  being
         admitted on the same occasion  for  settlement  and  has  had  sole
         responsibility for the child's  upbringing.   The  entry  clearance
         officer in this case indicated that the appellant's father  is  not
         solely responsible for his care as the appellant is now living with
         his mother in India.   The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  refused  the
         application because  he  was  not  satisfied,  on  the  balance  of
         probabilities, that the appellant meets all the requirements of the
         relevant paragraph of the Immigration Rules."

2.   The judge concluded that the Entry Clearance  Officer  was  correct  in
    that the appellant could not satisfy paragraph 297 of the Rules.   Only
    the appellant's father was present and settled in  the  United  Kingdom
    and his mother was in India.  The judge also stated  he  was  satisfied
    that the appellant's father had not had  sole  responsibility  for  the
    appellant's upbringing and therefore paragraph 297(i)(a)  or  paragraph
    297(i)(e) could not be  met.   In  relation  to  Article  8  the  judge
    observed that the appellant had never been in the  United  Kingdom  and
    the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer not to allow the  appellant
    leave to enter simply maintained the status quo and  did  not  separate
    the family.  Article 8 was not engaged since there was no  interference
    with the appellant's  right  to  family  life  or  private  life.   The
    appellant had never been in the United Kingdom and lived in India  with
    his mother and siblings.  The judge accordingly dismissed the appeal.

3.   The appellant applied  for  permission  to  appeal  and  permission  to
    appeal was granted on 26 April 2016.  The First-tier Judge  noted  that
    the sponsor had made the application on the basis that he did not  have
    notice of the hearing and wished to give evidence.

4.   At the hearing before me the sponsor again did  not  appear  and  there
    was no explanation for his non-attendance.  I was satisfied that notice
    of hearing had been sent to the sponsor and I was satisfied under  Rule
    38 that it was in the interests of justice to proceed with the hearing.



5.   Mr  Tarlow  submitted  that  there  was  nothing  to  rebut  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer's decision.  It was difficult to see what the sponsor
    could have said to change matters.

6.   At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.  I  remind
    myself that I cannot interfere with  the  First-tier  Judge's  decision
    absent a material error of law.  Permission to appeal  was  granted  on
    the footing that it was arguable that the sponsor had not had notice of
    the hearing.  It appears however from the file  that  the  sponsor  was
    notified about the hearing before me by notice on 4 May to the  address
    he had specified.  The sponsor has not attended before me and there  is
    no explanation for his absence.

7.   As Mr Tarlow observed, it is difficult to envisage a different  outcome
    had the Tribunal had the benefit of the sponsor's evidence.

8.   I adopt and agree with the points made  by  the  First-tier  Judge  for
    dismissing the appeal under the Rules.  The appellant  cannot  sensibly
    bring his case under paragraph 297 as the judge pointed out.

9.   In relation to Article 8 again I do not find that the judge's  decision
    was arguably flawed and I adopt the points he made when dismissing  the
    appeal on that basis.

Notice of Decision

10.  The decision of the First-tier Judge was not materially flawed  in  law
    and this appeal is dismissed.

11.  No anonymity direction made.




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Judge made no fee award and I make none.




Signed                                  Date 8 June 2016

G Warr
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

