
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/09125/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |                 Decision & Reasons   |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On the 5th October 2015               |                 On the 14th October  |
|                                      |2015                                  |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before


                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Mr Tariq Mahmood
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No Appearance

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal which allowed, erroneously they say, an appeal by
    Tariq Mahmood, who had applied for a visit visa for business purposes.
    That had been refused by an Entry Clearance Officer.

 2. The Appellant's appeal was heard and considered on the papers by Judge
    Stanford sitting at Taylor House on the 12th February 2015.  In a
    decision promulgated on the 24th March the Judge purported to find that
    the requirements of paragraph 46G of the Immigration Rules were met,
    that the decision was not in accordance with the law or the applicable
    Immigration Rules and then at paragraph 25, having considered the human
    rights aspect of the case, found that no articles were engaged in that
    appeal.  In the notice of the decision he allowed the appeal under the
    Immigration Rules and dismissed it on human rights grounds.

 3. The Judge had overlooked the fact that the Appellant's rights of appeal
    were limited by the terms of the then section 84 of the 2002 Act and
    that it was limited to those mentioned in section 82(2)(c), under
    section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 and race discrimination grounds.

 4. The first point that the Judge should have addressed is whether the
    Human Rights Act was engaged as the Appellant had claimed.  If he had
    found that it was not then that was the end of the appeal because there
    was then no jurisdiction to consider whether the refusal was in breach
    of any of the grounds.

 5. There was no suggestion that the Appellant has family in the UK and
    following the case of Kugathas article 8 and family life could not be
    engaged because there would be no dependency on anybody within the UK
    jurisdiction.  The case of Patel [2013] UKSC 72 severely limits the
    application of article 8 in respect of private life in country and thus
    had a similar effect out of country and that will not have assisted the
    Appellant.

 6. There is no breach of the right to a fair trial or hearing.  The
    Appellant did have the opportunity to present his case and the finding
    made at paragraph 25 that no rights under any other articles were
    engaged in the appeal was the only finding that was open to the Judge.

 7. That should have been the end of the decision and there was then
    nothing further for the Judge to consider and there was certainly no
    need for him to address the ability of the Appellant to meet paragraph
    46G or any other paragraph of the Immigration Rules.

 8. Accordingly I find that the decision of Judge Stanford contained a
    material error of law with regard to his jurisdiction to consider the
    appeal.  He was wrong to allow the appeal under the Immigration Rules
    and I have set aside the decision.  I remake the decision and
    substitute this finding that the refusal of the Appellant's application
    did not constitute a breach of any of the UK's international
    obligations under the European Convention on Human Rights.  There was
    therefore no jurisdiction to consider the appeal further and the appeal
    is dismissed.


NOTICE OF DECISION

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Stanford contained an error of
law and is set aside. I remake the decision and dismiss the appeal of Tariq
Mahmood.

No anonymity direction is made.

To The Respondent

I have dismissed the appeal of Tariq Mahmood and therefore there can be no
fee award.

Signed                              Date 13th October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Parkes

