
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/09809/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 November 2015                  |On 5 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                        Appellant/Respondent
                                     and

                          mr sabir mohamud mohamed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                        Respondent/Appellant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Ms Emma Savage, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   In the decision below I will continue to refer to the parties by  their
    designations  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (FtT)  so   that   the
    respondent to this appeal will continue  to  be  referred  to  as  "the
    appellant" and the appellant before this appeal- the Secretary of State
    for the Home Department- will be continued to be referred  to  as  "the
    respondent".

2.   This case last came before me at Field House on 21 August 2015  when  I
    found a material error of law in the decision of the FtT but directed a
    further hearing at which the ultimate disposal of the appeal  would  be
    decided. Following that hearing a material error of law in the decision
    of the FtT was found and  the  hearing  on  30  November  2015  was  to
    determine the ultimate disposal before the Upper Tribunal.

Background

3.   The appellant is a Somalian national born on  10  April  2003.   It  is
    claimed that he is the  son  of  Isse  Oreji  Ahmed  Isse,  who  admits
    travelling to the UK in 2003 on forged documents.  It is  claimed  that
    the appellant is the son of Mr Dawilbeyt, Ms Isse's former partner.  Ms
    Isse claims to have met Mr Dawilbeyt on 15 February 2002,  having  come
    to the UK originally in 2000.   It  seems  that  Ms  Isse  claims  that
    following the birth of her child on 10 April 2003 she travelled back to
    Somalia with her newborn son later that year.  He  has  remained  there
    ever since.

4.   On 9 June 2014 the appellant applied for entry clearance to the  UK  as
    the son of parents settled here.  On 1 July 2014  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer (ECO) refused that application because  he  was  not  satisfied
    that the appellant demonstrated that he met  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  No evidence had been supplied  that  the  appellant
    was related to Ms Isse and Mr Dawilbeyt as claimed.   Accordingly,  the
    ECO did not consider that the requirements of paragraph 297(i)  (a)  of
    the Immigration Rules to be met.  That sub-paragraph provides that both
    parents must be present and settled in the UK.

5.   The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal,  claiming  that  the
    decision was neither in  accordance  with  the  Immigration  Rules  nor
    Article 8 of the ECHR. He contended that the respondent ought  to  have
    granted him indefinite leave to remain  (ILR).   Both  parents  of  the
    appellant were British citizens residing in the UK.   Furthermore,  the
    appellant relied on DNA  evidence  establishing  paternity.   This  was
    obtained using DNA  sampling  despatched  to  the  British  Embassy  in
    Nairobi (the appellant currently resides in Nigeria).  Both parents had
    provided a mouth swab in the UK.  The grounds recite the fact that  the
    appellant had not been given an opportunity to provide  his  own  mouth
    sample and therefore had to rely on other evidence.  At the date of the
    grounds final DNA analysis was therefore  awaited.   Nevertheless,  the
    appellant maintained that he was the child of the UK sponsors, that the
    respondent had not considered adequately the DNA  evidence  or  awaited
    its conclusions and the refusal was not in  accordance  with  the  law.
    The Entry Clearance Manager (ECM) carried out a review of the  decision
    in the light of the appeal but  having  reviewed  the  evidence  placed
    before the ECO concluded that he had been right to reach  the  decision
    he had reached.  It seems that the ECM review was not conducted until 3
    November 2014 as the appeal had not been lodged in time.

6.   Eventually  (on  28  August  2014)  a  DNA  report  was  received  from
    Cellmark.  At page 10 of the additional bundle of documents  (filed  by
    the  appellant)  that  evidence  confirms  that,  based  on  a  medical
    certificate for the appellant, it was almost certain that the appellant
    was the child of the two UK sponsors.

7.   Nevertheless, the respondent maintained  before  me  that  the  child's
    date of birth did not coincide with a date that the  sponsors  were  in
    Somalia, indeed they had not been there  since  2000.   Therefore,  the
    child could not have  been  theirs.   This  discrepancy  had  not  been
    explained.

The Appeal Proceedings

8.   Following the hearing at Hatton Cross  on  23  March  2015  Immigration
    Judge Amin (the Immigration Judge) found the DNA  evidence  convincing.
    He found that if there had been any doubt about  the  identity  of  the
    appellant Cellmark would have "raised the  issue".   The  evidence  was
    that Isse had supplied a sample to her doctor  on  24  April  2014  and
    provided her passport as her identification document.  Mr Dawilbeyt had
    given a sample on  the  same  date  and  also  produced  his  passport.
    Although  the  TB  certificate  was  criticised  by  the   respondent's
    representative as not being a valid form of identification nevertheless
    the Immigration Judge was satisfied that on  balance  of  probabilities
    the author of the  Cellmark  report  had  been  provided  with  correct
    samples and had been able to identify paternity correctly.

9.   Following consideration of the grounds of appeal to the Upper  Tribunal
    by the respondent permission was given to appeal by Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Cruthers because he thought that uncritical acceptance of
    the DNA evidence did not deal with the other discrepancies in the case.
     In particular, the respondent's representative before the FtT (Mr Ali)
    had raised concerns over the reliability of  the  appellant's  mother's
    evidence. In particular, Ms Isse, had not given a reliable account  and
    have propensity to breach  Immigration  Rules  and  commit  immigration
    offences.  It appeared that the respondent's concerns had not even been
    considered by the Immigration Judge.  Had they  been  considered  there
    would have been considerable doubt cast on  the  parental  relationship
    between the appellant and his sponsor parents which rendered the  whole
    decision fundamentally flawed.

10.  Having been given permission to appeal on the basis that  these  points
    were at least arguable I decided following a hearing at Field House  on
    21 August 2015 that a full examination of the  circumstances  in  which
    the material was provided to the expert at Cellmark was needed before a
    proper conclusion could be reached.  It appeared that the  decision  of
    the FtT contained a material  error  of  law  in  failing  to  properly
    consider the respondent's concerns.  Accordingly, I directed that there
    should be a further hearing.

The Hearing

11.  The hearing took place at Field House on 30 November 2015.

12.  Ms Savage explained that because the  chronology  did  not  make  sense
    (the appellant having been born approximately  three  years  after  his
    parents left  Somalia)  there  were  significant  concerns  as  to  the
    reliability of the DNA evidence.  Clearly, as I pointed  out,  the  DNA
    evidence must relate to a child of the sponsors.  However, it  did  not
    follow Ms Savage said, that  the  DNA  evidence  must  relate  to  this
    appellant, given the facts summarised above.

13.  I heard briefly from both Ms Isse and Mr Dawilbeyt  who  told  me  that
    their son was being cared for at the date of the hearing  by  relatives
    in Kenya.  Mr Dawilbeyt explained that he had been in the UK since 1997
    and had been given indefinite leave to remain in 2000.  He had become a
    British citizen in February 2003 and in April 2003 his son was born.

14.  Ms Savage again submitted that the TB certificate was not reliable  and
    did not fall within a class of  documents  for  establishing  paternity
    that should be accepted.  The appellant's father would not have gone to
    Somalia at all between 2000 and 2003 and could not, therefore, possibly
    have been the appellant's father.

15.  At the end of the hearing I reserved my  decision  which  I  will  give
    after summarising the issues below.

Discussion

16.  It seems that there are three issues which need to be  resolved  before
    it is possible to reach  a  conclusion  as  to  the  parentage  of  the
    appellant.  This is the only sub-paragraph  of  paragraph  297  of  the
    Immigration Rules that is disputed in the case; the respondent  accepts
    the other requirements for settlement are met.

17.   The  first  issue  relates  to  Isse's  movements  early  in  the  new
    millennium.  Her witness statement says nothing about  when  she  first
    came to the UK but it seems to have been  around  2000.   Mr  Dawilbeyt
    does not say when he came to the UK either but said in evidence that he
    first came here in 1997 and was given refugee status in 1998.   Neither
    of them appear to have gone back to  Somalia  between  2000  and  2003.
    There were no documents confirming when Isse ever returned to  Somalia.
    Clearly she was there in April 2003 if she was able to  give  birth  to
    the appellant.

18.  The commencement of the relationship between Isse and Mr  Dawilbeyt  is
    barely any clearer.  He claims to have met his wife Amina Abikar  on  5
    January 2002 yet to have met and married Isse the following month.  The
    divorce to Mrs Abikar was not concluded until November 2008.

19.  There are no travel documents confirming Isse's return  to  Somalia  to
    have her child and she was only  able  to  say  that  she  used  forged
    documents to return here in November  2003.   This  casts  considerable
    doubt on the credibility of her evidence.

Conclusions

20.  The evidence on behalf of the sponsors is  confusing  and  in  my  view
    failed to show on the balance of probabilities  that  they  were  in  a
    relationship with  one  another  from  2002  onwards  as  claimed.   In
    particular, Dawilbeyt claims the relationship began in  February  2002.
    This would have been only one month after he  married  Ms  Abikar.   In
    addition, Isse's immigration history is very unclear.  She  appears  to
    have come to the UK seeking asylum in about 2000.  First of all, I find
    it surprising that she would wish to return to the country in which she
    claims  to  have  suffered  persecution   (Somalia).    Secondly,   and
    importantly, there is no documentary evidence to confirm her return  to
    Somalia  nor  her  presence  there  between  February  2002,  when  her
    relationship with Dawilbeyt is said to have begun, and April 2003, when
    she claims to have given birth to the appellant.  There is  a  lack  of
    detail as to the movements of Isse and Dawilbeyt  during  the  material
    period.

21.  Isse admits travelling on false documents to Somalia in  November  2003
    to see her mother,  who  she  claims  was  ill.   This  undermines  the
    truthfulness of her evidence generally.  The DNA report by Cellmark  is
    based on a TB report prepared for the appellant  and  is  not  a  valid
    identification  document  for  these  purposes.   Isse's   questionable
    credibility has led me to conclude that the DNA evidence here is not as
    foolproof as the Immigration  Judge  suggested  and  indeed  cannot  be
    relied on as indicating that the appellant's parents are Dawilbeyt  and
    Isse. The evidence only suggests that the child who  was  subjected  to
    the DNA analysis is likely to be a child of  Dawilbeyt  and  Isse.  The
    evidence summarised above suggests considerable doubt as to whether the
    person who is linked to  the  sponsors  by  his  DNA  is  in  fact  the
    appellant.

Notice of Decision

Having carefully reviewed the evidence before the FtT  having  on  the  last
occasion found a material error of law I have decided that the  decision  of
the FtT must be set aside.  I substitute the decision of the Upper  Tribunal
which is to dismiss the appellant's appeal against the decision of  the  ECO
to refuse entry clearance in this case.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

