
[pic]

UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/09191/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|on 18 January 2016                   |on 10 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between

                           entry clearance officer
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        Mr Brandon Ngonidzashe Maruta
                         no anonymity direction made
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr F Singarajah, counsel (instructed by
Permits2Work)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the entry clearance  officer  and  to
    the respondent as "the claimant."

 2. The claimant's appeal against  the  decision  of  the  entry  clearance
    officer dated 10 July 2014 to refuse to grant him  entry  clearance  to
    join his mother, was allowed by the First-tier Tribunal, in a  decision
    promulgated on 8 June 2015. The sponsor appeared in person  before  the
    Tribunal.   His  appeal  was  allowed  under  paragraph  297   of   the
    Immigration Rules as well as on Article 8 grounds.

 3. Permission to appeal against the decision  was  granted  on  20  August
    2015.

 4. On 20 November 2015, the Upper Tribunal found that the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error on a point of  law.
    The Judge's findings regarding the  guidance  given  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in TD (Yemen (paragraph 297(i)(e): sole  responsibility)  [2006]
    UKAIT 00049 were not properly reasoned. The evidence revealed that  the
    claimant's father had some control and direction relating in particular
    to schooling.

 5. No attempt had been made during the course of the  hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal to obtain proper clarification  from  the  sponsor,
    who was not represented, regarding the period and frequency of  staying
    contact during weekends at his father's. There  had  moreover  been  no
    indication during the interview  with  the  claimant's  uncle  that  he
    intended to limit the number of  joint  decisions  made  regarding  the
    claimant's schooling. Again, no clarification had been  sought  at  the
    interview or by the Judge.

 6. In the interviewer's summary, it was noted that the claimant lives with
    his maternal uncle and aunt and spends weekends with his father. It was
    also stated that the claimant seems to have a cordial relationship with
    his father, "since he regularly visits him." Finally it is  noted  that
    both parents render financial support to the claimant and "jointly make
    the decisions on his behalf like on schools".

 7. In the circumstances, the finding by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  at
    [21] that the father had abdicated responsibility did not appear to  be
    borne out by the evidence which the Judge accepted,  having  regard  to
    the uncle's assertions during the interview.

 8. In the circumstances, it was held that the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal involved the making of errors of law.  The  decision  was  set
    aside. None of the findings were preserved. It was  directed  that  the
    decision be re-made  by  the  Upper  Tribunal.  Directions  were  given
    relating to the filing and serving of witness statements, and any other
    evidence sought to be relied on at the hearing.

    Hearing on 18 January 2016

 9. At the date of the resumed hearing, the  claimant  was  represented  by
    counsel. I have had regard to the bundle of documents presented by both
    parties. There were  eight  'Appendixes'  produced  by  the  claimant's
    sponsor.

    The entry clearance officer's case

10. The entry clearance officer  was  not  satisfied  that  his  sponsoring
    parent had been able to show that she has been  solely  responsible  in
    exercising parental care over the claimant for  a  substantial  period.
    There was nothing to suggest that she had  sole  responsibility.  Eight
    money transfer receipts had been submitted  with  regard  to  financial
    support from his sponsor. This was regarded as very limited evidence of
    financial support. This is particularly so because the sponsor had been
    in the UK since 2003. Nor had he  presented  any  evidence  of  regular
    contact with his sponsor.

11. Regard was also had to the  interview  conducted  with  the  claimant's
    maternal uncle. He had been living with the uncle and  aunt  since  his
    mother left in 2003. His father had been jointly supporting  him  along
    with his mother. The  parents  jointly  decided  the  schools  that  he
    attends and he stays with his father during some weekends.

12. On that basis, the entry clearance officer was not satisfied  that  his
    mother had sole responsibility for his upbringing.

13. For this appeal to succeed I  must  be  satisfied  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities, the burden being on the appellant,  that  he  meets  the
    relevant requirements under the Rules.  The relevant date is  the  date
    of decision.

    The claimant's case

14. Ms Sheillett Mountford, the claimant's mother and sponsor, attended the
    hearing and gave evidence. She produced a bundle A as well as the eight
    appendices.  She adopted her statement  at  B6,  pages  7-9,  dated  20
    February 2015. She also adopted her statement at A18 dated  13  January
    2016. She lives at 37  Stanhope  Road,  Slough.  She  stated  that  the
    contents in the statements are true and correct.

15. In her earlier statement, she stated that she came  to  the  UK  during
    November 2002. Her son was then only six  years  old.  He  remained  in
    Zimbabwe with her mother and sister. His  father,  although  living  in
    Zimbabwe, was not part of his life. She in fact had to take a DNA  test
    to prove he was the father.

16. Even after that he did not support the claimant either  emotionally  or
    financially.

17. Whilst in the UK, she stayed with friends. She helped around.  She  was
    given a little pocket money to send home.

18. In March 2004, she "got my visa". She was then employed in a care home.
    By then the claimant was eight years old.

19. In August 2004, she discovered that she was pregnant.

20. In the following months her mother was diagnosed with  cervical  cancer
    and her twin sister with HIV/AIDS.

21. All plans to travel to Zimbabwe were shelved at that time as she had to
    pay for treatment for her mother. Her sister also needed emotional  and
    financial support.

22. She gave birth to a son, Simba, in June 2005.

23. She claimed that she had been involved "in the  day  to  day  basis  of
    Brandon's life, school reports, teachers, etc."

24. She went to Zimbabwe with her child, Simba, in March 2006 for a month.

25. In 2007 her mother passed away. She went to Zimbabwe  for  the  funeral
    and left Simba with his father. Her sister was  distraught  and  begged
    her not to take the claimant for a little while.

26. She was "awarded"  a  visa,  which  had  been  up  for  renewal,  after
    successfully appealing in 2008. She was in  financial  straits  at  the
    time. She was not able to travel home until 2012. By then, the claimant
    was 16 years old.

27. She spoke to the claimant daily, sending him money monthly. In 2012 she
    spent a month in Zimbabwe and had a lovely time with the family. It was
    agreed that the claimant should finish his O levels and then apply  for
    his visa.

28. In December 2013 an application for the claimant to visit  the  UK  was
    refused.

29. She now has indefinite leave to remain and wants him to  join  her  and
    his brother.

30. She is in full time employment and in a stable relationship.  There  is
    comfortable accommodation.

31. In her recent statement, she repeated that she has  provided  financial
    and emotional support for the claimant. She has produced as part of her
    evidence various letters, including  a  letter  from  Churchill  School
    situated in Harare, Zimbabwe. The letter confirmed  that  the  claimant
    was a student between 2010 and 2013. The school fees were being paid by
    his mother, the sponsor.

32. She said that she has provided for his upkeep by sending money  to  her
    siblings. She provides money for clothing, food and the like.  She  has
    attached various money transfers at the end of her Bundle  A.  This  is
    for the period March 2015 until December  2015.  I  was  informed  that
    between 22 November 2014 and 22 February 2015, the amount  of  $4957.51
    was transmitted. There are further transactions for the period 17 March
    2015 until 23 December 2015.

33. When the claimant was three, she  filed  for  maintenance  against  his
    father. That was when a DNA test had to be taken proving  that  he  was
    the claimant's father. However, despite winning her  case,  the  father
    only made one  payment  of  50  Zimbabwe  dollars.  She  tried  to  get
    financial help from him but was not successful.

34. She claimed that it was  she  who  "initiated"  opportunities  for  the
    claimant to have a relationship with his father. He was not willing  to
    try. His father is married with another family. He "allegedly"  has  31
    children and has thus chosen not to be involved in the claimant's life.
    This she asserts is "abandonment".

35. Her sister has managed to stabilise. Although still on  medication  she
    has fully recovered.

36. She struggled to renew her visa after it was initially denied. She  had
    to spend money paying for a lawyer. This took a  long  time.  She  went
    home in 2012. It took her a long  time  to  become  financially  stable
    again. Her solicitor told her to wait  until  she  received  indefinite
    leave to remain and then to apply for settlement. That took a very long
    time and she only managed to obtain that in March  2014.  The  claimant
    was then 17 years old. Her attempt to have him visit on holiday in 2013
    was refused.

37. She was very angry and upset when she read the interview relied  on  by
    the entry clearance officer.

38. In her oral evidence, she was referred to the interview held  with  the
    claimant's uncle on 18 June 2014. With regard to his staying  with  his
    father on weekends, she said that there have been about  ten  occasions
    that are accountable which she initiated. She cannot remember the exact
    dates but it was roughly from 2004 until 2012. She  did  not  "initiate
    anything else thereafter" from 2012. Prior to that, she initiated it by
    making telephone calls to the claimant's father. She was not  aware  of
    any visits since then. Her sister had  tried  to  call  the  claimant's
    father but there was no response.

39. Between the claimant's date of birth in 1996 and 2002, there  was  very
    limited contact. She estimated that it was about twice a year that they
    met.

40. She was taken to the interview of the  maternal  uncle  dated  18  June
    2014. There the uncle was asked whether his father helps to support his
    son. The answer was "yes, after we press him to do so." He has  however
    not given any emotional support. Financial assistance was "maybe once a
    year." That was when they pressed him.

41. Between 1996 and 2012, he probably provided about $1,000 in  total.  He
    is not aware that he has contributed anything further since 2012.

42. She said that the claimant's father did not  decide  which  school  the
    claimant would attend. It was she who took the final  decision.  Before
    he started secondary school, she called his father  and  gave  him  the
    names, but he gave her  no  help  in  choosing  a  school.  He  started
    secondary school in about 2008.

43. From 2008  onwards  his  father  was  not  involved  at  all  regarding
    decisions as to which schools the claimant should attend. Moreover  the
    relatives would consult her concerning any decisions  that  had  to  be
    taken in respect of the claimant.

44. In cross-examination, she was asked whether there had been  any  visits
    between the appellant and his father between 2012 and 2014. She is  not
    aware of any. The claimant would let her know. Her relatives would have
    let her know.

45. She was referred to the uncle's response to the question asked  at  the
    interview whether the claimant visits his dad. The answer  recorded  is
    that he stayed with him during some weekends. She said that she is  not
    aware of this. This must relate to another period.

46. She said she used to phone the claimant daily. This was  until  he  was
    nine, in 2005. He started secondary school when he was  12  years  old.
    She would then call him about three times a week.

47. When he put his application  in  during  May  2014,  he  was  at  Cosha
    Christian Centre. He was studying IT. His father lived in the same town
    as the claimant, which is about half an  hour  away  by  car.  When  he
    visited his father, the claimant was taken by her sister's car  or  his
    father would visit at her house.

48. She said that it is correct that  she  and  the  father  are  still  in
    contact. This however is "because of Brandon."  She  had  to  obtain  a
    statement from the claimant's father.

49. There is an affidavit produced at B6, page 2 from Mr  Alois  Ngondzashe
    Maruta dated 4 September 2014 - the claimant's father. He  stated  that
    he has not been responsible in any of the claimant's upbringing. He has
    never been able to provide for him financially as he is married and has
    a large family of his own. Schooling, food and all other  daily  living
    allowances were met by his mother. In the 18 years  of  the  claimant's
    life he has never lived with him. He has hardly seen  him  due  to  his
    family situation and the difficulties it brought.

50. Mr Kotas asked why  the  father  had  been  prepared  to  give  such  a
    statement. She said she told him that her son had been  denied  a  visa
    including the points upon which the refusal was based. As a result,  he
    then agreed to assist.

51. It was put to her that the father's statement, and in  particular  that
    he has never lived with him, "is slightly exaggerated." She said it was
    correct and truthful. He has never lived with him. It was she who  paid
    for his education in total. Apart from the 14  years  during  which  he
    contributed about $1,000, there has been no other contribution.

52. She was asked why her sister and her husband asked him to supply money.
    She needed financial help, particularly at the time that she  sponsored
    her mother's care. Her sister also had HIV. It was  she  who  sponsored
    their care. Her mother's illness was between 2004  and  2008.  She  was
    treated until 2007. Her sister was diagnosed with HIV  early  in  2005.
    She continues to support her antiretroviral therapy.

53. It was put to her that it had been stated at the  interview  that  they
    asked him for  financial  support.  She  said  that  when  they  needed
    something, for example food, and they did not have  money,  they  might
    have asked.

54. She was referred to a letter at  A20-21  from  William  Mountford,  who
    lives in Zimbabwe. He is the claimant's uncle. He has stayed  with  him
    for the past 19 years. In those years, his father has not visited  him,
    not more than nine times; not once has he brought him clothes.  He  has
    not brought him Christmas presents or even a phone  call  to  wish  him
    happy birthday. It  was  the  child's  mother  who  provided  him  with
    everything with no help from his father.

55. She said that the claimant calls her "mummy" (there is reference in one
    of the letters produced which shows that he did call her "mummy").

56. She was asked how many children the claimant's father has. She said  he
    has between 13-31. He is a retired engineer. She thinks he has  several
    properties in Harare. He lives with his second wife and family.

57. She was asked whether the claimant nevertheless has  contact  with  his
    father. She stated that her son would tell her. He  has  not  told  her
    that.

58. She was asked whether his father would not  take  an  interest  in  his
    education. She  gave  him  every  opportunity  to  participate  in  the
    education. He had the opportunity to develop a relationship.

59. It  was  put  to  her  that  the  claimant  has  not  referred  to  the
    circumstances between  himself  and  his  father.  She  said  that  the
    interview should have been with the claimant.

60. She was referred to the claimant's letter  "to  whom  it  may  concern"
    dated 18 February 2014 at B6,  page  1.  He  said  that  he  wants  his
    "mummy", brother and sister and his step dad to be a happy  family.  He
    misses his mummy very much. He used to cry a  lot  when  he  was  young
    because he missed her so  much.  He  misses  his  brother,  Simba.  The
    holiday was not enough time for them  to  spend  with  each  other.  He
    stated that the last weekend that he might have stayed with his  father
    would have occurred in mid 2012.

61. She said he had tried to involve his father but he only asked  for  the
    reasons why she was choosing a specific school. He was supposed to come
    back with regard to secondary schools, but he did  not  come  back.  In
    fact his father never telephoned her once.

62. The last time she spoke to him was after June 2014. That was  when  she
    tried to obtain a  statement  from  him.  Her  solicitor  at  the  time
    indicated that a statement would be  beneficial  as  to  financial  and
    emotional support. An email was sent to him setting out the things that
    should be contained in his affidavit. The content of the  affidavit  is
    'all true'.

63. In re-examination he  was  asked  about  any  involvement  between  her
    sister, her husband and the claimant. She said that they attend to  his
    day to day issues. She however told her to attend the parents'  meeting
    at the school. They did not take  decisions  independently.  They  only
    attend to day to day activities.

    Submissions

64. Mr Kotas adopted the reasons for refusal dated 10 July 2014.

65. He accepted that the claimant did not live with either  his  father  or
    mother. As regards sole responsibility, he  referred  to  the  father's
    involvement noting that "we are stuck  with  the  interview."  He  also
    referred to the summary at the end of the document. The  questions  are
    open and simple.

66. The sponsor's claim that he used to visit  his  father  prior  to  2012
    constitutes a different interpretation of the interview.

67. Insofar as support by the father is concerned, again, there is  nothing
    to suggest as claimed by the sponsor that this is only historical.  Nor
    has his father completely abdicated responsibility. He  submitted  that
    the uncle's witness statement at A20 in  which  he  contends  that  the
    claimant's  father  has  not  visited  him  more  than  nine  times  is
    "extraordinary."

68. He submitted that 'the stakes in this case are high'.  There  has  been
    the temptation to embellish the evidence. To assert that they have only
    been nine visits, each for less than 20 minutes, is not credible.

69. At A22, the statement of the claimant's aunt that the father has  never
    been present at all in Brandon's life and that on several occasions  he
    would promise to collect the child for weekend visits but never  showed
    up or called to explain why he did not come, is an  attempt  to  tailor
    their evidence to suit the case.

70. He submitted that "perhaps the father has been a little  more  involved
    than suggested". Moreover, the father  does  not  live  far  away.  The
    father's circumstances "chimes with the interview evidence".

71. Insofar as Article 8 outside the rules is concerned, he referred to  SS
    (Congo). There are no compelling circumstances outside  the  rules.  In
    any event, any interference would be proportionate  and  in  accordance
    with effective immigration control.

72. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Singarajah referred to the  reasons  for
    refusal. The issues  concerns  what  contact  and  relationship  exists
    between the father and the claimant;  if  his  mother  does  have  sole
    responsibility, is this for a substantial period? Finally, there is the
    issue as to financial support.

73. Mr Singarajah referred to extracts from TD (paragraph 297(i)(e)): "Sole
    Responsibility" Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049. "Sole responsibility"  cannot
    sensibly be read in an absolute or literal way. The  IAT  had  accepted
    that  a  parent  who  has  settled  in  the   UK   may   retain   "sole
    responsibility" for a child where the day to day care or responsibility
    for that child is necessarily undertaken by a relative abroad -

74. He referred to [11] in TD where the facts were that the  appellant  saw
    her father who lived in Jamaica every week. He  gave  her  money  on  a
    weekly  basis.  The  appellant's  aunt  and  uncle   also   contributed
    financially to support her. In addition, her  mother  also  sent  money
    each  week  from  the  UK  to  the   appellant's   grandmother.   Those
    circumstances fell short of establishing that  the  appellant's  mother
    had sole responsibility for her.

75. Mr Singarajah submitted that there was no evidence that  the  uncle  or
    aunt supplied financial support to the claimant. Nor was there evidence
    that the father had visited or supplied financial support on a  regular
    basis. Nor did  his  father  become  involved  in  decision  making  in
    relation to the colleges or schools that  the  claimant  attended.  The
    claimant's mother has been in contact with the claimant  on  a  regular
    basis, sometimes 3-4 times a week.

76. The primary case is that even if the  father  did  participate  in  any
    decisions or that he contributed  money,  it  was  to  such  a  limited
    extent. He referred to the decision in Sloley v  ECO,  Kingston  [1973]
    Imm AR 54 where the appellant's father lived nearby but  was  virtually
    absent from her life.

77. He  submitted  that  the  claimant's  mother  has  had  sole  financial
    responsibility.   Even   assuming   that   there   had   been    shared
    responsibility, since 2012 any such responsibility ceased. He  referred
    to the evidence of the claimant's uncle and aunt  at  A20  and  21,  at
    pages 3-5 of B6. He submitted that  as  far  as  major  decisions  were
    concerned, the oral evidence established  that  these  were  ultimately
    made by the mother.

78. He submitted from TD that although financial support, particularly sole
    financial support of a child is relevant as an indicator of obligations
    stemming from an exercise of "responsibility" by a parent, it cannot be
    conclusive. The evidence showed that between November 2014 and February
    2015, his mother had  contributed  $4957.51.  There  is  also  evidence
    indicating that his mother exercised substantially more  responsibility
    with regard to financial  support.  He  accepted  that  even  exclusive
    financial support will not necessarily mean that the  person  providing
    it has "sole responsibility for the child." It is a factor but no  more
    than that.

79. He submitted that on any view the father did  not  meet  the  threshold
    relating to "two parent cases."

80. He referred to [49] in TD. The father's  involvement  is  at  best  "de
    minimis". The mother's involvement has been  such  that  she  has  sole
    responsibility, apart from the day to  day  care  administered  by  the
    uncle  and  aunt.  She  has  exercised  continuing  responsibility  and
    control. She has exercised sole  decision  making  authority  over  the
    claimant. He referred to pages 18, 20-21 of Bundle  A,  containing  the
    evidence of the mother and the claimant's uncle and aunt.  There  is  a
    letter from the school at A26, confirming that  the  claimant's  mother
    pays his school fees. At pages 27-51 the  receipts  relating  to  money
    transfers from March 2015 until December 2015 have been produced.

81.  Mr  Singarajah  criticised  the  interview  of  the  uncle  as  'being
    incomplete'. Nor is it evident that it was contemporaneous.  There  has
    been no confirmation that 'it is correct'. Questions were  put  without
    affording any opportunity to provide a  further  explanation.  Relevant
    questions following from a vague answer were not asked.

82. The statements  at  A  20-21  constitute  the  responses  to  that.  He
    submitted  that  the  case  law  requires  that  in  an  interview  for
    immigration purposes there is a common law duty of  fairness  that  any
    issues subsequently raised should be put to the interviewee for  reply.
    Accordingly the interviewer should have obtained proper information  as
    to the contact by the father on weekends. Questions  should  have  been
    asked as to the date when the last weekend contact took place.

83. Moreover, the comments section constituted a "generous opinion based on
    apparent answers to questions.

84. With regard to Article 8, the threshold is lower.  He  referred  to  SS
    (Congo) at [29]. Leave to enter outside the rules can only  take  place
    in "exceptional circumstances." Since 2012 there must be something that
    is not contained in the adult relationship provisions under the rules.

85. Mr Singarajah accordingly sought to uphold the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal on Article 8 grounds as well.

    Assessment

86. The meaning of "sole responsibility" has given rise to a body  of  case
    law, including cases decided before the the Court of Appeal. As already
    noted, in TD (paragraph 297(i)(e)): "Sole Responsibility" Yemen  [2006]
    UKAIT 00049, the Tribunal examined the case law relating to the  notion
    of "sole responsibility" in considerable  detail.   It  concluded  that
    "sole responsibility" is a factual matter to be decided  upon  all  the
    evidence.  Where one parent is not involved in the  child's  upbringing
    because he or she had abandoned or abdicated responsibility, the  issue
    may arise between the remaining parent and others who  have  day-to-day
    care of  the  child  abroad.   The  test  is  whether  the  parent  has
    continuing control and direction over the child's upbringing, including
    making all the important decisions in the child's life.  However, where
    both parents  are  involved  in  a  child's  upbringing,  it  would  be
    exceptional that one of them will have "sole responsibility".

87. The Tribunal  found  at  [30]  that  the  Court  of  Appeal  saw  "sole
    responsibility"  as  a  practical  rather  than  an  exclusively  legal
    exercise  of  "control"  by  the  UK  based  parent  over  the  child's
    upbringing, including whether what is done by the carer is done  "under
    the direction" of their parent.

88. The Tribunal concluded at [46] that in order to conclude  that  the  UK
    based parent had "sole responsibility"  for  the  child,  it  would  be
    necessary  to  show  that  the  parent   abroad   had   abdicated   any
    responsibility for the child and was merely acting at the direction  of
    the UK based parent who was otherwise totally uninvolved in  a  child's
    upbringing.

89. Cases in the Court of Appeal made it clear that the touchstone of "sole
    responsibility" is the continuing control and direction by  the  parent
    in the UK in respect of "the important  decisions"  about  the  child's
    upbringing.  If the UK based parent has allowed  the  carer  abroad  to
    make some important decisions in the child's upbringing,  then  it  may
    readily be said that  the  responsibility  for  the  child  has  become
    "shared"- [50].

90. The  Tribunal  set  out  the  proper  approach  to  questions  of  sole
    responsibility under this rule at [52].  It emphasised  that  the  term
    "responsibility" in the Immigration Rules should not be understood as a
    theoretical or legal obligation, but rather as a practical  one  which,
    in each case, looked to who in fact is  exercising  responsibility  for
    the child.  That responsibility may have been for a short  duration  in
    that the present arrangements may have begun quite  recently.  Wherever
    the parents are, if both parents are involved in the upbringing of  the
    child, it would be  exceptional  that  one  of  them  would  have  sole
    responsibility.

91. At [52(ix)] the Tribunal stated that the test  is  not  whether  anyone
    else has  day  to  day  responsibility,  but  whether  the  parent  has
    continuing control and direction of the child's  upbringing,  including
    making all the important  decisions  in  the  child's  life.   If  not,
    responsibility is shared and so not "sole".

92. I have considered Mr  Kotas's  submissions,  and  in  particular  those
    relying on the interview that the father had not  been  shown  to  have
    abdicated responsibility. I have had regard to his submission that  the
    temptation in such a case is to "embellish" the evidence. He  contended
    that the claim that his father has only had about nine visits with  him
    up until 2012 is not credible.

93. Mr Kotas cross examined  the  mother  regarding  the  asserted  limited
    contact that the claimant  has  had  with  his  father.  She  contended
    however that the contents of the father's  affidavit  are  correct  and
    truthful. He has never lived with his father. Moreover, it was she  who
    paid for his education in total. For the whole of the  first  14  years
    when the claimant has been at school, he has contributed no  more  than
    about $1000. Ms Mountford was not challenged on these contentions.

94. I have had regard to the interview at F1 in the  light  of  Mr  Kotas's
    submission that there was nothing to suggest from the  transcript  that
    support from the claimant's father is only historical.

95. The document at F1 does not appear to be a complete transcript  of  the
    interview with the maternal uncle. Under the heading "Introduction"  at
    the outset, it is stated that the interviewer has  been  asked  by  the
    visa section to come and interview Brandon  Ngonidzashe  Maruta,  i.e.,
    the claimant. However,  the  claimant  himself  was  never  interviewed
    despite the fact that they had been asked to interview the claimant.

96. Instead, there is a short transcript of the interview between the  visa
    official and Mr Lewis Mountford, the maternal uncle.

97. It does not appear that the interview was recorded. Nor is  it  evident
    that all of the questions and the answers were fully recorded.

98. The uncle was asked on one occasion whether  the  claimant  visits  his
    father. The reply was "yes, he stays with him  during  some  weekends."
    However, no attempt was made to ask any further questions to  establish
    more clearly which period the uncle was referring to, or the  frequency
    of such weekend contact.

99. In the "comment/summary" at the end of the interview,  the  interviewer
    confirms that the appellant lived at the address at  Harare.  They  did
    not speak to him as he was still at school but spoke  to  the  maternal
    uncle. However, there is no explanation as to why they did not wait  to
    speak to him, or arrange a time where the claimant would be available.

100. In the comment/summary section at  the  end  of  the  interview  it  is
    stated that the claimant has lived  at  that  address  ever  since  his
    mother left in 2003 and that his father has been supporting  him.  That
    is an inaccurate summary of the questions recorded  in  the  transcript
    where the uncle said that he helps support his son "after we press  him
    to do so." However, again, there was no attempt to extract any  further
    detail to establish the occasions when he was "pressed to do  so."  Nor
    is the frequency or the period identified when this occurred.

101. Finally, in the summary it is stated that the father has  jointly  with
    the mother decided the schools that the claimant  attended.  He  stated
    that both parents render financial support  to  him  and  jointly  make
    decisions on his behalf, like on schools. It is stated in  the  summary
    that he spends weekends with the father and seems  to  have  a  cordial
    relationship with his father since he regularly visits him.

102. I have had regard  to  the  evidence  of  Ms  Mountford  regarding  the
    payment of school fees. She has not only asserted that it  is  she  who
    has paid for all his  schooling  over  the  years,  apart  from  a  few
    occasions when the father made some contribution after he was  "pressed
    to do so," but she has produced substantial evidence by  way  of  money
    transfers indicating that it was she who had been responsible  for  his
    support and the payment of his school fees. Moreover, there is a letter
    from the Churchill School dated 2 December 2015 from  the  Deputy  Head
    confirming that the claimant was a student at that school between  2010
    and 2013. His school fees were being paid by his mother.

103. I have had regard to a statement  from  Mr  Lewis  Mountford  dated  17
    February 2015. He states that the claimant's father is  not  supportive
    at all financially or emotionally. It has mainly been  his  mother  who
    provided for his welfare. That is at variance with the summary  of  his
    interview.

104. I have taken into account Mr Kotas's submission  that  the  stakes  are
    high and that the Tribunal should be  aware  of  the  possibility  that
    their statements may have been tailored to assist the claimant.

105. However, having seen and heard  Ms  Mountford  giving  evidence,  I  am
    satisfied that her account is essentially straightforward and credible.
    I accept from Ms Mountford's evidence that  it  was  in  fact  she  who
    attempted over the years to persuade the father to show an interest  in
    his son.

106. Having regard to the  evidence  as  a  whole,  including  the  problems
    identified regarding the  interview  and  its  summary,  I  accept  her
    evidence that it is she who has made important  decisions  relating  to
    her son's schooling. Although this was on occasion discussed  with  the
    father, the actual decision  was  made  by  her.  His  input  into  any
    decision was limited. Nor is there any evidence that the father has  in
    any way participated in the day to day care of the claimant.  There  is
    no  evidence  that  he  has  attended  any  parents'  meetings  at  the
    claimant's school.

107. Nor is there any evidence that he has even discussed or taken  part  in
    any other important decisions, such as those made in  relation  to  the
    claimant's health needs and the like.

108. I find on the evidence and thus accept that the claimant's  father  has
    his own family whom he supports. This appears  to  be  a  fairly  large
    family, the unhelpful estimate being that he  has  between  13  and  31
    children.

109. I have also had regard to her unchallenged evidence that she speaks  to
    the claimant regularly, which she described as daily, or at least three
    times a week. She has also explained why after her leave to remain  was
    granted after she  appealed,  she  was  not  in  a  position  to  apply
    immediately for her son to join her in the UK. She was in  a  financial
    crisis. She had assisted her mother who had cancer up until she died in
    2007. Her mother had  gone  to  South  Africa  for  treatment  and  had
    attended at a private hospital in Stanton City. When she  went  to  the
    funeral she left her own son, Simba, in the UK as she could not  afford
    two tickets at the time.

110. Moreover, she has also supported her sister and has provided  her  with
    funds in order to obtain antiretroviral therapy.

111. As a result, it was only in December  2013  that  the  application  was
    made initially for a visit visa. That was denied. Once she obtained her
    indefinite leave to remain, an application was made for her son to join
    her.

112. Having regard to the evidence as a  whole,  including  the  documentary
    evidence produced in support  of  the  sponsor's  assertions  regarding
    support and decision making up until the present, I find that it is she
    who has made all the important decisions  relating  to  the  claimant's
    welfare over the years. She has given a proper explanation as to why it
    was only relatively recently that the claimant has made his application
    to join his mother in the UK.

113. I have had regard to Mr  Kotas's  submission  that  there  has  been  a
    temptation to embellish the evidence. I have no reason to suppose  that
    the evidence of the sponsor and the uncle relating  to  the  commitment
    and contact between the father and  his  son  is  anything  other  than
    truthful and correct.

114. I am accordingly satisfied that the claimant has shown on  the  balance
    of probabilities that the requirements of paragraph  297(1)(e)  of  the
    Immigration Rules have been satisfied and that accordingly his  mother,
    Ms Sheillett Mountford, has had sole responsibility for his upbringing.
    It is accepted that the other requirements under paragraph 297, and  in
    particular with regard to maintenance and accommodation, are satisfied.



115. I acccordingly dismiss the appeal of the entry clearance office.

    Notice of Decision

    Having set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, I re-make the
    decision confirming the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  allowing  the
    claimant's appeal under the Immigration Rules.

    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 6 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer
