

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: OA/09471/2015
      OA/09473/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On: 10 January 2018                    |On: 12 January 2018                 |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     TZ
                                     SK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


For the appellants:    Ms Logan, Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellants.

 1. I have made an anonymity order because  this  decision  refers  to  the
    circumstances of the second appellant,  a  minor  child  born  in  2009
    ('A2') and her brother, a minor British citizen child  ('B'),  born  in
    2016.   The  first  appellant  is  married  to  the  sponsor,  who  has
    indefinite leave to remain in the UK.  They are the parents of  A2  and
    B.

Background

 2. The appellants are  citizens  of  Pakistan.   They  applied  for  entry
    clearance to join their husband  /  father  on  4  March  2015.   Their
    applications were refused on 25  May  2015.   The  respondent  did  not
    accept that the  relationship  between  the  first  appellant  and  her
    husband was genuine and subsisting or that the  financial  requirements
    were met.


 3. In a decision dated 20 March 2017 the First-tier Tribunal accepted  the
    genuineness of the relationship between the  first  appellant  and  the
    sponsor, and accepted they had two children  together,  the  second  of
    whom was a British citizen as he was  born  after  the  sponsor  became
    settled.  As Mr McVeety conceded, the First-tier Tribunal also  appears
    to have accepted that the sponsor was in  employment  at  all  material
    times and could meet the substantive  financial  requirements  but  was
    unable to meet the 'specified' requirements because a letter  with  all
    the required details on it from his employer was missing.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal considered Article 8 briefly but found that the
    denial of entry clearance would not be disproportionate and  a  further
    application should be made.

 5. In a decision dated 7 September 2017 Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  Alis
    did not consider the grounds of appeal challenging the finding  on  the
    financial  requirements  to  be  arguable  but  granted  permission  in
    relation to Article 8, in particular the failure to fully  address  the
    best interests of both children in light of MA  and  SM  (Zambrano:  EU
    children outside the EU) Iran [2013] UKUT 380.

Error of law

 6. Mr McVeety conceded that the First-tier Tribunal committed  a  material
    error of law in failing to fully address the children's best  interests
    and section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.
    He was clearly correct to make this concession.   Although  the  First-
    tier Tribunal touched upon the children's best  interests  it  did  not
    address the practical reality, particularly for B, the British  citizen
    child.  Both representatives agreed that I could and should remake  the
    Article 8 decision.

Re-making the decision under Article 8

New matter?

 7. At the beginning of the hearing I enquired whether the birth of B  gave
    rise to a 'new matter' such that the respondent was  required  to  give
    her consent for it to be considered.   After  taking  instructions,  Mr
    McVeety confirmed that this was not considered to be a new  matter  but
    that even if it was it was manifestly appropriate for me to address  it
    and in so far as consent was necessary, it was given.

Best interests

 8.  I  begin  the  Article  8  assessment  by   evaluating   the   primary
    consideration of the interests of A2 and B - see  Mundeba  (s.  55  and
    para 297(i)(f) [2013] UKUT 00088 (IAC).


 9. I accept  that  B's  citizenship  is  a  weighty  factor  of  intrinsic
    importance.  The fact that he is also a citizen of  Pakistan  does  not
    diminish his entitlement to the  benefits  of  UK  and  wider  European
    citizenship.  Both parents regard it  to  be  in  the  children's  best
    interests to reside together in the UK with both  their  parents  as  a
    united family.  Whilst the sponsor is able to live in Pakistan, he  has
    been in stable employment in the UK where I accept  the  financial  and
    future prospects for himself and his particular family are much better.
      I bear in mind that both children  have  always  lived  in  Pakistan,
    where they have been cared for  adequately  by  their  mother,  but  am
    satisfied that given B's right to benefit from his British  citizenship
    and the assessment of his parents as to what will be best for  him  and
    the family, it would be in the best interests of the children to reside
    in the UK.


10. On balance, I conclude that the best  interests  of  the  two  children
    would be better served by being with both parents  in  the  UK,  albeit
    they could all reasonably live in Pakistan.


Zambrano principles


11. There is nothing to prevent B from taking advantage of his British  and
    therefore European citizenship in order to live  in  the  UK  with  his
    father.  This means that he is not being deprived of  the  benefits  of
    European citizenship.   His position  can  be  distinguished  from  the
    appellant AP in MA and SM (supra).  AP's  British  citizen  parent  had
    mental health difficulties and it was necessary for the non-EEA citizen
    parent to accompany AP to the UK to prevent a deprivation of the rights
    enjoyed as a result of his status as an EU citizen.  The  circumstances
    in this case bear more similarity to the second appeal in MA and SM for
    the reasons set out at [55] to [56], albeit significantly no  child  of
    this family is currently residing in the UK.

Article 8

12.  The  appellants  have  family  life  with  B  and  the  sponsor.   The
    respondent's decision interferes with family life.   There  are  cogent
    reasons why it would be difficult for family life to  be  exercised  in
    Pakistan.  Such interference would be of sufficient severity to  engage
    Article 8.

Proportionality assessment

13. Both representatives agreed that the real question to be considered  in
    this case, by reference to the circumstances appertaining at  the  date
    of hearing, is whether or not it is disproportionate  to  refuse  entry
    clearance in the following circumstances of the case:

              i) The children's best interests are better served by residing
                 in the UK.


             ii) Whilst it remains possible for  the  family  to  reside  in
                 Pakistan together, to do so  would  be  difficult  for  the
                 sponsor and the family as a  whole  given  the  absence  of
                 decent financial and employment prospects for  the  sponsor
                 and the first appellant there.


            iii) B's parents wish him  to  take  advantage  of  his  British
                 citizenship but do not wish for him to  be  separated  from
                 his mother and sister in order to do so.


             iv) The appellants meet all the requirements of the Immigration
                 Rules save that they were unable to  provide  the  relevant
                 'specified'  financial  evidence,  albeit   they   can   be
                 maintained adequately without recourse to public funds.

14. Proportionality is the "public interest question" within the meaning of
    Part 5A of the 2002 Act. By section 117A(2) thereof  I  am  obliged  to
    have regard to the considerations listed in section 117B.   I  consider
    that section 117B applies to this appeal in the following way.


15. First, the public interest in the maintenance of effective  immigration
    controls is engaged.  The appellants  have  been  unable  to  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules in order to enter  as  a  spouse.
    She meets the substantive financial  requirements  but  was  unable  to
    provide the  relevant  specified  evidence.   Such  a  failure  remains
    important because the specified evidence  aspects  of  the  immigration
    rules implement public policy considerations and seek  to  ensure  that
    applications are considered fairly.


16. Second, there was little evidence before me regarding  the  appellants'
    English ability but I note that this was not  raised  as  an  issue  of
    concern when entry clearance was refused.


17. Third, the economic interest is unlikely to  be  engaged  in  substance
    because the sponsor has been  and  continues  to  be  employed  at  all
    material times and the financial requirements are met in substance.


18. In my judgment, when all of the above matters  are  considered  in  the
    round, it is disproportionate to refuse to grant the  appellants  entry
    clearance.  Mr McVeety was unable to point to any aspect of the  public
    interest that strongly pointed against the appellants.  The only public
    interest he could identify was economic but he accepted that in reality
    the family would be financially independent.  He  acknowledged  that  a
    further application in order to comply with the specified  requirements
    would have the consequence of further delays in a case where there  has
    already been delay, the original application having  been  made  nearly
    three years ago.


19. Having applied the facts to section 117B of the  2002  Act  and  having
    considered the general principles applicable in a case  raising  family
    life  under  Article  8  of  the  ECHR  where  one  child  has  British
    citizenship but remains outside the UK, I  find  that  the  refusal  of
    entry  clearance  in  the  particular  circumstances  of   this   case,
    constitutes a disproportionate breach of Article 8.

Decision

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and is
    set aside.


21. I remake the decision by allowing the appellants'  appeal  pursuant  to
    Article 8 of the ECHR.




Signed: Ms Melanie Plimmer                             Dated: 11 January
2018

Judge of the Upper Tribunal
