
[pic]
IAC-AH-SC-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/09454/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9th September 2015                |On 23rd September 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                               Nawal Al Abdin
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer - abu dhabi
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Shuhaib Abdulla, the Sponsor


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) appeals against a decision  of  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal J S Law promulgated on 11th February 2015.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and I will refer to her as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant is a female Iraqi  citizen  born  22nd  August  1950,  who
    currently lives in Dubai.  On 10th June  2014  she  applied  for  entry
    clearance to the United Kingdom as an adult  dependent  relative.   The
    Claimant indicated that she wished to live with  her  daughter  Khadija
    Sami who is married to the Sponsor.  The Claimant  indicated  that  she
    would be maintained and accommodated by the Sponsor  and  her  daughter
    and she wished to live with them and their three children.

 4. The Claimant indicated that she has two daughters living in the  United
    Kingdom, and a total of five grandchildren.  The Claimant was a teacher
    in Dubai but is now retired, and lives alone.  She separated  from  her
    husband in 1995 according to her daughter's witness statement.

 5. The application was refused on 23rd July 2014.  Initially the  ECO  did
    not accept the claimed relationship between the Claimant and her family
    in the UK, but this was conceded when  the  application  was  reviewed.
    The main reason for refusal was that the Claimant did not  satisfy  the
    requirements of E-ECDR.2.4 of Appendix FM which is set out below;

         "The applicant or, if the  applicant  and  their  partner  are  the
         sponsor's parents or grandparents, the applicant's partner, must as
         a result of age, illness or disability require  long-term  personal
         care to perform everyday tasks."

 6. The ECO contended that no evidence had been submitted  to  prove  this,
    and therefore the application must be refused.

 7.  The  Claimant  appealed  maintaining  that  the  refusal  was  not  in
    accordance with the Immigration Rules, not in accordance with the  law,
    and incompatible with Article 8 of  the  1950  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights (the 1950 Convention), as the Claimant is the mother of  a
    British citizen.

 8. The application was reviewed by an Entry Clearance Manager who conceded
    the claimed relationship, but maintained the decision to refuse, on the
    basis that the Claimant  had  not  submitted  evidence  to  satisfy  E-
    ECDR.2.4.

 9. In relation to Article 8  it  was  contended  that  if  there  was  any
    interference with private or family life, this was  justified  for  the
    purpose  of  maintaining  effective  immigration   control,   and   was
    proportionate and appropriate.

10. The appeal was heard by Judge Law (the judge) on 30th January 2015  and
    allowed under the Immigration Rules, and under Article 8  of  the  1950
    Convention.

11. The ECO applied for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  It was
    contended that the judge had failed to give reasons or adequate reasons
    for findings on the material matters.

12. It was submitted that the judge had failed to provide adequate  reasons
    for concluding that the requirements of Appendix FM were satisfied.  It
    was submitted that the judge  had  speculated  as  to  the  Appellant's
    health, and the required medical evidence had not been provided.

13. In relation to Article 8, it was submitted that the judge  had  had  no
    regard to section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2002 (the 2002 Act) and that  the  Article  8  assessment  was  legally
    flawed.  It was submitted that the Claimant  could  remain  in  contact
    with  her  family  in  the  United  Kingdom  via  modern   methods   of
    communication, and visits which had taken place in the past.

14. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal J M Lewis who found it arguable that the judge  did  not  have
    regard to the provisions of Appendix FM and  proceeded  directly  to  a
    freestanding  Article  8  proportionality  assessment,  and   that   in
    considering Article 8 there was a failure to  have  regard  to  section
    117B of the 2002 Act.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

Error of Law

15. The Sponsor attended the hearing as the Claimant's  representative.   I
    explained to him the procedure that would be adopted, and ensured  that
    he had seen the application for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and the grant of permission.

16. The Sponsor asked if the Tribunal had received further medical evidence
    from Prime Medical Centre dated 7th July 2015.  I confirmed  that  this
    had been received but explained  that  this  was  not  relevant  to  my
    consideration as to whether the First-tier Tribunal had erred  in  law,
    as this evidence had not been before the First-tier Tribunal.

17. I heard submissions  from  Mr  McVeety  who  relied  upon  the  grounds
    contained within the application for permission to appeal.  The medical
    evidence which had been before the  First-tier  Tribunal  were  letters
    from Aster Medical Centre in Dubai dated 23rd and  26th  January  2015.
    It was submitted that these letters did not prove that  E-ECDR.2.4  was
    satisfied.

18. In relation to Article 8 Mr McVeety observed that  the  assessment  was
    very brief, and no account was taken of the considerations set  out  in
    section 117B of the 2002 Act.  I was asked to set aside the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal.

19. I then heard from Mr Abdullah.  He explained that he is a pharmacist by
    profession, and he could  interpret  the  letters  from  Aster  Medical
    Centre as meaning that the Claimant could not perform  everyday  tasks.
    He accepted that the letters did not specifically say this.

20. Mr Abdullah explained that he and his family visited  the  Claimant  in
    Dubai twice a year, and that the Claimant has visited them a couple  of
    times and that she has a very good relationship with her grandchildren.
     The Sponsor confirmed that the  Claimant  has  two  daughters  in  the
    United Kingdom and five grandchildren.

21. Having considered the submissions I decided that the judge had erred in
    law in his consideration of E-ECDR.2.4.  There is  a  requirement  that
    specified medical evidence is provided  to  prove  that  E-ECDR.2.4  is
    satisfied and the evidence required is  set  out  in  paragraph  34  of
    Appendix FM-SE which I set out below;

         "34. Evidence that, as a result of age, illness or disability,  the
             applicant requires long-term personal  care  should  take  the
             form of:

             (a)   Independent  medical  evidence  that   the   applicant's
                  physical  or  mental  condition  means  that  they  cannot
                  perform everyday tasks; and

             (b)  This must be from a doctor or other health professional."

22. The letters from Aster Medical Centre dated 23rd and 26th January  2015
    were signed by a doctor.  The letters confirm  that  the  Claimant  has
    suffered with bronchial asthma and chest infections, and confirmed that
    the Claimant had told the doctor that she was taken to hospital  in  an
    ambulance twice with breathing difficulties.   The  Claimant  had  also
    told the doctor that most of the time she needs help to administer  her
    medication and she has disturbed sleep and has gained weight because of
    a lack of mobility.  She explained to the doctor  that  she  felt  very
    depressed  and  lonely  and  wished  to  be   with   her   family   and
    grandchildren.

23. The judge  erred  by  not  adequately  analysing  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 34 of Appendix FM-SE, and erred in allowing the appeal  under
    the provisions of Appendix FM, when the medical evidence produced,  did
    not confirm that the  Claimant  required  long-term  personal  care  to
    perform everyday tasks.  Because the specified medical evidence had not
    been submitted, the appeal should have been dismissed,  and  the  judge
    materially erred in allowing the appeal in the absence of the  required
    medical evidence.

24. I conclude that the Article 8 assessment was  inadequate  and  did  not
    follow a structured approach.  The judge did not consider  whether  the
    Claimant had proved that she had a private or family life which engaged
    Article 8.  Having assumed  that  Article  8  was  engaged,  there  was
    thereafter no consideration of the factors set out in section  117B  of
    the 2002 Act.   I  therefore  have  to  conclude  that  the  Article  8
    assessment was legally flawed and must be set aside.

25. Having set aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  I  was
    requested by the Sponsor to  remake  the  decision  without  a  further
    adjournment.  Mr McVeety had no objection to  that  course  of  action,
    which seemed to me to be appropriate.

Re-Making the Decision

26. I indicated that I would take into account all the  documentation  that
    had been before the First-tier  Tribunal.   In  addition  I  took  into
    account the additional medical  evidence  from  Prime  Medical  Centre,
    dated 7th July 2015, which had not been before the First-tier Tribunal.
     The evidence before the First-tier Tribunal on behalf of the  Claimant
    was two bundles of documents, comprising 73 pages in total.

27. The Sponsor indicated that no further evidence  would  be  called,  but
    reliance was placed upon the evidence that was  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  I therefore heard further submissions to assist  me  in  re-
    making the decision.

28. Mr McVeety submitted that the medical evidence that had been  submitted
    still did not satisfy the requirements of E-ECDR.2.4 and therefore  the
    appeal must be dismissed in relation to the Immigration Rules.

29. In relation to Article 8 I was asked to find that there was no  private
    or family life that engaged Article 8.  Mr McVeety pointed out that the
    Claimant's  daughters  in  the   United   Kingdom   are   adults,   and
    relationships between adult family members did  not  amount  to  family
    life that engaged Article 8, unless something  more  existed  than  the
    normal emotional ties.

30. In the alternative if I found that family life did exist which  engaged
    Article 8, I was asked to  find  that  the  decision  to  refuse  entry
    clearance did not interfere with this family life, as the Claimant  had
    not lived with her family in the United Kingdom for many years.

31. In relation to section 117B, Mr McVeety pointed out that there  was  no
    evidence that the Appellant could speak English and this  was  still  a
    requirement, as she was not yet 65 years of age.  I was asked  to  find
    nothing exceptional in this case, and to conclude that refusal of entry
    clearance did not breach Article 8.

32. I then heard from the Sponsor.  I was asked to  note  the  letter  from
    Aster Medical  Centre  dated  23rd  January  2015  indicated  that  the
    Claimant needed help to  administer  her  medication  and  the  Sponsor
    submitted that this satisfied  the  requirements  of  E-ECDR.2.4.   The
    letter from Prime Medical Centre stated that the Claimant suffered from
    chronic hypothyroidism which the Sponsor explained made  her  lethargic
    and tired, and that she had a severe iron deficiency.

33. The Sponsor explained that the Claimant had  been  a  teacher  all  her
    working life, but as she was no longer working she would not be able to
    continue to reside  in  Dubai.   The  Sponsor  stated  that  his  three
    children, aged 11, 9 and 4 years of age, have a very good  relationship
    with the Claimant and are dependent upon her.  The  Sponsor  said  that
    the Claimant speaks English, and asked that I take into account that it
    was not contended that he could not  adequately  support  the  Claimant
    financially.

34. The Sponsor confirmed that he and his family visited Dubai although his
    wife and children spent more time there than he  did,  because  of  his
    business commitments.

35. I was asked to allow the appeal both with reference to Appendix  FM  of
    the Immigration Rules, and Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.

36. At the conclusion of submissions I reserved my decision.



My Conclusions and Reasons

37. I have taken into account all the evidence both  oral  and  documentary
    that has been placed before me, and taken into account the  submissions
    made by both representatives.

38. Because this is an appeal against refusal of  entry  clearance,  I  may
    only consider the circumstances appertaining at the  date  of  refusal,
    which was 23rd July 2014.  I can however  take  into  account  evidence
    arising  after  the  date  of  refusal,  if  it  is  relevant  to   the
    circumstances appertaining at the date of refusal.

39. I firstly consider E-ECDR.2.4 of Appendix FM.  The burden of  proof  is
    on the Claimant, and the standard is a balance of probabilities.

40. I have taken into account the two letters  from  Aster  Medical  Centre
    dated 23rd and 26th January 2015, and the  letter  from  Prime  Medical
    Centre dated 7th July 2015.  I find that the letter from Prime  Medical
    Centre is not relevant, as it  refers  to  the  Claimant  visiting  the
    medical centre  in  May  2015  complaining  of  severe  dizziness  with
    repeated episodes of syncope with severe palpitations.  This  does  not
    relate to the date of refusal in July 2014.

41. In any event, taking all three of the letters into account, I am afraid
    that the medical evidence does not amount to medical evidence that  the
    Claimant's physical or mental condition means that she  cannot  perform
    everyday tasks, and the evidence does not prove that  as  a  result  of
    age, illness or disability, the Claimant  requires  long-term  personal
    care.  The evidence before the Tribunal indicates that the Claimant has
    been living alone, without a carer, and although she has had admissions
    into the medical centre, the evidence does not prove  that  she  cannot
    perform everyday tasks.

42. Therefore the appeal under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules must be
    dismissed.

43. I am asked to consider Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules and find
    that it is appropriate to do so.  In my view the correct approach is to
    adopt the principles set out in Razgar [2004] UKHL  27  which  involves
    answering the following questions;

         "(1) Will the proposed removal  be  an  interference  by  a  public
             authority with  the  exercise  of  the  applicant's  right  to
             respect for his private or (as the case may be) family life?

         (2)  If so,  will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such
             gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?

         (3)  If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

         (4)  If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic  society
             in the interests of national security, public  safety  or  the
             economic well-being of the  country,  for  the  prevention  of
             disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals,  or
             for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others?

         (5)  If so, is such interference proportionate  to  the  legitimate
             public end sought to be achieved?"

44. Although the guidelines set out above relate to a removal  decision,  I
    am satisfied that it is appropriate to apply them when  considering  an
    entry clearance application.  The first issue to be decided is  whether
    the Claimant has established a private  or  family  life  that  engages
    Article 8.  I do not find that there is any satisfactory evidence  that
    she has a private life that engages Article 8.  The private  life  that
    she has established is in Dubai.  She has previously  visited  the  UK,
    but I do not find that she has  established  a  private  life  in  this
    country.

45. In relation to her family life, the general principle when  considering
    family life involving adult relatives was set out in  paragraph  25  of
    Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31 in which it was decided that a family  life
    is not established between an adult child and his surviving  parent  or
    other siblings unless something more exists than normal emotional ties.



46. The Upper  Tribunal  in  Ghising  [2012]  UKUT  00160  (IAC)  found  in
    paragraph 56 that the judgments in Kugathas had  been  interpreted  too
    restrictively in the past  and  ought  to  be  read  in  the  light  of
    subsequent  decisions  of  the  domestic  and  Strasbourg  Courts.   At
    paragraph 62 it was found that there should be  no  blanket  rule  with
    regard to adult children when considering family life,  and  each  case
    should be analysed on its own facts to decide  whether  or  nor  family
    life exists within the meaning of Article 8(1).

47. The Court of Appeal in Gurung [2013] EWCA Civ 8 found in paragraph  50,
    in summary, that the critical issue in considering family life  between
    adult relatives was whether there was  sufficient  dependence,  and  in
    particular sufficient emotional dependence by the Appellants  on  their
    parents to justify the conclusion that they enjoyed family  life.   The
    usual emotional  bonds  between  parents  and  adult  children  may  be
    present, but to engage Article 8 on a family life basis there must be a
    degree of emotional dependence.

48. In this case I find that the Claimant and her daughter  (the  sponsor's
    wife, as I did not receive evidence from the Claimant's other  daughter
    in the United  Kingdom)  do  have  an  emotional  bond  as  mother  and
    daughter.  However I do not find that this amounts to family life  what
    would engage  Article  8.   The  Claimant's  daughter  in  her  witness
    statement confirmed that she has lived  in  the  United  Kingdom  since
    2003, and although there have been visits by the Claimant  to  the  UK,
    and by the Sponsor and his family to Dubai, the family have  not  lived
    together as a unit.

49. I do take into account that the Claimant has five grandchildren who are
    all minors.  I have taken into account the Sponsor's evidence that  his
    children have a good relationship with the Claimant.  I have considered
    the best interests of those children as a primary  consideration.   The
    children have never lived with the Claimant.  I do not  find  that  the
    Claimant has established family life with her grandchildren.  The  best
    interests of the children would be for the status quo to be maintained,
    in that they continue to live with their parents and they are  able  to
    visit their grandmother during school holidays.

50. I therefore conclude as I have not found that Article 8 is  engaged  in
    relation to private or family life, that it is not necessary to  go  on
    and consider the third, fourth and fifth questions set out in Razgar.

51. However, if I am wrong in finding that family life is  not  engaged,  I
    will go on in the alternative to consider those questions.

52. If there is interference with the Claimant's family life I find that it
    is in accordance with the law.  This is  because  the  Claimant  cannot
    satisfy the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules  in  order  to  be
    granted entry clearance.

53. I find that the proposed interference  is  necessary  in  a  democratic
    society in the interests of maintaining effective  immigration  control
    which is necessary to protect the economic well-being of the country.

54. I then have to consider whether the interference  is  proportionate  to
    the legitimate  public  end  sought  to  be  achieved.   This  involves
    considering section 117B of the 2002 Act.  Sub-section (1) states  that
    the maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in  the  public
    interest.  Sub-section (2) states that it is  in  the  public  interest
    that persons who seek to enter the United Kingdom  are  able  to  speak
    English.  The Claimant has not produced satisfactory  evidence  of  her
    ability to speak English.

55. Sub-section (3) states that it is in the public interest  that  persons
    seeking to enter this country are financially independent.  It has been
    accepted on behalf of the ECO, that the Claimant  would  be  adequately
    maintained by the Sponsor and his family, but the   Tribunal  confirmed
    in AM Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC)  that  a  Claimant  can  obtain  no
    positive right to a grant of leave to enter whatever  the  strength  of
    their financial resources.

56. The Court of Appeal in  SS  (Congo)  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387  stated  in
    paragraph 51;

         "51. In our judgment, the approach of Article 8 in the light of the
             rules in Appendix FM-SE should be the same as  in  respect  of
             the substantive LTE and LTR rules in Appendix  FM.   In  other
             words, the same  general  position  applies,  that  compelling
             circumstances would have to apply to justify a grant of LTE or
             LTR where the evidence rules are not complied with."

57. In this case I appreciate that the  Claimant  wishes  to  live  in  the
    United Kingdom, and that the Sponsor and his family wish  her  to  live
    with them.  However I have to place very substantial  weight  upon  the
    fact that the requirements of the Immigration Rules cannot be  complied
    with.  In effect, I am being asked to  disregard  the  requirements  of
    those rules and to allow this appeal under Article 8 outside the rules.
     I do not find that to be appropriate.  I do not  find  there  are  any
    compelling circumstances to allow this appeal outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.  It is open to the Claimant to make a fresh application  if  she
    believes that medical evidence is available that would confirm that she
    can satisfy the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  In my view, the
    weight that  must  be  attached  to  the  need  to  maintain  effective
    immigration control outweighs the weight to be attached to  the  wishes
    of the Claimant to enter the United Kingdom  notwithstanding  that  she
    cannot satisfy the rules.  The refusal  of  entry  clearance  does  not
    breach Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and  was
set aside.

I substitute a fresh decision.

The Claimant's appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules.

The Claimant's appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made no anonymity  direction.   There  has  been  no
request for anonymity and the Upper Tribunal makes no anonymity order.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall    15th September 2015



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall    15th September 2015
