
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: oa/09092/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 11th December 2014                     |On 2nd January 2015              |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRENCH


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
          (acting on behalf of entry clearance officer - islamabad)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                         MUHAMMAD NADEEM ASLAM AWAN
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Azmi instructed by Messrs Ravi Dilan & Hayer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Muhammad Nadeem Aslam Awan is a citizen of Pakistan, born on the 22 May
    1978.  In the interests of clarity and continuity I will  refer  to  Mr
    Awan as the Appellant, the title by which he was known before the First-
    tier Tribunal. He went through a ceremony of marriage with the Sponsor,
    Maria Ivone Do Rosario Augusto, a Portuguese national, in  Pakistan  on
    12th November 2012.  He then applied to  the  ECO  for  an  EEA  family
    permit under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006
    as amended.  The application was refused as the ECO was  not  satisfied
    that the Sponsor was divorced from her first husband and therefore able
    to  marry.   A  Portuguese  document  had   been   produced   but   was
    untranslated.  It was not accepted that the marriage was valid.

 2.  The  Appellant  appealed  against  that  decision   under   the   2006
    Regulations.  The appeal was listed to be heard on 29th  November  2013
    at the Nottingham Magistrates Court before Judge P  J  M  Hollingworth.
    The history of the appeal is regrettably convoluted after  that  point.
    I will go into the circumstances in more detail below.  Suffice  it  to
    say that Counsel then instructed  appears  to  have  indicated  at  the
    hearing that as the original divorce certificate was not available  the
    Sponsor wished to withdraw the appeal  and  the  judge  seems  to  have
    accepted that request on  certain  terms.   Subsequently  the  Tribunal
    issued a standard notice that the appeal had been withdrawn.  Following
    a request from a different  representative,  by  then  acting  for  the
    Appellant, in which it was stated that there had been no  intention  to
    withdraw the appeal and there had been a  misunderstanding,  Designated
    Judge Coates on 15th January 2014 gave instructions for the hearing  to
    be reinstated.

 3.  The  appeal  was  then  heard  before  Judge  Gurung-Thapa,  again  at
    Nottingham Magistrates Court, on  5th  February  2014.   The  issue  of
    jurisdiction was raised by the Presenting Officer on that occasion  but
    Judge Gurung-Thapa, having recited the history, proceeded to  hear  the
    appeal, which was allowed.

 4. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal contending that
    the appeal had been withdrawn at the hearing in November of 2013. Judge
    Gurung-Thapa had therefore been without jurisdiction to  determine  the
    appeal and had failed to give reasons as to why  she  thought  she  had
    jurisdiction.  Secondly it was said that the judge  failed  to  resolve
    conflicts of fact with regard to the validity  of  the  marriage.   The
    original divorce document had never been produced  and  the  judge  had
    been in error in considering that the  authenticity  that  the  divorce
    certificate was not in issue.   Permission  was  initially  refused  by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Grant-Hutchison  on  6th  March  2014.
    The application was then renewed to the Upper Tribunal and was  granted
    by Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein on 9th April 2014.  He felt that  the
    contention that the Tribunal had  lacked  jurisdiction  following  oral
    withdrawal had arguable merit and  was  persuaded  that  the  remaining
    grounds could also be argued.

 5. By the time of the hearing before  me  the  solicitors  who  have  been
    acting at the time of the hearing on  29th  November  2013  were  again
    acting for the Appellant but different Counsel appeared,  Mr  Azmi  not
    having represented the Appellant at the initial hearing.

 6. Mr Mills for the Secretary of State handed in a copy  of  the  relevant
    section of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)  Rules  2005
    (Procedure Rule 17)  and  by  way  of  contrast  also  a  copy  of  the
    equivalent Rule in the Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules.  He also  handed
    in a copy of Section 104 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002.  He referred to a minute from the Presenting Officer who had been
    representing the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  at  the  hearing  on  29th
    November 2013.  The Tribunal had issued notices on 18th  December  2013
    confirming that the appeal had been withdrawn.  No  documents  appeared
    to have been received prior to the notice of withdrawal.  The  document
    dated 29th November 2013 written on behalf of the Sponsor only appeared
    to have been sent on 23rd December and  it  seemed  that  that  was  in
    response to the notice of withdrawal.  Under Section 104  of  the  2002
    Act the appeal had been withdrawn.

 7. Mr Mills submitted that the subsequent letter and the decision  of  the
    Designated Judge could not reinstate the appeal.   First-tier  Tribunal
    Procedure  Rule  17  contained  no  power  to  reinstate,  unlike   the
    equivalent Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules  which  did.   As  Designated
    Judge Coates had no power to reinstate the  appeal  Judge  Gurung-Thapa
    had no jurisdiction to hear it, he said.  The argument had been put  by
    the Presenting Officer at the hearing before her and she  had  made  no
    reasoned finding as to why she had jurisdiction.  If I was not with him
    on that basis the other ground was that  the  judge  appeared  to  have
    considered  there  was  no  subsisting  issue  regarding  the   divorce
    certificate and she had not dealt with that point properly.  There  was
    a challenge to the authenticity of this certificate and the  judge  did
    not give an adequate explanation as to why she considered the  marriage
    to be valid.

 8. In response Mr Azmi referred expressly to the Presenting Officer's note
    of the hearing of 29th November 2013.  His reading  of  that  note,  he
    said,  was  that  Judge  Hollingworth  had  indicated  that  he  needed
    something directly from the Appellant before he would regard the appeal
    as withdrawn.  That confirmation was not  received  and  therefore  the
    appeal  was  not  validly  withdrawn.   The  subsequent  notices   were
    therefore in error  and  the  Designated  Judge  had  been  correct  in
    reinstating the appeal.  His action  at  that  point  could  have  been
    challenged by the Secretary of State by judicial review but  no  action
    was taken.

 9. With regard to the capacity of the Sponsor and Appellant  to  marry  he
    relied  on  his  skeleton  argument.   Only  a  copy  of  the   divorce
    certificate from Mozambique had been provided to  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer but a translation had been  provided  to  the  Entry  Clearance
    Manager.  The ECM did not take  issue  with  the  authenticity  of  the
    documents, only that the original divorce certificate was not provided.
    Judge Gurung-Thapa had noted that the  Sponsor  had  with  her  at  the
    hearing the divorce certificate from Portugal along with a  translation
    and found on the balance of probabilities that the Sponsor had obtained
    a divorce issued in Mozambique and therefore had the capacity to marry.
     She did so having considered the copy certificate and translation from
    Mozambique, the certificate and translation from Portugal and the  oral
    evidence of the Sponsor.  She gave sufficient reasons for her  finding.
    The divorce certificate from Portugal was from  a  competent  authority
    within the European Union.  I asked whether there were any  authorities
    known to the representatives on the issue of validity of withdrawal and
    was told that none had come to light.  I reserved my decision  which  I
    now give.

10. Both representatives placed reliance upon the note from the  Presenting
    Officer who was representing the ECO at the hearing  on  29th  November
    2013.  It appears from that note that after the judge had  queried  the
    divorce document and Counsel  for  the  Appellant  had  spoken  to  the
    Sponsor the judge said that

         "he will treat the matter as withdrawn  for  now.   But  before  it
         could be official a letter is needed from the Appellant  or  acting
         solicitors confirming instructions from the Appellant to  withdraw.
         Mr Hussain was  of  the  view  that  from  his  experience  once  a
         representative indicated to the Tribunal as to a withdrawal  that's
         sufficient.  The judge directed that the representative  has  until
         3.12.13 to send in  a  confirmation  to  the  Tribunal  as  to  the
         withdrawal.  The  appeal  will  be  treated  as  withdrawn  on  3rd
         December 2013 - but Mr Hussain's withdrawal is noted on record  for
         the file."

    That is of course the Presenting Officer's note and  not  any  form  of
    official  record.   The  judge's  Record  of  Proceedings,  written  in
    manuscript, is on the Tribunal file.  It is brief.   It  states  "Ravi,
    Dilan & Hayer act as solicitors for Appellant.   Appeal  is  withdrawn.
    Confirmation required from Appellant by December  3rd  at  4  p.m.   On
    receipt of this appropriate notices  to  be  issued."   The  Record  of
    Proceedings is then signed.  On the fly leaf  of  the  file  the  judge
    endorsed "Appeal withdrawn confirmation from Appellant to  be  provided
    by 4 p.m. 3.12.13."

11. Mr Mills is quite right that there is no record of any communication on
    the file from or on behalf of the Appellant prior to 3rd December 2013.
     Subsequently letters were received which were dated 29th November 2013
    from a different representative but which  were  not  received  by  the
    Tribunal until substantially later. In those it was stated  that  there
    had been a  misunderstanding  and  that  the  Appellant  had  not  been
    intending to withdraw the appeal.  It was following  receipt  of  these
    communications that Designated Judge Coates gave instructions  for  the
    hearing to be reinstated.  The scenario is wholly unsatisfactory, given
    in particular uncertainties as to whether documentation may or may  not
    be received  by  the  appropriate  department  of  the  Tribunal  by  a
    particular date.  Be that as it may that is what occurred.

12. Having considered the matter and of course the submissions made to me I
    have  reached  the  conclusion  that  Judge   Gurung-Thapa   did   have
    jurisdiction to hear the appeal before her.   A  fair  reading  of  the
    Record of Proceedings from Judge Hollingworth, read together  with  the
    note from the Presenting Officer, indicates  that  the  judge  was  not
    wholly satisfied that the appeal was actually being  withdrawn  by  the
    Appellant.  Had he been so  satisfied  then  there  was  absolutely  no
    reason why he would  have  required  a  confirmatory  letter  from  the
    Appellant or the solicitors acting on his behalf.   The  withdrawal  at
    that stage was not a final act but more in the nature of an indication.
     The judge's note is clear that notices of withdrawal were only  to  be
    issued once the letter of confirmation was received from the  Appellant
    or his solicitors.  This again is consistent with  the  note  from  the
    Presenting Officer.  The note to the administrative staff left upon the
    fly leaf of the  file  was  regrettably  not  sufficiently  clear  that
    notices of withdrawal under Procedure Rules 17  were  not  to  be  sent
    unless there was confirmation in writing  from  the  Appellant  or  his
    solicitors.

13. Perhaps understandably the administrative staff  then  went  ahead  and
    issued the notices under Procedure Rules 17.  That in itself  does  not
    indicate that the appeal had in fact been withdrawn.  A  relevant  case
    on the matter is AP (Withdrawals - nullity assessment) Pakistan  [2007]
    UKAIT 00022, which makes it clear that the validity of a withdrawal may
    be challenged.  Paragraph 57  of  that  determination  provides  useful
    guidelines.  Among examples given of when a  purported  withdrawal  may
    lack validity are:

         "(iii)   a withdrawal has been communicated to the  Tribunal  by  a
             representative without there  being  clear  understanding,  or
             meeting  of  the  minds,  between  the   Appellant   and   the
             representative; or

         (iv) a withdrawal has  been  communicated  to  the  Tribunal  by  a
             representative on the instructions  of  a  Sponsor,  (who  has
             completed Section 5 of  the  appeal  form),  rather  than  the
             actual instructions of the Appellant."

14. To my mind it is clear that the appeal was not  in  reality  withdrawn.
    Any instructions for withdrawal were  given  by  the  Sponsor  not  the
    Appellant.  The purported  withdrawal  was  treated  by  the  judge  as
    provisional. He was clearly not satisfied that it was  given  with  the
    consent of the Appellant. In other words it was  not  unequivocal.  The
    condition set by the  judge,  that  there  should  be  confirmation  in
    writing received by the Tribunal no later than 4 p.m. on  3rd  December
    2013, had not been met.  In  those  circumstances  I  accept  that  the
    purported withdrawal was a nullity.  The matter was  so  apparent  that
    Designated Judge Coates did not need to order a hearing before deciding
    that the hearing should be 'reinstated', as was done. In relisting  the
    appeal Designated Judge Coates  was  exercising  the  power  to  remedy
    administrative errors comprised in the former Procedure Rules 60(1). He
    did not expressly refer to that Rule but he did not need to do so.

15. In all those circumstances I find that the appeal  was  validly  before
    Judge Gurung-Thapa and she did not need to explain in  any  detail  the
    basis of her jurisdiction beyond referring to the background, which she
    did.

16. The other basis on which the decision was challenged was  the  evidence
    of the Sponsor's divorce, which goes to the validity of  the  marriage.
    Judge Gurung-Thapa dealt with this matter at paragraphs 19 to 22 of her
    determination.  As Mr Azmi pointed out the judge had the benefit of the
    documents which were before her  but  most  particularly  of  the  oral
    evidence of the Sponsor, which she accepted.  Although she  noted  that
    the authenticity or otherwise of the divorce certificate had  not  been
    questioned by the Respondent she herself had heard evidence of how  the
    divorce had been obtained and she found the Sponsor to be credible  and
    a truthful witness.  On the  basis  of  the  evidence  before  her  she
    accepted that the Sponsor had divorced her first  husband  in  the  way
    described and had  been  issued  with  a  divorce  certificate  by  the
    appropriate registry in Mozambique.  She gave  sufficient  reasons  for
    her finding and no material error on a point of law in her approach  is
    apparent.

17. Accordingly this appeal by the Secretary of State on behalf of the  ECO
    falls to be dismissed.

18. There was no request for anonymity and I could see no  basis  on  which
    anonymity was required.





Decision

19. The making of the original decision by the First-tier Tribunal did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law.   The  decision  that
    the appeal be allowed therefore stands.






Signed

Deputy           Upper           Tribunal            Judge            French
  Dated 31 December 2014




