
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/09795/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10 June 2014                               |On 1 July 2014               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                    THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NAIROBI

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    S H H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr G Hodgetts, instructed by South West Law

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269)  I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 2. In this case, the Entry Clearance Officer appeals  a  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge M J Waygood) allowing SHH's appeal against a
    refusal to grant her entry clearance under Art 8 of the ECHR.

 3. For convenience, I will hereafter refer to the parties as they appeared
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

Background

 4. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia who was born on 15 July 2008.   I
    will refer to her as "SHH".  Her grandmother ("FG") is the sponsor  who
    was granted leave on humanitarian  protection  grounds  on  3  December
    2010.  She is also a citizen of Somalia.

 5. The sponsor lived in Somalia until she came to the UK  on  20  November
    2009.  Her (then) husband and FG had a daughter ("K") who was  born  in
    Somalia on 1 December 1994.  In 1998, the sponsor's (then) husband  was
    killed.  From about 2001, the sponsor and K  were  held  captive  on  a
    militia farm in Somalia.  In 2005, the sponsor remarried.  Her  husband
    ("IBA") also lived on the  militia  farm.   Whilst  on  the  farm,  the
    sponsor's daughter (K) was raped and, as a result, on 15 July 2008  the
    appellant (SHH) was born.  The sponsor is her grandmother.   In  August
    2008, the family escaped captivity and the sponsor fled  Somalia.   The
    others did not come to the UK.   The  sponsor  lost  contact  with  her
    husband and daughter.  Eventually, the sponsor arrived in  Italy  where
    she claimed  asylum  under  a  false  name.   Thereafter,  the  sponsor
    travelled to the UK, arriving on 20 November 2009.    Whilst in the UK,
    as a result of a 'one-night stand' with her cousin, the sponsor  became
    pregnant and gave birth to a child.  On 3 December  2010,  the  sponsor
    was granted humanitarian protection until December 2015.

 6. In May 2011, the sponsor regained contact  with  her  husband  and  her
    daughter in Somalia.  In May 2011, the sponsor's husband, her  daughter
    and her granddaughter, the appellant (SHH) went to Nairobi.  On 14 July
    2011, the sponsor's husband, her daughter and the appellant applied for
    entry clearance to join the sponsor in the UK.  On 19  September  2011,
    the sponsor's husband was refused  entry  clearance.   On  17  November
    2011, the sponsor's daughter was  granted  entry  clearance  under  the
    family reunion provision in para 352FA of the Immigration Rules (HC 395
    as amended) as  the  minor  child  of  a  person  granted  humanitarian
    protection.  The appellant (SHH)  was  refused  entry  clearance.   The
    sponsor's husband and the appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal
    but the decisions were withdrawn on the day of the hearing  on  29  May
    2012.

 7. On 3 April 2013, the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  issued  new  decisions
    refusing entry clearance to the sponsor's husband  and  the  appellant.
    The ECO was not satisfied that they met the requirements of para  352FA
    and para 319X respectively.





The Appeal

 8. Both the sponsor's husband and the appellant appealed to the First-tier
    Tribunal.  The appeal was heard by Judge M  J  Waygood  on  24  January
    2014.  He found that the sponsor's husband met the requirements of  the
    family reunion rule in para 352FA and allowed his  appeal.   The  judge
    was satisfied that the sponsor was validly married to her husband; that
    the marriage had taken place pre-flight; and  that  their  relationship
    was a genuine one and that they intended to live  permanently  together
    as husband and wife.  I need say no more about that decision as the ECO
    has not sought to appeal it to the Upper Tribunal.

 9. In relation to the  appellant  (SHH),  it  was  accepted  before  Judge
    Waygood that she could not meet  the  requirements  of  para  319X,  in
    particular she  could  not  show  that  she  would  be  maintained  and
    accommodated without recourse to  public  funds.   Nevertheless,  Judge
    Waygood found that the appellant's exclusion from the  UK  would  be  a
    breach of Art 8 of the ECHR and he allowed her appeal on that basis.

10. It is against that decision that the  ECO  now  appeals  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Permission to appeal was granted by the First-tier  Tribunal
    (DJ Woodcraft) on 28 February 2014.

The Submissions

11. The grounds set out a single arguable error of  law,  namely  that  the
    judge failed to take into account that the appellant could not meet the
    accommodation and maintenance requirements in paras 319X(vi) and  (vii)
    of the Immigration Rules in carrying out  the  balancing  exercise  and
    finding that the appellant's exclusion would be disproportionate and  a
    breach of Art 8.  The grounds state:

         "In assessing  proportionality,  the  judge  failed  to  weigh  the
         appellant's inability to satisfy the accommodation and  maintenance
         requirements in paras 319X(vi) and (vii).

         The judge conducted his Article 8 analysis without reference to the
         Immigration Rules an approach deprecated by Cranston J  in  Gulshan
         [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC) at [27]."

12. In his oral submissions, Mr Wilding, on behalf of the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer adopted the ground and submitted  that  the  judge  had  failed
    properly to carry out the proportionality exercise.

13. First, he submitted that the approach in Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules
    - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC) at [24] applied.  The judge
    was required to consider whether there were any arguably  good  grounds
    for granting leave outside the Rules and only if there  were,  then  to
    consider whether in fact  there  were  any  "compelling  circumstances"
    based upon non-standard features of the appellant's case which resulted
    in an "unjustifiably harsh" effect if the  decision  were  upheld.   Mr
    Wilding submitted that the approach in Gulshan was  applicable  as  the
    new Immigration Rules applied.  He relied upon the  Court  of  Appeal's
    decision in Haleemudeen v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 558 that the  new  Rules
    apply even to a pre-9 July 2012 application decided on  or  after  that
    date.  He, in effect, invited me not to follow the earlier decision  of
    the Court of Appeal in Edgehill and Bhoyroo v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ  402
    which, despite reaching an opposite conclusion to  Haleemudeen,  should
    be distinguished.

14. Secondly, Mr Wilding submitted that Judge  Waygood  had  engaged  in  a
    "freewheeling" assessment of proportionality and he had failed to  take
    into account the important fact that the appellant would  be  a  burden
    upon the public finances.  That, he submitted, was an important  factor
    and he relied upon what was said by Sir Stanley  Burnton  in  FK  &  OK
    (Botswana) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 238 at [11].  In addition, he drew my
    attention to [49] in AAO v ECO [2011] EWCA Civ 840 in which  the  Court
    of Appeal had stated that a requirement that an entrant to  the  UK  be
    maintained without recourse to public funds was a "fair and  necessary"
    limitation on entry to the UK.

15. Thirdly, Mr Wilding submitted that the judge was required to engage  in
    a 'close analysis of the facts' (see Muse v ECO [2012] EWCA Civ  10  at
    [24]) and here, he submitted,  the  judge  had  merely  set  out  those
    factors in favour of  the  appellant  rather  than  dealing  with  them
    holistically in the context of the public interest.

16. On behalf of the  appellant,  Mr  Hodgetts  submitted  that  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer's challenge was essentially  a  perversity  challenge
    which could not succeed.

17. First, he relied upon a detailed skeleton argument which  he  developed
    in his oral submissions.  He submitted that following Edgehill this was
    a case where the application arose  before  9  July  2012  and  so  was
    governed by the 'old Rules', namely para 319X.

18. Secondly, in any event, he submitted that the  judge  had  fully  taken
    into account that the appellant could not meet the requirements of  the
    Rules, namely be maintained and accommodated without recourse to public
    funds.  He pointed out that the judge had reminded himself on a  number
    of occasions that the appellant could not meet the requirements of  the
    Rules (see paras 25, 61 and 62).  Mr Hodgetts submitted that the  judge
    had set out at para 64 that  the  justification  relied  upon  was  the
    "economic wellbeing of the country and effective immigration  control".
    The judge's reference to the appellant not meeting the requirements  of
    the Rules was, in context, a clear recognition of the 'opposite side of
    the coin', namely that if she came to the UK there would be recourse to
    public funds.  Mr Hodgetts submitted that the judge had carried out the
    balancing exercise under Art 8.2.  This was, he submitted, after all  a
    case where the appellant's circumstances were the central issue and the
    judge had concluded at para 79 that they were "sufficiently serious and
    compelling  to  require  admission".   The  judge  was,   Mr   Hodgetts
    submitted, not required to do any more.

19. Thirdly, Mr  Hodgetts  submitted  that  none  of  the  judge's  factual
    findings were challenged and it could not be said that  his  conclusion
    was irrational or perverse.  Mr Hodgetts relied upon the facts found by
    Judge Waygood, in particular the  appellant's  circumstances  if  entry
    clearance  were  refused,  namely  that  she  was  5  years  old,   her
    grandmother lived in the UK as did  her  mother,  having  already  been
    granted entry clearance, and her grandfather with  whom  she  lived  in
    Somalia and more recently Nairobi had, as a result of  Judge  Waygood's
    decision, been found to be entitled to  entry  clearance  as  the  pre-
    flight spouse of a person granted humanitarian protection in the UK.

20. In response, Mr Wilding submitted that it was not  sufficient  for  the
    judge simply to state what the public interest was at para  64  of  his
    determination.  He was actually required to  engage  in  the  balancing
    exercise  and  factor  it  in,  weighing  it  against  the  appellant's
    individual circumstances.

Discussion

21. I begin with the obvious observation  of  anyone  who  has  read  Judge
    Waygood's determination  that  it  is  a  most  thorough  and  detailed
    assessment of the evidence with clear and unchallenged factual findings
    made  both  in  relation  to  the  appellant's  step-grandfather   (the
    sponsor's husband) and the appellant  herself.   None  of  the  judge's
    findings  are  challenged;  the  only  challenge  is  to  his  ultimate
    conclusion that the refusal of entry clearance to the appellant was not
    proportionate.

22. I was somewhat surprised that Mr Wilding sought to argue that the judge
    was required to approach the assessment of Art 8 in the way set out  in
    Gulshan on the basis that the so-called  'new'  Rules  in  Appendix  FM
    applied to the appellant.  My surprise arises from the  fact  that  the
    ECO applied the old Rules, namely para 319X and the grounds  of  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal continue to refer to the  applicability  of  para
    319X when  arguing  that  the  judge  failed  to  give  weight  to  the
    appellant's  inability  to  meet  the  maintenance  and   accommodation
    requirements in para 319X.

23. Nevertheless, Mr Wilding took me to the transitional provisions in Part
    8 of the Immigration Rules at paras A277-A280.   There,  he  identified
    that, by virtue of para A280(c)(i), para 319X continued to apply  where
    an application was made, for example under para 319X prior  to  9  July
    2012, but the decision was made on or after that date as in this appeal
    where the relevant decision challenged was made on 3  April  2013.   He
    sought, nevertheless, to rely on para A277C which allows the  Secretary
    of State, where she deems it appropriate, to apply certain of  the  new
    Rules even though, in fact, by virtue of  the  transitional  provisions
    the old Rules remain applicable.  However,  as  I  pointed  out  to  Mr
    Wilding in the course of his submissions, that provision  only  applies
    the parts of Appendix FM  which  are  concerned  with  applications  by
    partners or by parents of children who seek leave to be in the UK  with
    their partner or child respectively.   It can have  no  application  to
    this appellant who is a child seeking to join her grandmother  (who  is
    the sponsor) in the UK. Her mother, K is of course also in the  UK  but
    her application has not been put on that basis.  In any event, such  an
    application would also not fall within para A277C.

24. The proper application of the transitional provisions in  Part  8  (and
    also the implementation provisions in HC 194) and whether they  require
    that a pre-9 July 2012 application be considered under  the  old  Rules
    rather than the  new  Rules  is  not  without  some  difficulty.   That
    difficulty becomes even plainer when it is  appreciated  that,  on  the
    face of it, the two decisions of the Court of Appeal (in  chronological
    order) of  Edgehill  and  Haleemudeen  appear  to  reach  contradictory
    positions.   In  two  earlier  unreported  appeals  (IA/33236/2013  and
    IA/31028/2013), I have sought to identify the effect of  the  Court  of
    Appeal's two decisions.  Had it been necessary to do so, I  would  have
    repeated my analysis here that the decision of the Court of  Appeal  in
    Haleemudeen is binding upon the Upper Tribunal (and upon the First-tier
    Tribunal).  It will be a matter for the Court  of  Appeal  to  seek  to
    resolve the two decisions and to conclude which should be followed  and
    on what basis.  In this appeal, however, it is not necessary for me  to
    set out that analysis.  First, I am confident for the reasons  I  shall
    give that the judge's decision  was  properly  open  to  him  whichever
    approach is applied.  Secondly, at no point has the ECO argued that the
    appellant's application and appeal should be determined  under  any  of
    the new Rules who, as I  have  already  pointed  out,  has  assiduously
    relied upon para 319X.  The time has  long  past  to  argue  otherwise.
    Indeed, the ECO would be seeking to argue that  her  own  decision  was
    unlawful as she had applied the wrong  Immigration  Rule.   I  did  not
    understand Mr Wilding to make that submission.  Thirdly, Mr Hodgetts on
    behalf of the appellant does not seek to argue that  latter  point  but
    rather seeks to defend the judge's favourable decision under Art  8  on
    the basis that he has fully taken  into  account  the  public  interest
    reflected in the appellant's inability  to  meet  the  maintenance  and
    accommodation requirements (without recourse  to  public  funds)  under
    para 319X itself.  Consequently, I approach this appeal on that basis.

25. There is no doubt  that  the  public  interest  takes  account  of  any
    potential economic burden upon the state by those  seeking  entry.   At
    [11] of FK & OK (to which Mr Wilding referred me), Sir Stanley  Burnton
    said this:

         "The second reason is that the maintenance of  immigration  control
         is not an aim that is implied for the purposes of Article 8.2.  Its
         maintenance is necessary in order to  preserve  or  to  foster  the
         economic well-being of the country, in order to protect health  and
         morals, and for the  protection  of  the  rights  and  freedoms  of
         others.  If there were no immigration control, enormous numbers  of
         persons would be able to enter this country, and would be  entitled
         to claim social security benefits, the  benefits  of  the  National
         Health Service, to be housed (or to compete for housing with  those
         in this country) and to compete for employment with  those  already
         here.  Their children would be  entitled  to  be  educated  at  the
         taxpayers' expense (as was the second appellant).  All such matters
         (and I do not suggest that they are the only  matters)  go  to  the
         economic well-being of the country.  That the individuals concerned
         in the present case are  law-abiding  (other  than  in  respect  of
         immigration controls) does not  detract  from  the  fact  that  the
         maintenance of a generally applicable immigration policy is, albeit
         indirectly, a legitimate aim for the purposes of Article 8.2."

26. Further, I accept that in appropriate circumstances the  fact  that  an
    applicant for entry clearance cannot be maintained without recourse  to
    public  funds  may  be  sufficient  to  outweigh  their  own   personal
    circumstances such that there will be no breach of  Art  8.   That  was
    recognised in the case of AAO (again to which  I  was  referred  by  Mr
    Wilding) at [49] where Rix LJ said this:

         "As  Strasbourg  and  domestic   jurisprudence   has   consistently
         emphasised (see above), states are entitled to have regard to their
         system  of  immigration  control  and  its   generally   consistent
         application, and a requirement that an entrant should be maintained
         without  recourse  to  public  funds  is  an  ultimately  fair  and
         necessary limitation on what  would  otherwise  become  a  possibly
         overwhelming burden on all its  citizens.   It  is  an  unfortunate
         reality of life that states, especially one like the United Kingdom
         which  is  generally  accessible  and  welcoming  to  refugees  and
         immigrants, cannot undertake to allow all members of  a  family  to
         join together here, even those members who can show  emotional  and
         financial dependency, without creating unsupportable burdens."

27. That passage has, however, to be seen in the light of the facts of that
    particular case.  Immediately preceding the passage I have set out from
    [49], Rix LJ noted the "weakness of the family life in  issue  in  this
    case"; he noted that the applicant mother had "accommodation, care  and
    support  from  a  near  neighbour  and  old  family   friend,   medical
    assistance, financial support and no life-threatening  or  debilitating
    illness." Whilst, therefore, I accept the importance of  the  issue  of
    whether an individual may have recourse to public funds as an aspect of
    the public interest, that can give way  in  a  sufficiently  compelling
    case.  That was, perhaps, implicit in Mr  Wilding's  reference  to  the
    Court of Appeal's decision in Muse at [24] where Toulson LJ (as he then
    was) said this:

         "Where entry is sought for  the  purposes  of  family  reunion  the
         Immigration Rules, laid before Parliament, represent an attempt  by
         the government to strike a fair balance between respect for  family
         life   and   immigration   control,   which    includes    economic
         considerations.  Different rules apply to a child seeking leave  to
         enter the UK in order to join  a  parent  who  has  refugee  status
         (352D) and a child who seeks leave to enter the UK as the child  of
         parent or relative in the UK  who  does  not  have  refugee  status
         (297).  The respondent submits, and I  would  accept,  that  it  is
         within the state's 'margin of appreciation' to set those Rules;  as
         a matter of generality the requirements are proportionate, but  the
         Rules are the beginning  and  not  the  end  of  the  matter.   The
         authorities provide examples of cases which fall outside the  Rules
         where the positive obligation of the state under Article 8 requires
         the giving of leave to enter.  Such cases are often  difficult  and
         require close analysis of the facts."

28. At [25], Toulson LJ went on to re-affirm, applying ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD
    [2011] UKSC 4, that in cases involving children  their  best  interests
    were "a consideration of high importance" but their interests were "not
    necessarily determinative of the outcome".  That passage was quoted  by
    Judge Waygood in his determination at paras 76 and 77.

29. In this appeal, I have no doubt that Judge Waygood  took  into  account
    the public interest represented by the fact that  the  appellant  could
    not meet the maintenance and accommodation requirements  of  para  319X
    without recourse to public funds.  As  Mr  Hodgetts  submitted,  and  I
    accept, the judge made a number of  references  to  the  appellant  not
    being able to meet the requirements of para  319X  (see  in  particular
    paras 25, 61 and 62).   At  para  64  Judge  Waygood  referred  to  the
    "interests of the economic  wellbeing  of  the  country  and  effective
    immigration control".  Reading the determination as a whole it is clear
    to me that the judge had well in mind that the appellant  failed  under
    the Immigration Rules because of her inability to prove  she  could  be
    maintained and accommodated without recourse to  public  funds.   There
    was no other basis upon which she failed under the Rules.  I reject the
    contention, therefore, that he erred in law by  failing  to  take  this
    aspect of the public interest into account.

30. The judge correctly directed himself in accordance with the  five-stage
    test set out by Lord Bingham in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 at [17].  He also
    correctly directed himself that the appellant's best interests  were  a
    primary consideration but could be outweighed by the cumulative  effect
    of other considerations (see paras 65-67 of  his  determination).   The
    judge  then  went  on  to  deal   with   the   appellant's   individual
    circumstances, including arguments presented by the respondent that the
    appellant could reasonably be expected to enjoy family  life  with  her
    mother and grandmother in Kenya.  At paras 68-71 he said this:

         "68. On the point of Article 8 it was said by the Respondent  there
             was no reason why the appellant could not  enjoy  family  life
             with her mother in Kenya.  It was said the  immigration  rules
             are  not  in  place  to   satisfy   personal   family   living
             arrangements.  Even if related and is claimed for  her  mother
             and sponsor the  decision  constituted  limited  interference.
             There was no apparent bar to her mother continuing  to  reside
             with her in Kenya.  The Respondent was satisfied the  decision
             was justified and proportionate and in the  interests  of  the
             operation of effective immigration control.

         69.  Mr Hodgetts in his skeleton argument referred to the  case  of
             Muse v ECO [2012] EWCA Civ 10.  He said that the principle  of
             whether it is reasonable to expect the UK sponsor to  relocate
             in that case to Ethiopia and in this case to  Kenya  (in  both
             cases concerning Somalis who have no official basis to  remain
             in the country overseas) applies just as much to  entry  cases
             as it does to removal cases.  He claimed it  was  unreasonable
             to expect the sponsor to live in Kenya.

         70.  In this case I have found that  the  first  Appellant  is  the
             spouse of the sponsor and is entitled to come to the UK as  he
             fulfils the  requirements  of  paragraph  352FA.   This  would
             potentially leave him with  the  stark  choice  of  coming  to
             United Kingdom to join his wife and leave his step  grandchild
             on her own.  The other alternative of course would be for  the
             sponsor and her daughter K to move to Kenya to  be  with  them
             both.  However I consider that neither the sponsor nor K  have
             the ability to lawfully remain in Kenya for more than a visit.
              In addition the sponsor was granted  humanitarian  protection
             in this country because of  her  situation  in  Somalia.   Her
             daughter K was granted entry on the basis  of  family  reunion
             with her mother.  I am satisfied that there is a  family  life
             between the sponsor and K and her daughter SHH.  The  decision
             of the Respondent in this case  interferes  with  that  family
             life significantly in that  all  family  members  cannot  live
             together.

         71.  Neither the sponsor nor her daughter would have  accommodation
             or recourse to any means of support or employment in Kenya.  I
             also find that the sponsor plainly cannot return  to  Somalia.
             I also consider that it would  not  be  reasonable  for  K  to
             return to live on a legally irregular basis in Nairobi, taking
             into account that she has been granted leave to enter  the  UK
             on the basis of family re-union with her mother.  In  addition
             Mr Hodgetts drew my attention to a Human  Rights  Watch  paper
             entitled "you are all terrorists", dated May 2013.  It reports
             that on November 19 2012 Kenyan  police  from  four  different
             units unleashed a wave of abuses, including  torture,  against
             Somali and Ethiopian refugees and  asylum  seekers,  including
             Somalis in Eastleigh where the Appellants currently live.   In
             addition  it  refers  to  December  13,  2012   when   Kenya's
             Department of  rural  affairs  announced  that  the  spate  of
             attacks meant 55,000 refugees and  asylum  seekers  living  in
             Nairobi should move to the country's refugee  camps  near  the
             Somali and Sudanese borders or face forced  relocation  there.
             It also refers to Kenya having a history of forcibly returning
             refugees and asylum seekers to Somalia  and  they  planned  to
             force refugees to camps.  In the circumstances I consider that
             this would be an extremely difficult place for K to return  to
             live with her daughter."

31. At paras 72-75, Judge Waygood dealt with the change in the  appellant's
    circumstances and impact upon her resulting  from  the  fact  that  her
    mother had been granted entry clearance (and had indeed come) to the UK
    on the basis that the sponsor had been granted humanitarian protection.
     Also, the appellant's step-grandfather had succeeded before the  Judge
    in overturning the refusal of entry clearance for him to  come  to  the
    UK.  The appellant was potentially, therefore,  left  alone  in  Kenya.
    The judge said this:

         "72.  It  was  said  in  Muse  at  paragraph  21  that   Strasbourg
             jurisprudence places a high value on the ability  of  families
             to live together.  I consider that principle applies  in  this
             case.  The first Appellant has been  looking  after  his  step
             grandchild and daughter since the sponsor  left  in  2008  and
             thus has family life with both his stepdaughter and  his  step
             grandchild.  Article 8 contains  both  positive  and  negative
             obligations.  A positive  obligation  requires  the  state  to
             admit to its territory children of settled immigrants who  are
             minors unless there  are  sufficiently  strong  countervailing
             reasons to make it proportionate to refuse entry.  I note that
             reference was made to the case of Huang  [2007]  UKHL  11  and
             what Lord Bingham said about proportionality at  paragraph  20
             and in stating that principle he drew no  distinction  between
             refusal of leave to enter and refusal of leave to remain.

         73.  I consider  the  trauma  in  this  case  is  identical  to  an
             exclusion case as the minor children had been living with each
             other K and  her  daughter,  with  the  first  Appellant.   Mr
             Hodgetts said the admission of K under the rules was  correct,
             I agree.  Refusal to permit her  to  have  joined  her  mother
             would have been in breach of Article 8.  I  particularly  note
             in this regard what K and her mother have been through.   They
             were in effectively a slave camp for a number of  years  where
             they both suffered repeated rape at the whim of their captors.
              As a result of this SHH was conceived.  Although the  sponsor
             left her husband, daughter and granddaughter behind in Somalia
             I find she clearly hoped that they would  be  re-united  in  a
             safe place which they now have the chance to be.

         74.  The refusal of SHH presents K with a stark choice.  She either
             chooses  to  break  her  family  ties  with  her  mother,   an
             entitlement of which has been recognised by the Respondent  or
             she remains apart from her daughter.  I do  not  find  in  the
             circumstances that it is reasonable to expect K or the sponsor
             to relocate to Kenya to be with SHH.  I therefore consider the
             entry clearance officer's refusal  of  SHH  disproportionately
             interferes with K's  right  to  family  life  and  the  second
             appellant's right to family life.  The principle of  a  family
             reunion within paragraph 352 would be plainly defeated by  the
             refusal of SHH.

         75.  In addition I have taken into account  the  conclusions  of  a
             report of Diana Jackson, presented as part of the  Appellant's
             bundle.  She is an independent social worker.  The  report  is
             dated the 28th of May 2012.  Ms Jackson gives  her  background
             in her curriculum vitae.  It is clear that she has significant
             experience  in  direct  work  with   children   and   families
             throughout her career.  She stated she had  provided  over  30
             records in immigration appeals in the last  four  years.   She
             interviewed both the sponsor and her daughter at their home in
             Bristol on the 26th of May 2012.  She conducted the interviews
             with the assistance of an interpreter.  In her opinion  having
             been asked to consider the effects on all  family  members  if
             the Appellants were not allowed to join the  sponsor  and  her
             daughter she considered that the child  had  already  suffered
             harm by the  fact  that  her  mother  had  left  and  did  not
             understand why.  That the loss of her mother before the age of
             11 was one of the four life events that most predispose  women
             to depression in adult life.  She said that K is showing signs
             of depression from being separated from her daughter.  She was
             concerned that she was heading for a depressive illness.   She
             coped with a great deal in her young life was 18 at  the  time
             of the report and that the loss of her daughter was likely  to
             be something she could not cope with."

32. Then at para 79 he reached the following conclusions leading at para 80
    to his decision that the refusal of entry  clearance  to  SHH  was  not
    proportionate.  He said this:

         "79. Taking these points into account.  The child is just  5  years
             old.  She is in an unstable environment in Kenya as she has no
             legal basis to be there.  Her mother is in the UK  as  she  is
             entitled to be.  Her mother was her main carer until  she  had
             to leave her in November 2011.   By  the  refusal  this  young
             child is being denied re-union with her  mother  her  previous
             carer.  The objective evidence about the  situation  in  Kenya
             currently indicates that she is potentially at risk as is  her
             step grandfather.  He has already been arrested, which was not
             disputed and if anything happened  to  him  in  that  unstable
             environment then the child I  find  it  is  likely  to  be  at
             significant risk.  Whilst it is not contested  that  her  step
             grandfather is looking after her to the best of  his  ability,
             the child's best interests are clearly to be with her  mother.
             I consider that she currently has  unmet  needs  in  terms  of
             having a relationship with her mother and the support  of  her
             mother that are not being catered for.  The  arrangements  for
             the child's physical and emotional care would be best  met  by
             her being with her mother.  I consider the situation  and  the
             circumstances of this child to  be  sufficiently  serious  and
             compelling to require admission.   The  best  interests  as  a
             starting point are best served by her being with her mother.

         80.   Having  taken  into  consideration  all  the  above-mentioned
             matters, I find that taken as a whole, it is not proportionate
             to deny SHH entry  to  the  UK  to  be  with  her  mother  and
             grandmother."

33. As the judge made clear in para 79, he considered that the  appellant's
    circumstances were "sufficiently  serious  and  compelling  to  require
    admission".  That, of course, mirrors the language used in  Gulshan  in
    cases concerned with the new Rules.  If the 'new' Rules did apply,  the
    judge's reasoning is entirely consistent with the case law dealing with
    their application in Art 8 cases.

34. Having clearly taken into account the basis upon  which  the  appellant
    could not meet  the  Immigration  Rules,  the  judge  carried  out  the
    balancing exercise required under Art 8.2, including having  regard  to
    the best interests of the appellant which were to be  with  her  mother
    (K).  I do not accept Mr  Wilding's  contention  that  the  judge  only
    considered the positive aspects of the  appellant's  case  or  that  he
    failed to engage in a 'close analysis of the facts'.  The judge clearly
    had the  public  interest  in  mind  and,  as  the  passages  from  his
    determination set out above demonstrate, he carried out a most thorough
    and careful analysis of the evidence and facts.

35. Further, I see no  basis,  given  that  none  of  the  judge's  factual
    findings are challenged, for concluding that his ultimate finding  that
    the decision was disproportionate was perverse or irrational.   Such  a
    conclusion requires that no reasonable judge could have  reached  those
    findings. Perversity or  irrationality  is  a  "very  high  hurdle"  to
    overcome and a "demanding concept" (see,  R(Iran)  and  others  v  SSHD
    [2005] EWCA Civ 982 at [11]).  Merely to disagree with a finding  comes
    nowhere near overcoming the "very  high  hurdle"  of  irrationality  or
    perversity.   Indeed, as Carwarth LJ  (as  he  then  was)  observed  in
    Mukarkar v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1045 at [40] in relation to a challenge
    to a judge's finding that removal was disproportionate  on  the  ground
    that it was perverse:

         "[t]he mere fact that one tribunal has reached  what  may  seem  an
         unusually generous view of the facts of a particular case does  not
         mean that it has made an error of law..."

36. There were undoubtedly compelling circumstances in the appellant's case
    which  would,  again  to  use  the  language  of  Gulshan,  result   in
    unjustifiably harsh consequences for the  appellant  if  she  were  not
    granted entry clearance.  She would be the sole remaining member of her
    family unit including her grandmother, step-grandfather and mother, who
    would not be allowed to live in the United Kingdom.  She is  a  5  year
    old girl and the unchallenged finding of the judge was that neither the
    sponsor nor the appellant's mother could be expected to live  with  the
    appellant in Kenya.  Given that finding, it is difficult to imagine any
    decision other than it would be disproportionate to split the appellant
    from her family unit.

37. For these reasons, I reject  the  respondent's  contention  that  Judge
    Waygood erred in law in allowing the appellant's appeal under Art 8  of
    the ECHR.  The judge's decision was properly open to him whether or not
    the 'new' Rules applied.

38. I end as  I  began  my  discussion  of  the  issues:   Judge  Waygood's
    determination  is  a  detailed  and  comprehensive  assessment  of  the
    evidence in which he reaches unchallenged findings of fact.  The  judge
    sets out in detail the relevant applicable law in respect of Art 8  and
    the relevance of the appellant's best  interests  in  that  assessment.
    The limited scope of the  ECO's  grounds,  even  when  expanded  by  Mr
    Wilding in his oral submissions,  come  nowhere  near  identifying  any
    error of law in the judge's determination.

Decision

39. For these reasons, the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  to  allow  the
    appellant's appeal under Art 8 of the ECHR did not involve  the  making
    of an error of law.  That decision stands.

40. The First-tier Tribunal decision to allow the appeal of the appellant's
    step-grandfather under para 352FA of  the  Rules  was  not  subject  to
    appeal.

41. Thus, the ECO's  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  respect  of  the
    appellant's appeal is dismissed.

                                                                      Signed


                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Judge Waygood made a fee award of any fee paid  or  payable  in  respect  of
both applications.  I have upheld  Judge  Waygood's  decision  allowing  the
appellant's appeal.  His decision to allow the  appeal  of  the  appellant's
step-grandfather was not challenged.  In these circumstances, I also make  a
fee award of the full fee payable in relation to both applications.

                                                                      Signed


                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal


