
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/09560/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9th November 2015                 |On 17th December 2015                |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                     SKA
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     The Cardinal Hume Centre
For the Respondent:    Ms S Sreeraman, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Ethiopia born on 1st January 1978 and  he
    made an application for settlement as the spouse of  a  person  present
    and settled in the UK further to  Paragraph  352A  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  His application was dated 8th July 2014.  This was refused in a
    notice of decision by the Entry Clearance Officer in  Nairobi  on  21st
    July 2014 under Paragraph 352A (i) and (ii).

 2. The decision of the Entry Clearance Officer stated that  the  appellant
    had provided a handwritten marriage certificate  and  his  wife's  Home
    Office interview records  whereby  she  confirmed  that  she  had  been
    married to a person  named  AS  who  was  now  deceased.   The  sponsor
    previously provided a statement advising her claimed husband was  dead.
    She then advised that she found out the  appellant  was  alive  in  May
    2014.

 3. As evidence of the identity the appellant provided a photocopy  of  his
    Ugandan immigration certificate and this certificate confirmed  he  had
    applied for leave to remain in Uganda but there was no evidence to show
    what evidence he provided to the  Ugandan  immigration  authorities  to
    prove his identity.  This certificate was issued on 22nd May 2014  just
    two months before he made  his  application  and  he  had  provided  no
    further evidence to corroborate his identity.

 4. There were also discrepancies between his sponsor's statement  provided
    with his application and her own Home  Office  interview  record.   The
    sponsor provided the statement which clearly stated she found  out  her
    husband was deceased after she left prison.  In her screening interview
    at 4.2 she effectively said that she discovered this whilst she was  in
    prison.  After her husband was killed  she  was  ill  and  admitted  to
    hospital.  Her sponsor stated the  following  at  question  84  of  her
    Statement of Evidence Form interview

         "As I was actually being brought to see my husband for five minutes
         every fifteen days.  From (illegible) as  I  expected  to  see  him
         because it  was  the  fifteenth  day.   When  I  asked  the  police
         (illegible) to get a glimpse of my husband he got curious and  came
         over to me.  One said 'your husband is killed, he's dead,  you  are
         to follow him'."

 5. The sponsor stated during her Home Office interviews that she found out
    her husband was deceased before she left prison.  This contradicted the
    statement provided with the application.  This discrepancy coupled with
    the fact that the appellant had provided insufficient evidence  of  his
    identity left him to doubt  that  he  was  the  person  listed  as  his
    sponsor's husband in her Home Office interviews.

 6. He had provided no evidence of the relationship such as photographs  of
    himself and his wife prior to her departure from Ethiopia.  All of  the
    photographs provided appear to have been taken recently.

 7. The Entry Clearance Officer was not  satisfied  that  the  sponsor  was
    married as claimed and that they were part of the sponsor's family unit
    at  the  time  of  their  departure  from  their  country  of  habitual
    residence.

 8. The matter was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Davidson who  refused
    the appeal under the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.

Application for permission to appeal

 9. An application for permission to  appeal  was  made  on  the  following
    grounds

         (i) the judge had at paragraph 29 and 30 made findings  in  respect
         of plausibility of the sponsor.  The sponsor had not found out  for
         four years that her husband was alive not dead but the  judge  made
         assumptions about what the sponsor may or may not have been able to
         find out about the husband and  what  the  Oromo  Liberation  Front
         would have been able to find out.  Paragraphs 29 and  30  exhibited
         an unlawful reliance on the judge's own views in terms of what  was
         reasonable to expect of the sponsor or obtain in Ethiopia.

         See MM (DRC - Plausibility) Democratic  Republic  of  Congo  [2005]
         UKIAT 00019, HK and the Secretary of State for the Home  Department
         [2006] EWCA Civ 1037, Y and the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1223.

         (ii) the judge indicated that he had been referred to the  case  of
         The Chief Adjudication Officer and Bath  at  paragraph  24  of  his
         determination but deduced a  wrong  point  of  law  from  it.   The
         marriage certificate had to  be  accepted  as  genuine  unless  the
         respondent provided some evidence to prove it was a  forgery.   The
         issue of whether or not the marriage certificate was a forgery  was
         dealt with in ground 6. In that authority the presumption  operated
         to show that the  proper  form  was  observed  and  could  only  be
         displaced by positive not merely clear evidence.

         The judge failed to take into account the birth certificate of  the
         child which indicated the names  of  both  the  appellant  and  the
         sponsor as the parents of the child.

         (iii)  the  judge  made  findings  in  respect  of  the   sponsor's
         'creditability' (sic)  in respect of discrepancies of  her  account
         but this was no way central to the issue of the case as to  whether
         or not the appellant was in fact her husband  or  whether  she  was
         ever married to the appellant.  The judge therefore  placed  weight
         on discrepancies that were not  material.   Further  the  judge  at
         paragraph 16 of his determination wrongly  identified  this  was  a
         central issue in the case.  This was not a  central  issue  in  the
         case.

         (iv) at paragraph 25 of the determination the judge attached little
         weight to the letter from AM which testified as to the  wedding  of
         the appellant but the judge was in  a  position  to  take  judicial
         notice as to how two calendar  systems  operate  thereby  resolving
         this issue.

         (v) at paragraph 23 of the determination the judge  made  reference
         to the ID card of the  appellant  that  had  been  translated  into
         English commenting on the distinction between the address in the ID
         card and the address  the  sponsor  gave  as  her  address  at  her
         screening  interview  but  there  was  no  representative  for  the
         respondent at the hearing and it was  incumbent  on  the  judge  to
         raise this issue with the sponsor in live evidence.  This  did  not
         take place contrary to the Surendran guidelines.

         (vi) the judge failed to  take  into  consideration  the  fact  the
         respondent did not  challenge  the  authenticity  of  the  marriage
         certificate and that it should be accepted as a  genuine  document.
         He made no findings in respect of the certificate  at  all  however
         his overall finding was that the appellant and the sponsor were not
         married would suggest that it was a  forgery.   In  order  for  the
         judge to be persuaded of this it would have been incumbent  on  the
         respondent to present evidence proving the document was  a  forgery
         as per RP (Proof of Forgery) Nigeria [2006] UKAIT 00086.

10. Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge P J White. He found
    it was arguable that the respondent had  not  challenged  the  marriage
    certificate, had not taken into account the birth  certificate  of  the
    child, improperly took against the evidence of two witnesses, adopted a
    procedural unfairness in highlighting a discrepancy  in  address  which
    had not been raised at the hearing  and  was  arguably  wrong  to  make
    findings as to how the appellant may have obtained  information  as  to
    how the appellant may have  obtained  information  as  to  whether  her
    husband was still alive.

The Hearing

11. At the hearing  before  me  Miss  Mellon  submitted  that  the  judge's
    assessment that the central issue as  described  at  paragraph  16  was
    whether the appellant was dead was misconceived.   She  submitted  that
    the marriage certificate  was  not  properly  considered  and  was  not
    discussed in the findings and there was merely an assumption it  was  a
    forgery.  The Home Office had not been represented at the  hearing  and
    the judge only asked three to four questions  throughout  the  hearing.
    This was an issue of procedural fairness.

12. In relation to the witness evidence there were two statements  and  the
    judge dismissed these at paragraphs 25 and 26 purely on  the  basis  of
    the failure to translate dates.   Those  dates  were  provided  in  the
    marriage certificate and there was a failure to translate  dates.   The
    judge should have explored any discrepancy with regard  to  dates  with
    the appellant sponsor albeit that  the  witnesses  themselves  were  in
    Ethiopia.

13. There was  a  birth  certificate  of  the  child  which  pre-dated  the
    application by four years and there was no challenge on  that  that  AS
    existed.

14. There were also discrepancies  in  the  address  which  were  cited  at
    paragraph 23 but the evidence was that the appellant  had  subsequently
    moved to the last  address  and  once  again  the  sponsor  could  have
    explained this.

15. A further ground was put in relation to plausibility.   The  judge  had
    erred at paragraph 30 and his reasons were not clear.   There  were  no
    reasons as to why the sponsor should be lying albeit that I stated that
    it was possible the judge could have been criticised for speculation.

16. In addition there was a failure to consider evidence although this  was
    not raised specifically in the application for  permission  to  appeal.
    Miss Mellon  referred  to  the  photographs  and  the  ID  cards.   She
    submitted it was not clear that identification was a core issue and  it
    was not explored.  It was accepted that the judge was  on  his  own  as
    there was no Home Office Presenting Officer but for the  reasons  given
    the appellant should succeed.

17. Miss Sreeranam submitted that the core of the appeal did lie  with  the
    identity of the appellant and was a primary point of  conflict.   There
    was a serious discrepancy in the appellant's  own  evidence  which  the
    judge had identified.  The judge did consider the marriage  certificate
    said to be issued on 15th February 2000  but  this  did  not  take  the
    identification  of  the  appellant  further.   Albeit  that  the  judge
    granting permission had identified that the judge had made an error  in
    the dates there was a discrepancy between the  dates  on  the  marriage
    certificate which was stated to be on 23rd  April  1992  and  the  date
    given by AM for the wedding which was said to be on 23rd December 1992,
    there was a conflict in the  facts  and  with  regards  to  the  second
    witness it was clear that that witness was not even listed as a witness
    on the certificate.

18. The issue with regards to addresses was not a sustainable  point.   The
    appellant and the sponsor had not established an address they  had  co-
    habited at and if the appellant had moved into  the  sponsor's  claimed
    address there was no explanation provided as to why he was still giving
    an address residing at number 390 as opposed to 1012.  In her screening
    interview and asylum interview the sponsor gave the address  she  lived
    at as  permanent  accommodation.   The  marriage  certificate  did  not
    resolve the central issue of the identity of the appellant.

19. Miss Mellon countered that the marriage contract identified  the  names
    of the witnesses on the contract.  If there was an adverse  credibility
    point that was a procedural issue which should have been taken.  At the
    top of page 28 on the marriage contract the two addresses appeared.  If
    the judge was wishing to say this was an entirely different man he  was
    making an opportunistic application to join the sponsor in the  UK  the
    judge had not specifically found so.  There was evidence which  he  had
    not explored and my attention was specifically drawn to the Ugandan  ID
    card for the appellant which was at page 40 of the  appellant's  bundle
    which included the letter from the Aromo community in Uganda dated 10th
    April 2015 and the family registration dated 19th August 1996.

20. In conclusion Ms Sreeranam submitted that there  was  no  DNA  evidence
    which had been presented to the judge.

Conclusions

21. I have no doubt that the central issue in this  matter  is  indeed  the
    identity of the appellant.  The question is whether this  appellant  is
    who he says he is.  The identity of the  appellant  is  of  fundamental
    importance to this appeal.  The Entry Clearance  Officer  rejected  the
    application on the basis of Paragraph 352A (i) that is the applicant is
    married to or the civil partner of a person who is currently a  refugee
    status as such under the immigration rules in the  United  Kingdom.  It
    was always clearly the case that the identity of the appellant  was  in
    issue and it was put in issue by the Entry Clearance  Officer.   It  is
    not contested that the sponsor has refugee status.  What  is  contested
    is that the sponsor is who he says he is and whether the  appellant  is
    the person named in the marriage certificate and the birth certificate.



22. The judge identified the question of whether in fact the appellant  was
    dead as the sponsor had claimed on arrival into the UK  and  throughout
    her asylum claim and/or whether she  had  an  honest  belief  that  her
    husband was dead.  The credibility of  the  sponsor  was  evidently  an
    issue.

23. I do not think that the judge can have been more clear in  setting  out
    that he thought the issue which was relevant was whether the person who
    claimed to be SKA was in fact that person.  Indeed the judge  cited  at
    paragraph  13  that  "the  appellant's  claimed  identity  and  claimed
    marriage to the sponsor are disputed by the respondent."  This was  the
    opening paragraph in the findings of credibility, fact and law  of  the
    judge and he went on to explain why the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  had
    refused that application.  The question of  the  marriage  relates  and
    centres on whether the person is who he is says he is.

24. The judge recorded that "in response the appellant claims he  submitted
    the same documentation to the Ugandan authorities in the course of  his
    asylum claim in Uganda as the sponsor submitted to the UK authorities."
     At paragraph 17 the judge's decision rested squarely on the  differing
    accounts that  the  sponsor  herself  had  given  in  relation  to  her
    husband's claimed death.  In her screening interview she stated as  the
    judge recorded "She was in prison for 2 years and  six  months  without
    sentence and her husband was killed after two  years  [SCR  4.2].   She
    said that after her husband was killed she  was  ill  and  admitted  to
    hospital and she was able to escape from the hospital with the help  of
    a nurse and her family in mid-2008 screening interview 4.2.  When asked
    about her marital status she replied that her husband was 'AS  and  was
    deceased [SCR 6.5]"

25. However the judge recorded at paragraph  18  that  in  her  substantive
    asylum interview conducted  on  27th  July  2010  ten  days  after  the
    screening interview held  on  17th  July  2010,  when  asked  when  her
    marriage ended, the sponsor stated that at some time in summer 2008 she
    asked to glimpse her husband as usual and was told that he was dead SAI
    84.

26. At paragraph 22 and the judge states as follows

         "In her SAI the sponsor said that she was told in prison  that  her
         husband had been killed [SAI: 84].  She repeated exactly  the  same
         account before me in oral  evidence.   This  was  repeated  by  the
         sponsor in her  witness  statement  dated  7.5.15  [WS:  6  &  16].
         However in her witness statement dated 8.7.14 at  paragraph  6  the
         sponsor says, "For 6 years of the last six years, I  believed  that
         my husband was dead.  We had both been detained at the same  prison
         in Ethiopia for over two years. I  was  able  to  escape  from  the
         prison in 2008.  After I left prison, I  made  enquiries  about  my
         husband.  That was when I was told that he was dead.  I  never  saw
         his body'.  This last statement is a clear  contradiction  of  what
         she has maintained in every other circumstance.  When I  asked  her
         about it she said "I remember this was with my social  Worker."   I
         then asked her if the statement  of  8.7.14  had  been  drafted  by
         solicitors and she replied, "The social worker asked me questions I
         thought I understood  everything  I  was  told  by  the  guards  in
         prison".    Her  answers  to  my  questions  were   obviously   non
         sequiturs.  They did not in any way explain a  glaring  discrepancy
         between her previous accounts of being told about  her  husband  in
         prison and then saying it was by making enquiries  after  she  left
         prison, as she stated in her statement of  8.7.14.   This  detracts
         from her credibility."

27. The judge gave sound reasons for finding the sponsor lacked credibility
    in  that  the  sponsor  changed  her  evidence  between  her  screening
    interview and her asylum interview and her statement that she  gave  on
    8th July 2014 at paragraph 6 and as the judge found,  her  answers  did
    not in any way explain a glaring discrepancy between her accounts.   It
    was the judge's view, regardless of when or how she could find  out  or
    the findings regarding the Oromo Liberation Front, that the  change  in
    evidence undermined the sponsor's evidence.

28. I find that the judge gave a perfectly  reasonable  assessment  of  the
    evidence in relation to the addresses at paragraph 23.  It  was  argued
    that the parties could have moved but even if the address is such  that
    the appellant had moved that does not undermine the  cumulative  nature
    of the findings the  judge  made  with  regard  the  remainder  of  the
    evidence.

29. I do not agree with the submission that the judge  misdirected  himself
    in relation to the marriage certificate.  The judge  did  not  have  to
    accept the marriage certificate and it was a matter for him as to  what
    weight he placed upon it in relation to this particular appellant.   In
    that regard the judge did address the issue of the marriage certificate
    at paragraph 24.  It is not the case that the respondent needed to show
    that the marriage certificate was a forgery for the judge to  place  no
    reliance on the marriage certificate. Even if the marriage  certificate
    is genuine it does not address the fundamental issue of the identity of
    the appellant. Is the person named in the  certificate  the  appellant?
    The judge did not believe so.  The objection in relation to  the  birth
    certificate falls away for the same reason.

30. In particular the judge found that neither AM nor Mr G attended to give
    oral testimony or be cross examined as  to  their  evidence  and  as  a
    result the judge placed less weight on  their  evidence.   Indeed  they
    could not because they were in Ethiopia.  I fail how  to  see  how  the
    appellant's sponsor could supplement answers on their behalf.  What  is
    quite clear is that AM was not one of the signatory  witnesses  and  AM
    does not in fact assist in identifying who AS was.   The  judge  states
    "there is no evidence inherent in the letter of AM that identifies  the
    parties as the appellant and the sponsor."  That is a fundamental point
    in this appeal.

31. As a further point it should be added that this witness  gave  entirely
    the wrong date for the wedding being 23rd December 1992 EC and  further
    that he  was  not  a  signatory  witness  as  claimed  in  his  witness
    statement.  The judge was not given a translation of the dates from the
    Ethiopian calendar into the Gregorian calendar and I do not  find  that
    he can be criticised for his own challenge  to  the  evidence  on  that
    basis.  These letters were presented by the appellant's  representative
    and this matter should have been addressed.

32. In relation to the letter of Mr G, which was addressed at paragraph 26,
    the judge quite clearly stated that the letter had confused the western
    calendar with the Ethiopian calendar.  I find that the judge would have
    been criticised had he made  an  attempt  to  translate  this  calendar
    incorrectly and no such translation was given.

33. The application for permission to appeal was not based on  the  failure
    of  the  judge  to  address  the   evidence   from   the   senior   OLF
    representatives but the judge  at  [28]  makes  further  findings  that
    Bersisa Berri claimed to have known the appellant since  teenage  years
    and  detailed  all  his  activities  but  made  no   mention   of   his
    imprisonment.  This adds to the lack of credibility of the evidence.

34. The judge also found that the period of ignorance which struck  him  as
    inherently implausible.  I was referred  to  MM  (DRC  -  Plausibility)
    Democratic Republic of Congo [2005] UKIAT 00019.  I  am  not  persuaded
    that this case assists the appellant  and  I  cite  from  the  relevant
    paragraphs to underline my point bearing in  mind  the  change  in  the
    sponsor's, the key witness' evidence.

35. Paragraph 17 of that decision refers to "an absence  of  evasion  or  a
    sequence of changing answers and  the  converse  can  be  usefully  and
    explicitly referred to.  This  is  an  element  in  the  assessment  of
    credibility" and further at paragraph 19 "it is the  total  content  of
    the   evidence   including   consistency   on   essentials   or   major
    inconsistencies,   omissions    and    details    improbabilities    or
    reasonableness which does and should found the decision."

36. Further at paragraph 20

         "We also need to say something about the submission that there were
         alternative possibilities which could explain  away  satisfactorily
         what the Adjudicator found to be wholly improbable.   This  is  not
         uncommon approach on appeal, even where that appeal is  only  on  a
         point of law.  First it is for the appellant to put forward all the
         evidence  which  he  can  as  to  what  happened.   If  there   are
         inconsistencies and improbabilities it  is  for  the  appellant  to
         recognise them and deal with them so far as he can.   Usually,  and
         as here, the appellant will know that his credibility is  in  issue
         even though not all the points relied on  by  the  Adjudicator  may
         feature in the refusal letter.   Such  points  may  arise  from  an
         appellant's evidence to the Adjudicator."

37. And further at paragraph 21 second,

         "If it is said that there was an alternative  explanation  unfairly
         overlooked  by  an  Adjudicator  because  the  relevant  point  was
         unfairly not raised, it is for the appellant to provide evidence as
         to what it  was.   There  is  a  world  of  difference  between  an
         appellant's evidence and the speculations of an advocate."

38. And paragraph 22

         "Third it is a fallacy to suppose that  where  an  Adjudicator  has
         concluded that a story is  too  improbable  to  satisfy  the  lower
         standard of proof  the  conclusion  can  be  shown  to  be  legally
         erroneous by pointing to alternative inferences even if they may be
         possible even reasonable.  A conclusion is  not  legally  erroneous
         because it may fail to contemplate or to traverse possibilities not
         raised for the Adjudicator's consideration.  It would need to be  a
         point so obvious that any Adjudicator would reasonably have had  it
         in mind as a reasonable alternative which needed to be  dealt  with
         even though not  proffered  by  the  appellant  in  order  for  the
         contention even to be arguable."

39. I  am  not  persuaded  in  these  circumstances  that  MM  assists  the
    appellant.  The burden of  proof  rests  with  the  appellant  and  the
    standard of proof is on the balance of probabilities.  The  judge  gave
    reasons for his finding that the period of ignorance  of  each  other's
    existence was implausible because he said

         "Two OLF officials Berri and Alishe both claimed to have known  the
         parties and knew  about  their  activities  and  yet  there  is  no
         evidence of the sponsor asking them if they had  any  knowledge  of
         the fate of her husband.  In view of the relative ease  with  which
         the sponsor claims to have escaped and the  account  given  by  the
         appellant of the conditions in which he was detained, it would have
         been relatively easy for him to get word out of prison to  his  and
         his  wife's   family   about   his   whereabouts   and   situation.
         Alternatively it would have been comparatively easy for  the  Aromo
         Liberation  Front  to  have  made  enquiries  of  sympathisers  and
         prisoners to discover the fate of  the  appellant.   It  is  beyond
         belief that no attempt was made by anyone over four years  to  find
         out what actually happened to the appellant or that no  information
         leaked out to  the  families  who  could  have  then  informed  the
         sponsor."

40. The judge is not obliged to give reasons for reasons and it is not  the
    case that the appellant was unrepresented.  I was also referred to  the
    Surendran guidelines which it was submitted that the  judge  failed  to
    apply.  I find  that  in  the  refusal  letter  the  challenge  to  the
    appellant's case was clearly  set  out  and  as  I  note  that  he  was
    represented at the hearing.  As stated at paragraph 4 of the  Surendran
    guidelines

         "Where matters of credibility are raised in the letter of refusal a
         Special Adjudicator should request the  representative  to  address
         these matters particularly in his examination of the  appellant  or
         if the  appellant  is  not  giving  evidence  in  his  submissions.
         Whether or not these matters are addressed  by  the  representative
         and whether or not the Special Adjudicator  has  himself  expressed
         any particulars concern he is entitled to form his own view  as  to
         credibility on the basis of the material before him."

41. There was clearly an issue  in  relation  to  the  credibility  of  the
    appellant's case and as stated in the Surendran guidelines at paragraph
    6

         "It is not the function of the  Special  Adjudicator  to  adopt  an
         inquisitorial role in cases of this nature.  The system  pertaining
         at present is essentially an adversarial  system  and  the  Special
         Adjudicator is an impartial judge  and  assessor  of  the  evidence
         before him."

42. Finally, I was asked to extend grounds to include a  challenge  to  the
    failure of the judge to consider the ID card and the photographs.  Even
    if I allowed that application, which I do not, it would not assist  the
    appellant's case for these reasons.  The photographs  are  blurred  and
    those taken of the appellant with the sponsor do not appear to  be  the
    same person as that on the ID card.   Secondly,  it  may  be  that  the
    sponsor married somebody by the name of ASK  who  is  recorded  on  the
    Addis Ababa city council identification document as having  a  date  of
    birth on 8th May  1972  EC  (January  16th  1980).  This  document  was
    submitted at the hearing and was  translated  by  Daniela  Languages  a
    translator adopted by the appellant's representatives  and  stamped  as
    such.  In his application for entry clearance, however,  the  appellant
    gave his date of birth as 1st January 1978.  There were  therefore  two
    different dates of birth given by the appellant. There was a failure by
    the judge to have  identified  that  the  identity  document  showed  a
    different date of birth but, that said, I note that he was handed  this
    documentation at the hearing.  This is a serious flaw in  the  evidence
    and only further underlines that the judge made no error of law in  his
    assessment of credibility and the deficiencies in the evidence.

43. Reading the decision as a whole, the judge gave adequate reasoning  for
    his decision and his assessment  displayed  neither  irrationality  nor
    procedural error and therefore I find that there is no  material  error
    of law and the decision shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 4th December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
