
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/09449/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10th October 2016                 |On 28th October 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS


                                   Between

                               Mr Muhammad Ali
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer - islamabad
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Reyaz, of Ashraf & Ashraf
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant a citizen of Pakistan (born 9th August 1985)  appeals  to
    the Upper Tribunal with permission, against the decision  of  a  First-
    tier Tribunal  (Judge  V  Jones)  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's refusal to grant him entry  clearance  as  the  spouse  of
    Kaukab Jabeen ("the Sponsor"), a British citizen settled in the UK.

 2. In refusing the Appellant's application, the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    ("the ECO") took into  account  the  Immigration  Rules  governing  the
    application and was not satisfied on two counts;

      1) that the marriage between the Appellant and Sponsor was  a  genuine
         and subsisting one;

      2) that  the  parties  to  the  marriage  intended  to  live  together
         permanently in the UK.

    The Appellant appealed the refusal to the FtT.  When  the  appeal  came
    before that Tribunal oral evidence was given from the Sponsor  and  her
    sister Zohra Jabeen.  In addition  there  was  also  available  to  the
    Tribunal, documentary evidence, including evidence from  the  Sponsor's
    GP.  All of this was noted by the judge who recorded that he had  taken
    account of it [7].

 3. The FtT also had before it decisions dealing with previous unsuccessful
    applications made by the  Appellant.  The  judge  therefore  took  into
    account findings made in  those  decisions,  after  properly  directing
    himself under the Devaseelan principle [21]. The relevant decision  and
    findings for the purposes of this decision are contained in a  decision
    made by Judge Middleton-Roy in 2012.

 4. Having considered all those matters, the judge concluded that  although
    he was satisfied that  the  Appellant  and  Sponsor's  marriage  was  a
    genuine and subsisting one, and therefore the first ground of objection
    raised by the Entry Clearance Officer fell away, nevertheless he  could
    not be satisfied that the Appellant had shown that he intended to  live
    together permanently with the Sponsor in the UK,  as  set  out  in  the
    Rules.  The judge concluded therefore  that  the  Appellant  could  not
    satisfy the requirements of the Rules.

 5. He went on to consider Article 8 outwith the  Rules,  keeping  in  mind
    that this is an out of country appeal.  He found that Article 8 was not
    even engaged, but nevertheless  he  did,  no  doubt  for  the  sake  of
    completeness, set out that the alternative that even if Article 8  were
    engaged, there was nothing to show that there existed,  any  compelling
    or compassionate reasons for allowing the appeal.

Onward Appeal

 6. The Appellant appealed the FtT's decision to the Upper  Tribunal.   The
    grounds seeking permission essentially relied upon one  point.  It  was
    claimed that  the  FtT  erred  on  this  basis;  having  found  in  the
    Appellant's favour that he and  the  Sponsor  were  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting marriage, it was unreasonable of the judge to find that  the
    parties had no intention to live together permanently,  since  the  two
    aspects of the "marriage tests" go "hand  in  hand".  The  evidence  of
    intervening devotion should satisfy both tests.

 7. Permission was granted on the basis that it was arguable that the judge
    may not have sufficiently explained the  reasons  for  finding  in  the
    Appellant's favour on one aspect of the "marriage tests" and not on the
    other.





Error of Law Hearing

 8. Before me Mr Reyaz appeared for the Appellant; Mrs  Pettersen  for  the
    Respondent.  Mr Reyaz's submissions kept to the lines  of  the  grounds
    seeking permission.  He emphasised that the marriage had been found  to
    be a  genuine  and  subsisting  one  because  evidence  of  intervening
    devotion which consisted of the  Sponsor's  pregnancy  and  unfortunate
    miscarriage, allowed the judge to revisit  the  2012  determination  by
    Judge Middleton-Roy wherein the Appellant's appeal had been  dismissed.
    The judge in making the finding that the marriage  was  a  genuine  and
    subsisting one had taken into account the fact  that  the  Sponsor  had
    visited the Appellant in Pakistan and that  she  had  become  pregnant,
    although sadly had miscarried.  He added, it was perverse of the  judge
    to go on and find that the parties did not have the intention  to  live
    with one another permanently in the UK.

 9. Mrs Pettersen submitted a Rule 24 response.  She said that contrary  to
    what Mr  Reyaz  said,  the  FtT  had  directed  itself  properly.   She
    emphasised that although Mr Reyaz had tried to give the impression that
    a finding of  a  genuine  and  subsisting  marriage,  should  some  how
    automatically lead to a finding of an intention to live together,  this
    was not the correct approach.  Each  of  those  matters  represented  a
    separate and distinct part of the Rules.  The judge's decision  at  [8]
    clearly and correctly sets out the separate nature of the two parts  of
    the Rules. They are cumulative parts and each must be met.

10. She submitted further that the judge had made findings which were  open
    to him. He had looked at all the evidence before  him  and  had  relied
    properly on the evidence contained in Judge  Middleton-Roy's  decision.
    She said that whilst there was evidence of  intervening  devotion,  and
    the judge accepted  that  evidence,  equally  the  judge  had  found  a
    deficiency in the evidence dealing with the intention of the parties to
    live together permanently in the UK.

Consideration

11. I find I am satisfied that the FtT's decision discloses no error of law
    requiring to be set aside and remade.  I now give my reasons for  this.



12. The Immigration Rules clearly and distinctly set out that there are two
    parts or requirements which need to be  met  in  the  "marriage  tests"
    before the ECO can grant entry clearance.  It is correct to say that no
    challenge arises from the Respondent, on the FtT's  findings  that  the
    marriage is a genuine and subsisting one.  However it is  also  correct
    to say that each and every part of the relevant Rule must be met.   The
    burden of proof rests with the Appellant.

13. I find that Mr Reyaz was incorrect to surmise that because an Appellant
    had shown that he had fulfilled that part of the Rule relating  to  the
    genuineness of the marriage, it somehow followed automatically that  he
    had satisfied the rest of the Rule. this is especially so when there is
    a finding before a previous tribunal that the Appellant did not satisfy
    that part of the Rule. There should have been  placed  before  the  FtT
    judge in the present appeal some evidence which would have allowed  him
    to displace the finding made by Judge Middleton -Roy.

14. I find that the FtT correctly assessed the  evidence  before  it.   The
    evidence which the FtT relied upon was the evidence  which  was  before
    Judge Middleton-Roy contained  in  the  decision  promulgated  on  20th
    February 2012.  To date there has been no further evidence dealing with
    that point.  Judge Middleton-Roy found that there was no  intention  of
    the parties to live with one  another  permanently  and  came  to  that
    finding following evidence which had been given at the  hearing  before
    him, by the Sponsor's father.  This  led  Judge  Middleton-Roy  to  the
    conclusion that the Appellant had not discharged the burden upon him to
    show both that he had an intention to live with the Sponsor permanently
    in the UK and that the marriage was a genuine and subsisting  one.  The
    fact that the genuineness of the marriage is now settled  does  not  of
    itself settle the second marriage test.

15. The judge, I find, correctly reviewed the evidence before him. At  [24]
    he said the following;

         "24. However I was  not  satisfied  about  the  Appellant's  future
             intentions. At the hearing in 2012 the Sponsor and her  father
             said that if his  application  was  successful  the  Appellant
             would not live with the Sponsor at her house in Birmingham but
             would move to London  or  another  city.  Judge  Middleton-Roy
             found on  the  basis  of  this  evidence  that  there  was  no
             intention by the  parties  to  live  together  permanently  as
             required by the Rules. No evidence has been produced  to  this
             hearing, either by the Appellant or the  Sponsor,  to  suggest
             that  his  intentions  have  changed.  There  was  no  witness
             statement from the Appellant and the point was  not  addressed
             by the Sponsor or her sister in their evidence."

16. Judge Jones followed this up with his findings  at  [25]  and  said  as
    follows;

         "25. The burden of proof is on the Appellant to show he  meets  the
             requirements of the Rules. He has produced  no  evidence  that
             his   position,   as   recorded   in   Judge   Middleton-Roy's
             determination, has changed.  The  evidence  of  the  Sponsor's
             pregnancy was not enough to satisfy me that the Appellant  now
             intends to live permanently with the Sponsor in  the  UK.   He
             has  therefore  failed  to  demonstrate  that  he  meets   the
             requirement of paragraph E-ECP.2.10 that he  and  the  Sponsor
             intend to live together permanently in the UK."

    I find that nothing can be clearer than what  is  said  there.   It  is
    pointed out rightly that  there  is  a  conspicuous  lack  of  evidence
    relating to the intention of the parties to live with one another.   It
    is not a matter that can have taken the Appellant by  surprise  because
    he must know why the case against him was refused in 2012.  Because the
    Appellant has simply brought no further evidence addressing this point,
    it is hard to see how the judge can be criticised for  relying  on  the
    available evidence before him. a The weight  to  be  attached  to  each
    piece of evidence is a  matter  for  the  judge  subject  o  to  giving
    adequate reasons for his findings.

    The Appellant's appeal, it must be kept in mind is not on  the  grounds
    that he meets the Rules but on the only ground available to him, namely
    that the ECO's decision is a disproportionate interference with his and
    the Sponsor's Article 8 right to family life in the UK.   Part  of  the
    evidence before the FtT was that the Sponsor who  has  health  problems
    could not live in Pakistan because of her health. I note that the judge
    dealt with that in his decision making a finding at [27] that he  could
    not be satisfied that the Sponsor could  not  access  adequate  medical
    treatment for her condition in Pakistan. So far  as  this  Tribunal  is
    concerned there has been no challenge to that finding and it  therefore
    remains.  There  are  no  children  to   be   considered   within   any
    proportionality assessment.

17. I find therefore that  there  is  nothing  to  show  that  the  judge's
    findings  in  this  decision,  can  be  characterised  as  perverse  or
    irrational.  Indeed I find that the judge has dealt with  the  evidence
    before him and made findings  which  were  open  to  him.   It  follows
    therefore that I find no material error disclosed.  The decision of the
    FtT stands and this appeal is dismissed.



Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     27 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     27 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts
