
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/10143/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 15th August 2014                             |On 8th September 2014      |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE

                                   Between

                   the Entry clearance officer- New Delhi

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               MRs rani saxena
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)


                                                                    Claimant


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr H Kannangara, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The claimant, Mrs Rani Saxena date of birth 3 June 1941, is  a  citizen
    of India.  Having considered all the circumstances I  do  not  make  an
    anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  [ECO]  New  Delhi
    against the determination of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Herbert  OBE
    promulgated on 15th of May 2014.  To avoid confusion  I  have  for  the
    purposes of the present proceedings referred throughout to  the  person
    making the original application for entry clearance as the claimant.

 3. The judge allowed the appeal of the claimant against  the  decision  of
    the ECO dated 18th June 2013. The decision by the ECO was to refuse  to
    the appellant entry clearance to the  United  Kingdom  as  a  dependent
    relative under Appendix FM section EC-DR.

 4. By decision made on 23 June 2014 permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal was granted. The matter appeared before me to determine in the
    first instance whether or not there was a material error of law in  the
    original determination. Directions sent out prior to the hearing stated
    that if any further evidence was to be lodged it had to be lodged prior
    to the hearing so that the Upper Tribunal, if it was appropriate, could
    re-determine the appeal.

 5. During the course of the hearing I asked the claimant's  representative
    to look at the provisions within paragraph E-ECDR.2.5. of the Rules and
    paragraph 16 of the determination to assist me to understand  how  they
    presented their case to say that the rules had to be  interpreted  such
    that care could not be provided by a paid help but had to  be  provided
    by a family member.

 6. The sponsor,  Mr  Vishal  Saxena,  who  was  present  at  the  hearing,
    interrupted the proceedings. The sponsor indicated that he  was  paying
    for the representation and that he wanted to speak instead of the legal
    representative.   After   further   discussion   between   the    legal
    representative and the sponsor the legal representative decided that he
    could no longer represent and with the consent of the sponsor  withdrew
    from the proceedings. I did warn the  sponsor  that  these  with  legal
    issues but he was insistent upon being allowed to  speak.  I  permitted
    the sponsor thereafter to address the issues in the case. I also  heard
    from the representative of the ECO.

 7. The claimant applied for entry clearance to the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    dependent relative of a person present unsettled in the United Kingdom,
    the sponsor, her son. The claimant is 73 years of age. According to the
    medical reports submitted  the  claimant  suffers  from  arthritis  and
    hypertension, both conditions which were being "treated" in India.   In
    the past the claimant had a maid who appears to have helped her. It  is
    now  claimed  that  the  maid  has  left  and  they  cannot  obtain   a
    replacement.

 8. It is the claimant's case that due to age, ill-health or disability she
    requires  long-term  personal-care  to  perform  everyday  tasks.   The
    claimant and the sponsor claimed that those  needs  cannot  be  met  in
    India even by the provision of a maid and in any event they cannot find
    a maid or a person to undertake such duties.

 9. The provisions under consideration are paragraphs 2.4 and 2.5 of E-ECDR
    Relationship and requirements. Paragraph 2.4 and 2.5 provide:-

         E-ECDR.2.4 The applicant or, if the applicant and their partner are
         the sponsor's parents or  grandparents,  the  applicant's  partner,
         must as a result of age and illness or disability require long-term
         personal care to perform everyday tasks.

        E-ECDR.2.5. The applicant or, if the applicant  and  their  partner
        are the sponsor's parents or grandparents, the applicant's partner,
        must be unable, even with the practical and financial help for  the
        sponsor, to obtain the required level of care in the country  where
        they are living, because -

        a) it is not available and there is no person in that  country  who
        can reasonably provide it; or

        b) it is not affordable.




10. In allowing the appeal the judge at paragraph 16 of  the  determination
    states the following:-

         " I find that on the medical evidence before me that the  appellant
         does meet the criteria for consideration  and  that  the  long-term
         personal-care means care to be given by member of  their  immediate
         or extended family, rather than long-term  '  professional  care  '
         which would suggest a nursing service being provided for her.


11. It is submitted on behalf of the ECO that in coming to that  conclusion
    the judge has misinterpreted the provisions as not permitting such care
    to be provided by third parties, who are paid for their services. It is
    asserted that the judge  failed  to  take  into  account  paragraph  E-
    ECDR.2.5. of the rules. It is claimed that  that  paragraph  2.5  makes
    clear that any care needed must not be available or not affordable.  It
    is claimed that it is clear from the provision that  the  care  can  be
    provided by persons other than family members.

12. One has to look at the degree of care needed by this  claimant.  Within
    the body of the determination itself in paragraphs 8 to  13  the  judge
    has acknowledged that the hospital letters from  Lucknow  Hospital  and
    Neera Hospital confirmed that the conditions, from which  the  claimant
    was  suffering,  were  hypertension  and  arthritis  and   that   those
    conditions were treatable in India. The judge has gone on  to  indicate
    that for a number of years the claimant had had a maid, who had managed
    to provide the day-to-day care needed.

13. There was no evidence that the  claimant  required  day-to-day  medical
    care, which required the attendance of the nurse. Indeed  in  paragraph
    17 of the determination the judge had referred to  the  fact  that  the
    sponsor, the claimant's son, were  both  working  during  the  day  but
    refers to the fact that they could  provide  the  care  needed  by  the
    claimant. Whilst  there  is  reference  thereafter  to  a  nurse  being
    provided,  there  was  no  indication  of  any   specific   need   that
    necessitated the claimant having a nurse.

14. By comparison consideration had to  be  given  to  the  fact  that  the
    claimant had over a number of years been assisted by  a  maid  who  had
    managed her day-to-day needs. There was no indication of any  worsening
    in the claimant's condition such that such a maid could not continue to
    meet her day-to-day needs.

15. There is no justification to read into the rule a requirement that  the
    personal care has to be provided  by  a  member  of  a  family  whether
    immediate  family  member  or  extended  family  member.  Clearly   the
    paragraph E-ECDR.2.5 is clearly framed  on  the  basis  of  care  being
    provided by an individual being paid.

16. In the circumstances the judge within paragraph 16 has in deciding that
    the rules require care by a family member has failed to apply the rules
    properly.

17. Further within the paragraph cited from the determination  there  is  a
    suggestion that there is a need for professional long-term-care in  the
    form of the nursing service in respect of this appellant. That does not
    appear to be the case given the references to the  medical  report  set
    out within paragraph 8 of the determination. Paragraph 8 states:-

        The hospital letters  from  Lucknow  hospital  and  Neera  Hospital
        confirmed that she suffered from  hypertension  and  arthritis  and
        that those conditions were treatable in India.

18. There is no suggestion within the reports that the  appellant  requires
    nursing services.

19. With regard to the claimant's medical condition  I  have  letters  from
    Lucknow hospital, Neera Hospital and  SKD  Hospital  which  provide  as
    follows:-

        Lucknow Hospital

        Mrs Rani Saxena ....  aged  72  is  suffering  from  Arthritis  and
        Hypertension

        She is having Chronic Arthritis and having Functional  Disabilities
        and requires regular personal care by some attendant for her day-to-
        day activities.

        Such personal-care is not available where she is living.

        Neera Hospital

        This is to certify that Mrs Rani Saxena ... is  suffering  from  OA
        both knees & HT & other old page problems due to which she  is  not
        able to perform oh routine daily activities and needs  help  &  aid
        for the same.

        [OA, I take to be osteo-arthritis  & HT, I take to be hypertension]

        SKD Hospital

        Mrs Rani Saxena...  who  is  aged  72  is  suffering  from  Chronic
        arthritis of multiple joints and hypertension

        She experiences pain and stiffness in her knee,  ankle  joints  and
        spine in everyday routines such as bathing, dressing and  toileting
        the meal preparation.

20. Paragraph 9 of the  determination  recognises  that  in  the  past  the
    appellant managed her daily life with the  help  of  a  maid,  who  had
    served the family for a number of years.

21. There is no limitation in E-ECDR2.4. or 2.5. which  requires  that  the
    care has to be provided by a family member. To read into the  provision
    such a requirement constitutes a clear error of law on the part of  the
    judge. From reading paragraph E-ECDR 2.5. it is clear that the care can
    be paid for and as such that would include payment to a maid  or  other
    personal carer.

22. I invited the parties to address me as to how  this  matter  should  be
    dealt with on the  basis  that  there  was  an  error  of  law  in  the
    determination. It was the case on behalf of the ECO that the case could
    be re-determined on the basis of  the  evidence  presently  before  the
    tribunal. These sponsor also accepted that  the  appeal  could  be  re-
    determined on the basis of the evidence presently before the  Tribunal.
    Having considered the submissions I determined to deal with this appeal
    on the basis of the evidence already presented.

23. In so doing I would draw attention to Appendix FM - SE  which  requires
    specific evidence from specific sources to be provided [see the extract
    from the rules in the papers].  In  respect  of  confirmation  that  an
    individual requires long-term personal-care the  provisions  under  the
    heading of Adult Dependent Relative provide:-

        34 Evidence that, as a result of age, illness  or  disability,  the
        applicant requires long-term personal-care should take the form of:

        a)  Medical  evidence  that  the  applicant's  physical  or  mental
        condition means that they cannot perform everyday tasks; and

        b) This must be from a doctor or other health professional.

        35 Evidence that the  applicant  is  unable,  even  with  practical
        financial help the sponsor in the UK, to obtain the required  level
        of care in the country where they are living should be from:

        a) a central or local health authority;

        b) a local authority; or

        c) a doctor or other health professional

        36 If the applicant required  care  has  previously  been  provided
        through a private arrangement, the applicant must  provide  details
        of that arrangement and white is no longer available.

24. It is the claimant's case that  whilst  previously  she  did  have  the
    assistance of a maid that assistance is no longer available  and  there
    is no alternative assistance available.

25. The evidence discloses that  the  claimant  has  conditions  which  are
    "treatable" by the hospitals in India insofar as such things as  osteo-
    arthritis are treatable. Osteoarthritis is a degenerative condition the
    symptoms, aches and pains, lack of movement, which  may  be  alleviated
    but which at the moment cannot be resolved by medical treatment.

26.  There is no evidence that the claimant requires the day-to-day nursing
    care. Indeed the letter from  Lucknow  hospital  refers  only  to  some
    attendant and not medical care.

27. The sponsor and his wife both work. They would  not  be  present  on  a
    daily basis to meet the  needs  of  the  claimant.  There  would  be  a
    requirement of providing some help and assistance  during  the  daytime
    but such would not need nursing care.

28. In the past in India the claimant had a maid and there  is  nothing  to
    suggest that the day-to-day needs of the claimant were not met provided
    she had such assistance.

29. The evidence from the medical professionals gives  no  reason  why  the
    type of assistance previously available to  the  claimant  is  not  now
    available.

30. On the basis of the medical evidence I accept the claimant is suffering
    from chronic arthritis and has functional disabilities. I  accept  that
    she requires day-to-day assistance to enable her to carry out her every
    day activities. No reason is given however why  such  assistance  could
    not be provided in India. Such assistance has been provided in the past
    and was sufficient to  enable  the  claimant  to  carry  on  her  daily
    activities. I take account of what is said in the hospital letters  but
    give that a maid could be found in the past I see no  reason  why  such
    should not be available.

31. There is  no  requirement  for  any  professional  assistance.  In  the
    circumstances I find that it has not  been  proved  that  the  required
    level of assistance and care could not be provided in India at a price.

32. In those circumstances the claimant has failed to prove that she  meets
    the requirements of the immigration rules. For that reason this  appeal
    has to be dismissed on immigration rules grounds.

33. I have considered in the circumstances whether  or  not  Article  8  is
    engaged on the facts as presented.

34. I take account of the cases of Haleemudeen 2014 EWCA Civ  and MM v SSHD
    2014 EWCA Civ 985. The case law examines whether the rules are  Article
    8 compliant and whether there is any  need  for  an  intermediary  test
    requiring that consideration under Article 8 be warranted. As stated by
    LJ Aikens at paragraph 128:-

        "...  I  cannot  see  much  utility  in  imposing   this   further,
        intermediary, test. If the applicant's cannot satisfy the rule then
        there either is or there is not a further  Article  8  claim.  That
        will have to be determined by the relevant decision-maker.

35. I also draw attention to paragraph 134 and 137 of MM where it  is  make
    clear that there is no absolute right for any British citizen to  found
    a family in the United  Kingdom  and  bring  his/her  spouse  into  the
    country. The same must apply in respect of other family members and  in
    respect of persons with settled status in the UK.

36. I also take account of the case of Kugathas 2003  INLR  170.  The  case
    makes clear the degree to which in dealing with adults there has to  be
    not only financial dependency but also other elements  of  dependencies
    such as emotional dependency.

37. The claimant has not lived with the sponsor or the sponsor's family  in
    the United Kingdom and has not lived otherwise  with  the  sponsor  for
    some years.

38. The claimant has a pension and has her own accommodation  and  home  in
    India. There is some financial support provided by the sponsor  but  in
    the main the claimant has her own income from the pension. I take  such
    into account. I also take into  account  other  factors  including  the
    relationship between the parties.

39. Given all the circumstances I do not find that it has been  established
    that there is a family life of such a quality as to engage  Article  8.
    Even I were to be wrong with regard to that and the decision is such as
    to  materially  and  significantly  interfere  with  family  life,  the
    decision is clearly in accordance with the law and for the purposes  of
    maintaining immigration control as an aspect of the economic well-being
    of the country.

40. As a final matter I have to determine whether or not  the  decision  is
    proportionately justified. I take account of all the matters that  have
    been advanced. There is a means by which the  claimant  can  enter  the
    United Kingdom under the rules but the  appellant  does  not  meet  the
    rules. The claimant has a home and her day-to-day needs can  be  looked
    after in her home country.  In  such  circumstances  I  find  that  the
    decision is proportionately justified.

41. There is a material error of law in the  determination.   I  substitute
    the following decision

         a) The appeal is dismissed on Immigration Rules grounds.

         b) The appeal is dismissed on ECHR grounds.

         c) I make no fee award




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure

