

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/10499/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 27 January 2015                            |on 27 January 2015           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             SHYNAR MUKAMEJANOVA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Saddiq, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Sharma, of Matthew Cohen & Associates Ltd.,
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are as described above, but are referred to in the rest  of
    this determination as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The ECO appeals against a determination by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Balloch, allowing the appellant's appeal against refusal of  her  entry
    clearance application as a spouse, in terms of the  Immigration  Rules.
    The grounds of appeal do not  dispute  the  outcome  on  the  financial
    aspects.  Their point is that the Judge  went  wrong  by  granting  the
    appeal in absence  of  the  specified  evidence  to  meet  the  English
    language requirement.

 3. In his written argument and in submissions Mr Sharma correctly conceded
    that the ECO is right about that issue.

 4. The appellant now has the appropriate IELTS certificate, but that post-
    dates the ECO's decision, which  is  the  relevant  date  in  an  entry
    clearance appeal.

 5. The circumstances of the appellant have changed considerably  over  the
    course of these proceedings.  She, her husband and their two  daughters
    (all three being UK citizens) now live in the UK.   The  children  both
    attend primary school.   The  appellant's  argument  runs  that  taking
    account of the family life interests involved and the best interests of
    the two children, the appeal should be allowed under Article 8  of  the
    ECHR, and the appellant should not have to  apply  again  from  abroad;
    Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40.

 6. The appellant has a strong case for  leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  as
    matters now stand, but there are two insuperable problems in the way of
    reaching that result in these proceedings.

 7. Firstly,  in  an  entry  clearance  case  not  only  issues  under  the
    Immigration Rules but also Article 8 issues are assessed as at the date
    of decision: AS (Somalia) v SSHD [2009] UKHL 32, [2009] INLR 339.

 8. Secondly, there is nothing in the way of  the  appellant  applying  for
    leave under the family life provisions of the Rules on the basis of her
    current circumstances.  Even  if  the  Upper  Tribunal  could  look  at
    matters as they stand today, the requirement  to  make  an  application
    under the Rules can never itself be a disproportionate interference.

 9. While of course any application the appellant may make will have to  be
    decided by the respondent on its own merits,  all  presently  available
    information suggests that she may expect a favourable outcome; but  the
    application will have to be made (and in it the appellant will have the
    benefit, if needed, of Part 5A of the 2002 Act and section  117B(6)  in
    particular).

10. The First-tier Tribunal erred by allowing the appeal under  the  Rules,
    because the appellant's case had to fail on the  language  requirement.
    Its determination is set aside.  Looking at matters as at the  date  of
    the respondent's decision, there is no available  route  by  which  the
    appeal can properly be allowed.  The appellant's appeal, as  originally
    brought to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  is  dismissed  on  all  grounds
    available.

11. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


           [pic]


           27 January 2015
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
