
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/10023/2014
     OA/10028/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 6 July 2016                           |On 18 July 2016                     |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                   YIDIDYA NIGSSE KINFE (FIRST APPELLANT)
                  Sofonias Nigsse Kinfe (SECOND APPELLANT)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                      entry clearance officer - nairobi
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms O Taiwo, Counsel instructed by UK Law
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants appeal to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing their appeals against the decision of an
    Entry Clearance Officer to refuse them entry clearance for the purposes
    of settlement as the children under the age of 18 of Ms Behray Kemal, a
    recognised refugee from Eritrea.  The children are Ethiopian nationals,
    having Ethiopian nationality by virtue of their father being Ethiopian.
     Their case before the First-tier Tribunal was that in  the  year  2000
    they were living with their mother in Ethiopia most of  the  time,  but
    that they also stayed from time to time  with  their  father  (who  was
    separated from their mother) and their grandmother.  Thus they were not
    with their mother when  she  was  forcibly  removed  from  Ethiopia  to
    Eritrea in the year 2000.  The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an
    anonymity direction, and I do not consider that the appellants  require
    anonymity for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On 19 May 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge Simpson granted the appellants
    permission to appeal for the following reasons:

         1.   The appellants seek permission to appeal against a decision of
             the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Lang)  who,  in  a  decision
             promulgated on 18 December  2015,  dismissed  the  appellant's
             appeal against the ECO's decision to  refuse  entry  clearance
             under Paragraph  352D  as  the  dependent  children  of  their
             sponsor mother.

         2.   The appellants' grounds are that the Judge:

             (a)  failed to asses the applicant's evidence  and  failed  to
                  make findings on fundamental aspects of their claim;

             (b)  expressly failed to read the SEF,  which  was  a  crucial
                  document;

             (c)  materially  erred  in  her  assessment  of  sub-paragraph
                  352D(iii);

             (d)  failed to take corroborative evidence  into  account  and
                  failed to give  any  or  any  adequate  reasons  why  that
                  evidence was not considered;

             (e)  failed to properly consider article 8 issues.

         3.   It is not clear from the decision why  the  Judge  disregarded
             the evidence  relating  to  the  sponsor's  contact  with  her
             children between 2005 and 2012, this being  the  corroborative
             evidence referred to in (d) above.  Moreover, it  is  arguable
             that the Judge's comment in [26] as  to  whether  the  sponsor
             retained parental responsibility has not been  explained.   It
             is  also  arguable  that  the   Judge   has   erred   in   her
             interpretation of 'independent family unit'.

         4.   The grounds disclose an arguable material error of law.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The Entry Clearance Officer in Nairobi disputed that the appellants met
    inter alia the following requirements of paragraph 352D:

    (iii)    he is not leading an independent life, he is unmarried and  is
         not a civil partner, and has not formed an independent family unit;

    (iv) was part of a family unit of the person granted asylum at the time
         that the person granted asylum left the  country  of  his  habitual
         residence in order to seek asylum.

 4. The judge's findings on these questions were  contained  in  paragraphs
    [26] to [29] of her subsequent decision,  which  I  reproduce  verbatim
    below.

         26.  I have nothing to suggest  that  between  2000  and  2010  the
             sponsor remained involved in her children's lives.   I  accept
             that until 2005 she may have been precluded from doing so  but
             once she was in Greece contact would not have  been  difficult
             and the sponsor's statement is unclear  and  confusing  as  to
             whether contact did take place.  The appellant remained in the
             care of her grandmother  from  2000  until  the  date  of  the
             application.  It is the grandmother who had responsibility for
             the appellant, provided  the  home  and  was  the  appellant's
             guardian.  There  is  nothing  to  suggest  that  the  sponsor
             retained parental responsibility  and  everything  to  suggest
             that the appellant was in a separate  and  independent  family
             unit which continued  after  the  sponsor  was  able  to  make
             contact.

         27.  There is a statement from the grandmother and a statement from
             a Children Rights Protection Support  and  Care  Service  core
             process co-ordinator at pages 143-144  and  237-239  that  the
             grandmother  is  destitute  and  unwell.   The  statement  was
             requested on the 19th May 2014 and forwarded with  the  letter
             from the appellant's lawyers on 29th May 2014 after an initial
             refusal to grant leave to enter the UK (page 151).  I  do  not
             know whether this destitution is new or a reflection  of  life
             as it has been for many years.  There are no details  relating
             to the illness or to how this  impacts  on  the  life  of  the
             appellant and  the  grandmother's  ability  of  care.   It  is
             however clear that the appellant continues to  live  with  her
             grandmother, who continues to be her guardian  and  with  whom
             she has lived for all but the first fourteen to fifteen months
             of her life.  I conclude that  the  appellant  has  formed  an
             independent family unit with her grandmother  and  sibling  in
             Ethiopia of which the sponsor forms no substantial part.   Her
             part being limited to telephone calls and  Face  Book  contact
             since 2012 and some limited and recent financial help.

         28.  The respondent has argued that the appellant was not  part  of
             the family unit of the sponsor at the time  that  the  sponsor
             left the country of her  habitual  residence  as  required  by
             paragraph 352D (iv) of the Immigration Rules.  I do not accept
             this.  The respondent has based this on the use of "residence"
             in the statement of 3rd December 2012 paragraph 4.  However in
             the preceding paragraph  the  sponsor  makes  clear  that  the
             children "lived" with their grandmother once or twice a  month
             and their father lived with his mother.  In  cross-examination
             the  sponsor  talked  about  the  children  being  with  their
             grandmother once or twice a  week  and  confirmed  again  that
             their father lived with his mother.  While there is an obvious
             discrepancy in the amount of time the children were  not  with
             the sponsor it is clear that they  did  not  live  with  their
             father but spent time with the grandmother  (with  whom  their
             father lived) while being based with the sponsor.

         29.  I do not find that that the appellant has met the requirements
             of paragraph 352D, all of which need to be  met  and  for  the
             reasons set out above 352D (iii) has not been met

The Rule 24 Response

 5. On 14 June 2016 a member of the Specialist  Appeals  Team  settled  the
    Rule 24 response opposing the appeal.  In  summary,  it  was  submitted
    that  the  Judge  of   the   First-tier   Tribunal   directed   herself
    appropriately.  She had given anxious and careful scrutiny to  all  the
    evidence, and it  was  clear  from  paragraph  [25]  that  the  claimed
    corroborative evidence of contact was not deemed to  be  sufficient  by
    the judge.  She found that the sponsor gave no indication exactly  when
    contact started or  its  frequency  and  the  earliest  phone  call  or
    Facebook evidence was from 2012.   She  found  the  sponsor's  evidence
    about communication was difficult to understand  and  unspecific.   The
    grounds had no merit, and were merely a  disagreement  to  the  adverse
    outcome of the appeal without identifying any arguable  material  error
    of law.

Discussion

 6. There is no merit in some of the grounds.  As is recorded in  paragraph
    3 of her decision, the judge raised with the parties at the  outset  of
    the hearing the fact that large parts of the SEF at pages 52 to  90  in
    bundle two were unreadable.  Ms Taiwo, who appeared on  behalf  of  the
    appellants before Judge Lang, confirmed that she intended  to  rely  on
    the SEF only to confirm the sponsor's status as a refugee and the  fact
    that the appellants were her children.  This was not  disputed  by  the
    Presenting Officer, and accordingly both representatives  were  content
    to proceed without further reference to the SEF.

 7. Ms Taiwo was also unable to persuade me there  was  any  merit  in  the
    claim that the judge had disregarded evidence relating to the sponsor's
    contact with her children  between  2005  and  2012.   The  judge  gave
    adequate reasons at paragraph [25] for explaining why she rejected  the
    sponsor's  evidence  that  she  had  re-established  contact  with  her
    children in 2005.

 8.  However,  Mr  Avery  conceded  that  the  judge  had  erred   in   her
    interpretation of what constituted an independent family unit  for  the
    purposes of paragraph 352D(iii) of the Rules.  It was his understanding
    that in order to fall foul of 352D(iii) the appellants  would  have  to
    have formed an independent family unit themselves, rather than being in
    a family unit separate from the UK sponsor in which they were dependent
    on another responsible adult, such as in this case the  grandmother  or
    (as asserted by the Entry Clearance  Officer)  the  children's  father.



 9. Neither Ms Taiwo nor Mr Avery was able to direct me to any authority on
    the point, and I noted the judge had taken her cue  from  the  line  of
    reasoning pursued  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  in  the  refusal
    decision.  However, the consequence of the judge's interpretation would
    be that no children of refugees who were being looked  after  by  other
    family members would be able to  qualify  for  refugee  family  reunion
    under the Rules, which would be a surprising outcome.  So I  accept  Mr
    Avery's concession, and find that the judge has erred  in  law  in  her
    application of paragraph 352D(iii).

10. Although not canvassed in oral argument before me, I am  also  troubled
    by the judge's application of paragraph 352D(iv).  While it was clearly
    open to her to find that the appellants were part of the family unit of
    their mother at the time that she left  the  country  of  her  habitual
    residence, the judge did not engage with  the  other  element  of  sub-
    paragraph (iv) which is that the purpose  of  leaving  the  country  of
    habitual residence must be "in order to seek asylum".  The sponsor  did
    not leave Ethiopia to  seek  asylum:  she  was  forcibly  removed  from
    Ethiopia to Eritrea.

11. In the circumstances, the judge's decision under the Rules and also  on
    an Article 8 claim outside  the  Rules  is  unsafe,  and  the  decision
    requires to be remade in its entirety.  In view of the  extent  of  the
    fact-finding that will be involved, this is  an  appropriate  case  for
    remittal to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo  hearing.   Both
    representatives were in agreement with this proposed course of  action.



Notice of Decision

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of law, such
    that it must be set aside and remade.

Directions

13. This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House  for
    a de novo hearing before any judge, apart from Judge Lang.








Signed                              Date 18 July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
