
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/10115/2014
                                                               OA/10116/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 9th October 2015                  |On 19th October 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                         Mr OTEDOLA ADEDEJI ODUSANYA
                                                             First Appellant
                        Ms ADEJOKE ABIODUN ODUNSANYA
                                                            Second Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Olajuwon, of Bloomfield Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms E Savage, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of these Appellants. Having considered all the circumstances and evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    These are appeals by the Appellants against  the  decision  of  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Cockrill promulgated on 30 April 2015,  which  dismissed
the Appellants appeals both under the Immigration Rules  and  on  article  8
ECHR grounds.

Background

3.    The first Appellant was born on 6 June 1996. The second appellant  was
born on 27 December 1998. The appellants are Nigerian nationals.

4.    On 8 May 2014 the Appellants  applied  for  entry  clearance  to  join
their father in the UK. The appellants' father  is  a  British  Citizen.  He
works as a nurse in London, and lives in Essex.

5.    On 28 July  2014  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellants'
applications.

The Judge's Decision

6.     The  Appellants  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Cockrill ("the Judge")  dismissed  the  appeals  against  the
Respondent's decision.

7.    Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 29 July 2015 Judge  Simpson  gave
permission to appeal stating inter alia

    "The issue was whether the sponsor has exercised "sole  responsibility"
    for those children for a significant  period,  or  whether  there  were
    compelling family reasons why their exclusion was undesirable. However,
    it is arguable that the judge has conflated consideration of  297(i)(e)
    and 297(i)(f), which address separate issues, and his reasoning  as  to
    those issues lacks focus. Moreover, the decision is entirely silent  as
    to the leading case of TD (paragraph 297(i)(e): "sole  responsibility")
    Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049."

The Hearing

8.    (a)   For the  appellants.  Mr  Olajuwon  adopted  the  terms  of  the
skeleton argument. He reminded me that there are  five  grounds  of  appeal,
and told me that he will be relying on the cases of TD  Yemen  [2006]  UKAIT
00049 and QZ (China) [2002] UKIAT 07463. He  argued  that  at  [83]  of  the
decision  the  Judge  had  erred  in  his  approach  to  determining   "sole
responsibility". He argued that the Judge should have looked at the  history
of the case and accepted that with the death of  the  sponsor's  brother  in
2013, the sponsor  became  the  parent  with  sole  responsibility  for  the
appellants. He told me that that should be  the  starting  point,  and  from
there the  evidence  could  only  be  interpreted  as  indicating  that  the
requirements of paragraph 297(i)(e) were satisfied.

    (b)    He argued that (in the alternative) proper consideration  should
be given to paragraph 297 (i)(f), and that the evidence in  this  case  must
lead to the conclusion that there are compelling considerations  which  make
the exclusion of the appellants undesirable. He argued that  the  judge  had
conflated consideration of those paragraphs of the  immigration  rules,  and
that, together with the absence of  reference  to  the  cases  of  TD  Yemen
[2006] UKAIT 00049 and QZ (China) [2002] UKIAT  07463,  indicates  that  the
wrong test was applied. He urged me to allow the appeals  &  set  aside  the
decisions.

9.    In reply, Ms Savage, for the respondent, relied  on  the  respondent's
rule 24 response dated 29 September 2015. She argued that the decision  does
not contain any material errors of  law.  She  argued  that  the  judge  had
clearly taken account of each of the sub-paragraphs of paragraph 297 of  the
immigration rules and had neither conflated two sub-sections nor merged  the
boundaries between each of the disjunctive requirements of paragraph  297(i)
of the rules. She conceded that there  is  no  reference  to  case  law  but
argued that the decision makes it clear that the test set out in  the  cases
of TD Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049 was the test  that  the  judge  applied.  She
referred me to the case of R (Iran), and urged me to dismiss the appeal  and
allow the decisions to stand.

Analysis

10.   In TD (Paragraph 297(i)(e): "sole responsibility") Yemen [2006]  UKAIT
00049 the Tribunal said that "Sole responsibility" is a  factual  matter  to
be decided upon all the evidence.  Where one parent is not involved  in  the
child's  upbringing  because  he  (or  she)  had  abandoned   or   abdicated
responsibility, the issue may arise between the remaining parent and  others
who have day-to-day care of the child  abroad.   The  test  is  whether  the
parent has continuing control and direction  over  the  child's  upbringing,
including making all the important decisions in the child's life.   However,
where both parents  are  involved  in  a  child's  upbringing,  it  will  be
exceptional that one of them will have "sole responsibility".

11.   The judge sets out his reasons and his  findings  of  fact  in  detail
between [62] and [100] of  the  decision.  At  [67]  the  judge  focuses  on
paragraph 297(i)(e) of the rules. Between [68] and [83] the judge  carefully
weighs the evidence against the test of sole responsibility.

12.   It is true that the judge does not refer to the case of TD  (Paragraph
297(i)(e): "sole responsibility") Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049,  but  a  careful
and impartial reading of the Judge's decision indicates  that  between  [68]
and [83] the judge manifestly follows the guidance given in the case  of  TD
(Paragraph 297(i)(e): "sole responsibility") Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049.

13.   At [87] the judge considers paragraph 297(i)  (f)  of  the  rules.  He
takes account of the findings of fact made between  [62]  and  [86],  before
finding  that  the  appellants  cannot  fulfil  the  requirements   of   the
immigration rules because of the paucity of evidence produced. It  is  clear
from  an  holistic  reading  of  the  decision  that  the  Judge   correctly
considered  the  immigration  rules  and   found   that,   because   of   an
insufficiency of evidence, the appellants did not discharge  the  burden  of
proving that they fulfil the requirements of the immigration rules.

14.   There is no merit in the  appellant's  argument  that  the  Judge  has
conflated consideration of paragraphs 297 (i)(e) &  paragraphs  297  (i)(f).
He clearly considers each of those disjunctive  subsections  separately  and
comes to the sustainable conclusion  that  neither  of  the  appellants  can
fulfil the requirements of those subsections of paragraph 297 of the rules.

15.   From [92] onwards  the  judge  correctly  considered  the  appellant's
article 8 ECHR rights out-with the immigration  rules.  He  correctly  takes
guidance from the case of Razgar [2004] UKHL 27,  and  succinctly  addresses
the question of proportionality. At [94]  he  makes  clear  and  unambiguous
finding that the respondent's decision is a proportionate interference  with
the right to respect for family life in these cases.

16.   The decision made by the Judge is  one  that  the  appellants  do  not
like; but in these cases the Judge has not misdirected himself  in  law  and
has quite clearly considered the facts and circumstances particular  to  the
appellants' cases on the basis of the evidence lead before him.

17.   In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside)  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)
the Tribunal held that although a decision  may  contain  an  error  of  law
where the requirements to give adequate  reasons  are  not  met,  the  Upper
Tribunal would not normally set aside a decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
where there has been  no  misdirection  of  law,  the  fact-finding  process
cannot be criticised and the relevant Country Guidance has been  taken  into
account, unless the conclusions the judge draws from the primary  data  were
not reasonably open to him or her.

18.   It is not an arguable error of law for a  Judge  to  give  too  little
weight or too much weight to a factor, unless irrationality is alleged.  Nor
is it an error of law for a Judge to fail to deal with every  factual  issue
under  argument.  Disagreement  with  a  Judge's  factual  conclusions,  his
appraisal of the evidence or assessment of credibility,  or  his  evaluation
of risk does not give rise to an error of  law.  I  find  that  the  Judge's
determination when read as a whole set out findings  that  were  sustainable
and sufficiently detailed and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

19.   I therefore find that no errors of law have been established and  that
the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

20.   The appeals are dismissed.


Signed      Date 19 October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
