

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                     Appeal
Number OA/10795/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Sheldon Court
                        Determination Promulgated
On 16th July 2014      On 21st July 2014
Prepared 17th July 2014

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                             HABIBA HUSSEIN OMAR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant: Mr J Halligan (Counsel, instructed by Immigration Advice
Service)
For the Respondent: Mr J Mills (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant applied for entry clearance to the UK as an adult
   dependent relative under Appendix AM of the Immigration Rules, the
   application was made on the 28th of March 2013. It was refused by the
   ECO, the date of the decision being the 10th of April 2013. The Appellant
   appealed the decision by Notice and Grounds of Appeal of the 3rd of May
   2013.

2. The appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hubball at Sheldon
   Court on the 10th of March 2014. He allowed the appeal in a determination
   promulgated on the 25th of March 2014. In the determination he found that
   the Appellant did meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules relying
   on documentary evidence submitted and the evidence of the Sponsor, her
   son, who he found to be a credible witness.

3. The Respondent sought permission to appeal by an application dated the
   2nd of April 2014. In the grounds it was argued that the Judge had erred
   in respect of the evidence and Appendix FM-SE, it was unclear that the
   evidence had been prepared as required. Evidence suggested that care
   could be obtained for the Appellant. Accordingly it was argued that the
   Judge had erred and there was inadequate evidence to show that the
   Appellant could not access appropriate medication or support in Ethiopia.
   Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Brunnen on the 7th of
   May 2014.

4. For the Upper Tribunal hearing the Appellant submitted photographs taken
   of him with his mother. The submissions of the Respondent and the
   Appellant are set out in full in the Record of Proceedings. The
   submissions first addressed the issue of whether there was an error of
   law and then, on the basis that if an error was found, the approach to be
   taken to the Appellant's circumstances in respect of article 8.

5. As an out of country appeal the facts had to be established and the case
   decided as matters stood at the date of the decision, the 10th of April
   2013. The Immigration Rules do not require the submission of specified
   evidence with the application but whatever evidence is submitted has to
   relate to the position at the date of the decision and that applies to
   consideration of article 8 as well as the position under the Immigration
   Rules. The Immigration Rules form the starting point for the
   consideration of the proportionality of the decision.

6. The requirements for entry clearance as a dependent relative are set out
   in section EC-DR of Appendix FM. Paragraph E-ECDR.2.4 provides: The
   applicant or, if the applicant and their partner are the sponsor's
   parents or grandparents, the applicant's partner, must as a result of
   age, illness or disability require long-term personal care to perform
   everyday tasks.

7. Paragraph E-ECDR.2.5 provides as follows: The applicant or, if the
   applicant and their partner are the sponsor's parents or grandparents,
   the applicant's partner, must be unable, even with the practical and
   financial help of the sponsor, to obtain the required level of care in
   the country where they are living, because-
   (a) it is not available and there is no person in that country who can
reasonably provide it;
   or
   (b) it is not affordable.

8. The evidential requirements are set out in Appendix FM-SE in the section
   dealing with adult dependent relatives. Paragraph 35 provides:
   Independent evidence that the applicant is unable, even with the
   practical and financial help of the sponsor in the UK, to obtain the
   required level of care in the country where they are living should be
   from:
   (a) a central or local health authority;
   (b) a local authority; or
   (c) a doctor or other health professional.

9. It appears from the Refusal Notice that no evidence in support had been
   provided with the application but it may have been supplied with the
   Notice and Grounds of Appeal. At paragraphs 78 to 84 the Judge considered
   the medical evidence that was available. At page 12 of the Respondent's
   bundle was a letter from the Kamara Higher Clinic dated April 26, 2013,
   and so post-decision. That letter appears to be signed by a Dr Seid, it
   is in English and there is no indication that it is a translation from a
   document in Ethiopian.

10. The letter states that the Appellant had been receiving treatment for
   the previous 6 months but does not state what for, that she had hearing
   difficulties and needed help with day to day tasks, had difficulties with
   her arm and cannot manage her own care. The letter went to state that
   people like her would be looked after by their families and were often
   the victims of crime. The letter clearly does not state that the care she
   needed was either unavailable or unaffordable and did not state how, if
   she received no assistance, she was able to get to and from the clinic.

11. The second letter was from the Eldina Higher Clinic, this referred to
   an examination of March 18, 2013 and was signed by a Dr Taddesse but was
   undated and gave no address. This set out the diagnosis and medication
   that was prescribed but concluded that the Appellant was to take her
   medication regularly and to have regular follow up in the clinic. That
   did not state that she needed help, that it was either unavailable or
   unaffordable and did not indicate how it was that she had been able to
   travel to or from the clinic.

12. The third letter is from the Tikur Anbessa Hospital and is dated "17-
   feb-14", about 10 months post-decision. The letter gave the results of an
   examination but did not state when the examination had been carried out
   or by whom or what their qualifications were. This set out her condition
   in more detail and concluded that she could not live on her own, that she
   needed to be cared for and emotional support and "We understand that she
   has no family or friends that can help her or arrange her care in
   Ethiopia." The letter did not state that care could not be obtained in
   Ethiopia.

13. This evidence was taken by the Judge to support the Sponsor's evidence
   relating to the Appellant's condition and the inability to obtain support
   for her in Ethiopia. On that basis he allowed the appeal finding that the
   Appellant met the requirements of paragraph E-ECDR.2.5.

14. While this evidence did not have to be submitted with the application
   it has to meet the requirements of paragraph 35 of the Appendix FM-SE.
   There is nothing in any of the letters that states that it is not
   available and there is no person in that country who can reasonably
   provide it, or that it is not affordable.

15. The nearest evidence there is to show that the Appellant actually
   requires full-time assistance is the last letter. This letter is not in
   accordance with paragraph 35 of Appendix FM-SE as there is nothing to
   show that it is from any of the specified sources in terms of authority
   and it cannot be said who signed it or how they were qualified. In any
   event little weight could be attached to it as there is nothing to show
   that it related to the Appellant's condition at the date of the decision,
   some 10 months before it was dated.

16. I find that the determination contained an error of law and the Judge
   relied on evidence that did not meet the requirements of the Immigration
   Rules in terms of what had to be shown for the Appellant to come within
   the rules and the evidence did not meet the requirements for specified
   evidence. The evidence of the Sponsor was insufficient for the purposes
   of the rules, although it could support medical evidence properly
   submitted and admissible.

17. In short there was no admissible evidence to show that the Appellant,
   at the date of the decision, met the requirements of the Immigration
   Rules to be admitted to the UK as an adult dependent relative.
   Accordingly there was no basis for the Judge to find that the Appellant
   met the requirements of the Immigration Rules and the appeal had to be
   dismissed on that basis.

18. For the Appellant it was submitted that her circumstances are such that
   she ought to be admitted under article 8. For this the Immigration Rules
   are the starting point for the assessment of the public interest and the
   balancing of the competing interests. I accept that the Appellant's
   health is not good and appears to continue to deteriorate and is a cause
   for significant concern for the Sponsor whose support for his mother is
   impressive.

19. However I am unable to find that the situation is such that the
   Appellant can properly be admitted to the UK as matters stood at the date
   of the decision. It is clear that at that time she was able to access
   medical treatment and to travel to clinics and hospitals and was able to
   receive medical treatment. She was also able to travel around to collect
   money sent to her although I accept that there is evidence she had been
   mugged once in doing so. That regrettably is a problem elderly people
   suffer in the UK too.

20. Life was clearly difficult but the evidence submitted that related
   directly to around that time did not show that she was then in need of
   constant care or could not obtain it and suggests that some level of help
   was available. If the situation has changed since then, and the evidence
   suggests that it has, that is not something that I can take into account
   as there is no evidence to suggest a predictable prognosis along those
   lines.

21. The determination contained an error of law in respect of the
   Appellant's ability to meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.
   The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules and article 8.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making
of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I re-make the decision in the appeal dismissing the appeal of H H O.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I make no
order.

Fee Award

In dismissing the appeal I make no fee award.

Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 18th July 2014


