
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal numbers: OA/10592/2014
      OA/10589/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Royal Courts of Justice-Belfast                Decision and
Reasons Promulgated
On 1 December 2015                                 On 8 December 2015

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER-BEIJING
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 FANGMEI LI
                                HENGGUO HUANG

                                                                 Respondents

                                  DECISION

     1. I refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

     2. The respondent has been granted permission to appeal to  the  Upper
        Tribunal against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which
        allowed the  appellants'  appeals  against  the  refusal  of  entry
        clearance as a spouse and child.

     3.  At  the  hearing  before  me  the  appellants  were  not   legally
        represented. However, the appellants' former legal  representatives
        wrote to the Tribunal by letter dated 22 October  2015  stating  as
        follows:

                 "We refer to the above appeal and to the response filed  in
                 relation to it on behalf of the  (appellants)  respondents,
                 on 24 September 2015.

                 Our  instructions  in  this  matter,  on  behalf   of   the
                 (appellants) respondents, come via their  sponsor.  He  has
                 since instructed us that he no longer wishes to oppose  the
                 (respondent's) appellant's appeal, and that  he  wishes  to
                 withdraw any cross-appeal on  behalf  of  the  (appellants)
                 respondents, such that  might  be  contained  within  their
                 response that was filed on 24 September.

                 We trust that this letter will suffice for these purposes.

                 A copy of this letter goes to  the  (respondent)  appellant
                 for their attention."

     4. The sponsor, Guo Ju Huang,  attended  the  hearing.  There  was  no
        Mandarin interpreter and he spoke little or no English. It was  not
        possible to arrange for an interpreter to attend that day.

     5. The best that could be achieved was for me to speak to a friend  of
        the sponsor on the phone, who confirmed that the  sponsor  did  not
        want to pursue the appeal any longer.

     6. Rule 17 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
        provides that a party may give notice of the withdrawal of its case
        or part of it, subject to the consent of the Upper Tribunal.  There
        is no provision for a party to withdraw the appeal before the Upper
        Tribunal.

     7.  I  have  interpreted  the  letter  from  the   appellants'   legal
        representatives as a notice of withdrawal of the  appellants'  case
        before  the  Upper  Tribunal,  to  which  the  Upper  Tribunal  now
        consents.

     8.  The  letter  indicates  that  the  respondent's  (Entry  Clearance
        Officer's) appeal is not opposed. The appellants' case  before  the
        Upper Tribunal is withdrawn. The  appellants'  case  was  that  the
        respondent was wrong to refuse entry  clearance.  Accordingly,  the
        appellants' appeal against the  decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance
        Officer is dismissed.








Upper                Tribunal                Judge                 Kopieczek
        3/12/15





