
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: OA/10732/2013
                                                               OA/10739/2013
                                                               OA/10743/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reason Promulgated        |
|On 3rd May 2016                      |On 9th May 2016                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                              MRS SAVI ATIA (1)
                              MR DORI ATIA (2)
                              MR KOLI ATIA (3)
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Davison, Counsel, instructed by Regal Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS





    Introduction

    1. The appellants are citizens of Albania, and  are  a  mother  and  two
       children. They are the wife and children of Mr Ferdi Atia who asserts
       he is a British citizen. The second appellant was born on 4th  August
       1991 and the  third  appellant  was  born  on  23rd  July  1995.  The
       appellants applied for entry clearance to join Mr Atia on  8th  March
       2007. The respondent refused the application on 28th  February  2013,
       and the appellants appealed. Their appeal  against  the  decision  to
       refuse entry clearance was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Joshi
       to the extent that the decisions were found to be not  in  accordance
       with the law in a determination promulgated on the 5th August 2015.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
       PJM Hollingworth in a decision dated 2nd December 2015 on  the  basis
       that it was arguable that the First-tier judge had erred  in  law  in
       the construction of the Immigration Rules and on the basis  that  the
       judge had misunderstood a material fact: namely  the  judge  had  not
       understood that the respondent had not come to a  conclusion  on  the
       issue of whether Mr Atia was entitled to British citizenship.

    3. The matter  came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

    Respondent's Submissions - Error of Law

    4. The respondent relies upon  the  grounds  of  appeal.  In  these  she
       submits that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law as it  accepted
       that sponsor was a British citizen when it was clear he had  obtained
       his British passport  by  fraudulent  means  by  adopting  the  false
       identity  of  Mondi  Bega  born  in  Jumik,  Kosovo.  The  grant   of
       citizenship was either a nullity in law or capable of  being  treated
       as such by the Secretary of State, see Kaziu & Ors v SSHD [2014] EWHC
       832 Admin. This fact had been irrationally ignored by the  First-tier
       Tribunal. This was the ground primarily relied upon by Mr  Clarke  at
       the hearing. My attention was drawn to the fact that Kaziu  had  been
       appealed to the Court of Appeal, and that the decision of  Ouseley  J
       had been upheld in Hysaj & Ors v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 1195.

    5. The respondent also argues that the  First-tier  Tribunal  found  the
       sponsor credible where in fact he claimed asylum in a false  identity
       and  used  this  identity  in  numerous  other  application  to   the
       respondent including for citizenship, in his marriage to his  ex-wife
       (a British citizen) and in this application  for  the  appellants  to
       join him. The finding that the appellant was a credible  witness  was
       therefore an irrational conclusion.

    6. The respondent also argues that the First-tier Tribunal wrongly found
       that  it  was  not  possible  to  apply  paragraph  320(7a)  of   the
       Immigration Rules in refusing the application which  was  made  under
       paragraph 281 of the Immigration Rules. Appendix FM should  not  have
       been applied to this application as it was made  in  2007,  and  thus
       prior to Appendix FM being incorporated into the Immigration Rules.

    Conclusions - Error of Law

    7. Singh v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 74
       holds that whatever the date of application the new Immigration Rules
       under Appendix FM apply for all decisions on family applications made
       from 6th September 2012. The decision in this case was made  on  28th
       February 2013, and thus undoubtedly after the 6th September 2012, and
       as  such  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  correct  to  identify  that
       paragraph 320 (7A) does not apply to application for entry  clearance
       to enter the UK  as  a  family  member,  and  as  such  to  find  the
       respondent erred in law in applying it to refuse the  appellants  and
       also in not considering the application generally under Appendix FM.

    8. The First-tier Tribunal reached the conclusion that the sponsor was a
       credible witness taking into account his admissions of having adopted
       a false identity. This is done on a rational basis at paragraph 21 of
       the decision, and it was open to the First-tier Tribunal to find that
       the appellant had a reason to do this as is set out at  paragraph  25
       of the decision. The First-tier Tribunal judge gives reasons for  the
       conclusion that the appellant is the  person  who  naturalised  as  a
       British citizen on the basis of a marriage to a  British  citizen  at
       paragraph 28: these are perfectly rational. She also rationally finds
       that the sponsor remarried the first appellant in March 2007 and that
       the second and third appellants are his sons from their first  period
       of marriage, at paragraph 32 of the decision

    9. The  First-tier  Tribunal  clearly  understood  that  the  respondent
       contended that she had not reached a  conclusion  as  to  whether  to
       deprive the sponsor of his  citizenship  despite  this  matter  being
       muted since 2008: this is evident from what is said at paragraphs  11
       and 12 of the decision. However  the  First-tier  Tribunal  concluded
       that the material before them showed that the  sponsor  was  told  in
       2011 that no further action would be taken in a potential deportation
       case as he is a British Citizen and found, as there  was  no  further
       action since then regarding depriving  the  sponsor  of  his  British
       citizenship, that they was entitled to  find  that  he  was  still  a
       British citizen, see paragraph 30 of the decision.

   10. The facts of this  case  differ  materially  from  those  before  the
       Administrative Court and Court of Appeal in Kaziu and Hysaj.

   11. In those cases the Courts found that the applicants fell to be  found
       not to be British citizens as the applicants had fraudulently mislead
       the Secretary of State as to their true  identities  and  thus  their
       naturalisations as British citizens  were  nullities  on  grounds  of
       fraud in relation to the applications.   As  such  the  Secretary  of
       State did not need to make an order  depriving  them  of  citizenship
       under s. 40(3) of the British Nationality Act 1981. It was  clear  in
       these cases that there were false identities given in terms of  name,
       age,   minority/adulthood   and   nationality   which   were    vital
       characteristics as to whether the applicants were refugees  and  fell
       to be granted leave to remain, and which  must  therefore  have  been
       material to the grant of citizenship.

   12. Whilst the sponsor in this case came to the UK as an  asylum  seeker,
       and started the process as had the applicants in Hysaj by adopting  a
       false Kosovan identity and claiming asylum, he did  not  pursue  this
       claim which was refused in 1999 by the respondent and gained  nothing
       by it. He then married a British citizen and  as  a  result  of  this
       marriage was granted leave to remain, and then  indefinite  leave  to
       remain, and then applied to be naturalised as a British Citizen.  The
       First-tier Tribunal considered allegations by the respondent that the
       marriage of the sponsor  to  a  British  citizen  was  bigamous  (see
       paragraph 30 of the decision) but makes clear finding that  this  was
       not the case: it is clearly found at paragraphs  26  and  27  of  the
       decision that the sponsor divorced the first appellant in  July  1999
       prior to his marriage to the British citizen in August 2000, and that
       he divorced the British citizen in 2005 prior to remarrying the first
       appellant in 2007 (see paragraph  29  of  the  decision).   No  other
       allegations have been made that the sponsor's marriage to the British
       citizen was fraudulent in any other way.

   13. Given the fact that the sponsor's  name,  nationality  and  place  of
       birth were not central to his grant of leave to remain and indefinite
       leave to remain as a spouse, the fact that he continued  to  use  his
       assumed  Kosovan  name,  nationality  and  place  of  birth  in  this
       application, rather then his actual Albanian  name,  citizenship  and
       place of birth, cannot be  said  to  be  so  central  to  the  proper
       operation of the Secretary of State's  powers  to  grant  citizenship
       that the grant is rendered a nullity in accordance with the decisions
       in Kaziu and Hysaj.

   14. It would seem that the respondent also takes  this  approach  in  her
       most recently letter of 29th April 2016. In this letter the Secretary
       of State says she is considering depriving the sponsor of his British
       citizen status under s. 40(3) of the British Nationality Act 1981  on
       the basis of alleged bigamy. If an order is potentially going  to  be
       made under s.40(3) as indicated  by  this  letter  then  clearly  the
       Secretary of State is of the view that the grant  of  citizenship  is
       not automatically a nullity in the sponsor's case.

   15. It would  appear  from  the  letter  of  29th  April  2016  that  the
       respondent has further documents from Albania which show the  sponsor
       was not divorced from the first appellant prior to  his  marriage  to
       the British citizen. No such evidence was provided to the  First-tier
       Tribunal in March 2015 or is attached to the letter. Given  the  very
       great delays in this matter if such documentation exists it must,  as
       a matter  of  fairness,  be  produced  to  the  sponsor's  solicitors
       forthwith to enable them to respond to the letter as requested.

   16. I also implore the respondent to produce  a  decision  on  the  entry
       clearance applications by the appellants  within  a  reasonable  time
       frame: these applications now having been outstanding for  over  nine
       years which  reflects  extremely  poorly  on  British  administrative
       practice. I would venture that the appellants should have  one  month
       from the promulgation of this decision to provide the  full  relevant
       evidence in accordance with Appendix FM and  Appendix  FM-SE  to  the
       entry clearance post, and that a decision should be made by that post
       forthwith thereafter.

Decision:

      1. The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
         involve the making of an error on a point of law.

      2. I do not set aside the decision

      3. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal finding that the  decisions
         of the entry clearance officer were not in accordance with the  law
         is upheld.


Signed:     Fiona Lindsley   Date: 3rd May 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

