
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA106372014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9th June 2016                              |On 20th June 2016             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                              Muna sheikh noor
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      entry clearance officer - nairobi
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms N Katambala of Fadiga & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of Judge Colvin of the First-
    tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 14th October 2015.

 2. The Appellant is a female citizen of  Somalia  who  applied  for  entry
    clearance to the United Kingdom as the spouse of [HM] (the Sponsor) who
    has been recognised by the United Kingdom as a refugee.

 3. The application was refused on  13th  August  2014  with  reference  to
    paragraph 352A(i) and (iv) of the Immigration  Rules.   The  Respondent
    accepted that the Sponsor had been granted refugee status in the United
    Kingdom, and that when interviewed he had named Muna Sheikh Noor as his
    wife.  The application  was  refused  because  the  Appellant  had  not
    provided evidence to prove that she is Muna Sheikh Noor,  and  evidence
    had not been provided to prove that she lived with the Appellant before
    he left Somalia, and there was  no  evidence  of  contact  between  the
    Appellant and Sponsor since the  Sponsor  had  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 4. The Respondent was  therefore  not  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  is
    married to a person granted refugee status in the United  Kingdom,  and
    was not satisfied that the Appellant intended to live permanently  with
    the Sponsor.

 5. The Appellant appealed pursuant  to  section  82  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act) and the appeal was heard
    by the FTT on 11th September 2015.

 6. Having heard evidence from  the  Sponsor  the  FTT  accepted  that  the
    Sponsor had married a woman called Muna Sheikh Noor in Somalia on  10th
    April 1989 as a marriage certificate had been submitted which  had  not
    been challenged.

 7. The FTT did not however find that the Appellant had proved that she  is
    Muna Sheikh Noor for the following reasons.

 8. Firstly the Appellant had produced a passport issued to her in  Somalia
    which gave her date of birth as 25th July 1971, but in the  application
    form the Appellant's date of birth was given as 1st January 1965.   The
    FTT accepted that this matter was not noticed or raised at the hearing.
     There was therefore an unexplained discrepancy.

 9. Secondly the Sponsor had given evidence at the hearing that there  were
    no children of the marriage, which  had  also  been  confirmed  in  his
    asylum interview.  However the Appellant's application form referred to
    a dependant child born in Somalia on 30th  November  2001  and  it  was
    indicated that the child intended to travel with the Appellant  to  the
    United Kingdom.  This was therefore a second  unexplained  discrepancy,
    which had not been noticed at the hearing.

10. The FTT described the above discrepancies as  significant.   The  third
    reason given for dismissing the appeal was that there was  no  evidence
    of what documents, if any, the Appellant had to show in order to obtain
    her passport in Somalia in 2014.  The FTT described it  as  unfortunate
    that the discrepancies were not raised with the Sponsor at the hearing,
    but nevertheless the burden of proof rests upon the Appellant to  prove
    on a balance of probabilities her true identity.  The FTT decided  that
    the burden of proof had not been discharged, hence the dismissal of the
    appeal.

11. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    In summary it was contended that the FTT had erred in law by dismissing
    the appeal with reference to matters which had not been  raised  as  an
    issue by  the  parties.   It  was  contended  that  the  Appellant  had
    rectified the incorrect date of birth on the application form with  the
    embassy.  It was contended that the FTT had failed  to  note  that  the
    Sponsor in his asylum interview had stated that  the  Appellant  is  42
    years of age, which confirms the correct date of birth to be 1971.   It
    was  contended  that  the  FTT  should  have  given  the  Sponsor   the
    opportunity to explain the discrepancies, and failure to do so amounted
    to an error of law.

12. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge P J  M  Hollingworth  in  the
    following terms;


         1.   The judge at paragraph 15 of  the  decision  has  referred  to
             significant discrepancies in the evidence.  The judge has also
             stated that it is unfortunate that  these  discrepancies  were
             not raised with the Sponsor at the time of the hearing.
         2.   Whilst the judge has pointed out  that  the  burden  of  proof
             rests upon the Appellant it is arguable  that  an  opportunity
             should have been provided to the Sponsor to provide a response
             to these discrepancies at the hearing.
         3.   The permission application refers  to  matters  to  which  the
             Sponsor would have drawn attention.  It is arguable  that  the
             judge's  conclusions  in   relation   to   the   question   of
             discrepancies would have differed had the Sponsor  been  given
             the opportunity of responding to the discrepancies referred to
             by the judge.  It is therefore arguable  that  the  burden  of
             proof might have been satisfied.

13. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 contending in summary that the FTT had not erred in law,  and  the
    grounds contained within  the  application  for  permission  to  appeal
    amounted to no more than a mere disagreement with sustainable  findings
    which had been made.

14. Directions were subsequently  issued  that  there  should  be  an  oral
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal to ascertain  whether   the  FTT  had
    erred in law such that the decision must be set aside.

Oral Submissions

15. Ms Katambala relied upon the grounds contained within  the  application
    for permission to appeal.

16. Mr Kandola relied upon the rule 24 response contending that the finding
    made by the FTT in relation to there being a dependant child was not  a
    determinative factor.  There was an unexplained  discrepancy  regarding
    the Appellant's date of birth.  I enquired whether  Mr  Kandola's  file
    recorded whether the issues in relation to a dependant  child  and  the
    Appellant's date of birth had been put  to  the  Sponsor  when  he  was
    questioned before the FTT.  Mr Kandola  confirmed  that  there  was  no
    evidence to indicate that  these  matters  had  been  raised  with  the
    Sponsor.

17. Ms Katambala contended that the FTT had failed to consider  documentary
    evidence other than the application  form,  which  confirmed  that  the
    Appellant's date of birth is 1971.  If the Sponsor had been  given  the
    opportunity, he could have confirmed that the child referred to in  the
    application form is not a child of the family.

18. At the conclusion of submissions I indicated that the FTT had erred  in
    law and gave my reasons for so finding, which  would  be  confirmed  in
    writing.

My Conclusions and Reasons

19. In my view the FTT erred in law by  failing  to  give  the  Sponsor  an
    opportunity to respond to apparent discrepancies  which  had  not  been
    raised at the hearing.  This is procedurally unfair.

20. The FTT gave two main reasons for  dismissing  the  appeal.   They  are
    contained in paragraph 14 of the FTT decision.

21. Firstly there was the issue of  the  apparent  discrepancy  as  to  the
    Appellant's date of birth.  It is clear that the date of birth  in  the
    passport is 1971, and this is also stated in the marriage  certificate,
    although there is no reference  to  this  in  the  FTT  decision.   The
    evidence given by the  Sponsor  in  his  asylum  interview  appears  to
    indicate that the Sponsor was born in 1971.

22. The FTT did not notice until after the  hearing  that  the  application
    form referred to the Appellant as having a date of birth in 1965.   The
    FTT regarded this as a significant issue and  accepted  that  this  had
    only become apparent after  the  hearing.   As  this  was  regarded  as
    significant by the FTT, I find that the sponsor should have been  given
    an opportunity to explain or clarify the apparent discrepancy.

23. The second apparent discrepancy, which the FTT refers to as significant
    relates to whether or not there is a child of the marriage.  In  answer
    to question 61 of the application form,  the  Appellant  confirms  that
    there is a dependant child  born  on  30th  November  2001  and  it  is
    intended that this child travel with the  Appellant.   This  conflicted
    with the oral evidence given by the Sponsor at the  hearing,  and  also
    the evidence given by the Sponsor in his asylum interview.  Again  this
    discrepancy was not put to the Sponsor, as this only became apparent to
    the FTT after the hearing.

24. I note that in Appendix 4, which accompanies the application  form,  in
    answer to question 1.32 details of a child for whom the  Appellant  has
    responsibility are given.  This however is not a child of the  marriage
    between  the  Sponsor  and  Appellant,  and  therefore  there   is   no
    discrepancy when this answer is compared to the Sponsor's evidence that
    there are no children of the marriage.  As the FTT regarded this  as  a
    significant discrepancy, and confirmed that this  was  not  noticed  or
    raised at the hearing,  and  recorded  at  paragraph  14  that  it  was
    "unfortunate that these discrepancies were not raised with the  Sponsor
    at the time of the hearing" I find that it is an error of  law  not  to
    have given the Sponsor an opportunity  to  comment  upon  the  apparent
    discrepancy.

25. The result was that the two main reasons for dismissing the appeal were
    never raised with the Sponsor, or the Appellant's representative at the
    hearing.

26. For the reasons set out above, the decision of the  FTT  is  set  aside
    with no findings preserved.

27. Both representatives agreed at the hearing, when the FTT  decision  had
    been set aside, that it would be appropriate to remit the  appeal  back
    to the FTT to be heard again.

28. I have considered  paragraph  7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statements, and find that it is appropriate to remit the appeal back to
    the FTT because of the nature and extent of judicial fact-finding  that
    will be necessary in order for this decision to be remade.

29. The appeal will be heard at the Taylor House  Hearing  Centre  and  the
    parties will be advised of the time and date in due course.  The appeal
    is to be heard by an FTT Judge other than Judge Colvin.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that  it
is remitted to the FTT with no findings of fact preserved.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made by the FTT.  There has been  no  request  to
the Upper Tribunal for anonymity and I see no  need  to  make  an  anonymity
order.





Signed                              Date 13th June 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is  made.   The  issue  of  any  fee  award  will  need  to  be
considered by the FTT.





Signed                              Date 13th June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
