
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/10128/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decisions & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 17th July 2017                         |On 09th August 2017               |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                          kolade olusanya fajuyitan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Celia Record (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. For the purposes of this appeal, the references to the Appellant and to
    the Respondent are those references as existed in  the  Tribunal  below
    and had been maintained as such  in  this  Tribunal,  together  with  a
    reference to their representatives.

 2. This is an appeal against the determination of First-tier Tribunal J  C
    Hamilton, promulgated on 4th November  2015,  following  a  hearing  at
    Taylor House on 17th August 2015.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    allowed the appeal of the Appellant, whereupon the Respondent Secretary
    of State, subsequently applied for,  and  was  granted,  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 3. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Nigeria, who was born on 15  July
    1991.  He is 26 years of age.  He appealed  against  the  making  of  a
    deportation order against him on 7 October 2015.  He  is  currently  in
    Nigeria, having returned there  voluntarily  in  September  2015.   His
    right to appeal was therefore being exercised from  abroad  before  the
    Tribunal of J C Hamilton, and is similarly being exercised from  abroad
    now.

The Appellant's Claim

 4. The Appellant came to the UK as a visitor with his  parents  in  August
    2002 and was subsequently granted indefinite leave to remain.   Whereas
    his father went on to apply for, and was granted  British  citizenship,
    the Appellant did not so.  He was  granted  with,  and  remained  with,
    indefinite leave to remain on 10th October 2008.  He had lived  in  the
    UK lawfully for twelve years.  He went to college here and undertook  a
    part-time job in this country.  On 28th  November  2012,  however,  the
    Appellant went to a mobile phone shop with the intention of stealing  a
    phone.  He asked to look  for  a  phone  and  then  ran  off  with  the
    telephone.  He returned on 8th December 2012, this time with a  hammer,
    to the same shop and threatened to smash a display cabinet and stole an
    unspecified number of telephones.  A few days later  on  26th  December
    2012, he returned once again to the same shop with a  hammer  and  once
    again smashed the display cabinet and stole telephones.  As previously,
    he waved his hammer at the employees, but denies any intention to  hurt
    anyone.

 5. On 3rd June 2013, the Appellant pleaded guilty at Woolwich Crown  Court
    to one theft of shoplifting and two counts of robbery.

 6. The Appellant has a partner, [JF], who is a British  Canadian  national
    resident in the UK, and there is a child of this relationship, who  was
    referred to in the Tribunal below as "J".  He is a British  citizen  by
    virtue of his mother's nationality.

 7. On 1st July 2013, the Appellant was  sentenced  to  a  total  of  three
    years' imprisonment at Woolwich Crown Court.  He  was  subsequently  on
    1st August 2013 served with a  liability  to  deportation  notice,  and
    invited to make representations, following which the deportation  order
    was confirmed on 16th August 2014.

The Judge's Determination

 8. In his determination, Judge J C  Hamilton  considered  the  Appellant's
    circumstances, including the fact that he had lived in the UK from  the
    age of 11 onwards, had been educated and had worked in the UK.  As  the
    judge observes, "these were his formative years".  The judge noted  how
    the case law suggested that from the age of 7 onwards,  "that  a  child
    starts to form social relationships  and  relates  to  his  environment
    independent of its parents" (paragraph 65).  The judge did  not  ignore
    the fact that the Appellant had nevertheless lived in Nigeria until  he
    was 11 years of age and his family were originally from  Nigeria,  such
    that  "they  clearly  have  continuing  links  with  Nigeria"  and  the
    Appellant has at least one sister there, notwithstanding the fact  that
    he had spent now fourteen years in the UK, such that "the likelihood is
    that he retains cultural and other ties  to  Nigeria"  (paragraph  66).
    The judge also observed that, at the time that the Appellant had formed
    his  relationship  with  his  partner,  [JF],  neither  his   nor   her
    immigration status  was  precarious,  and  this  was  conceded  by  the
    Respondent Secretary of State in the  decision  letter  (see  paragraph
    73).

 9. The core of the judge's determination, however, is in relation  to  the
    impact of his deportation on his child, "J".  The judge dealt with this
    pointing  out  that,  for  the  child,  "the  adverse  consequences  of
    remaining in the UK are likely to be that he  will  be  deprived  of  a
    proper relationship with his father".  The child was aged 3 years, and,
    "this is a time when he would normally be  bonding  with  his  father".
    Given that the Appellant had been in prison, the judge also  recognised
    that, "the Appellant's son has limited knowledge of his father and  has
    the benefit of a supportive extended family".  Nevertheless,  this  was
    no substitute for the emotional and developmental benefits for a 3 year
    old child that are associated with being brought up by both parents  in
    his formative years (paragraph 92).  The judge then went on to conclude
    that it will be unduly harsh for the Appellant's partner and  child  to
    live in Nigeria with him, given  that  neither  of  them  had  been  to
    Nigeria.  He also observed that, "expecting her to  separate  from  her
    child in order to live with the Appellant would also be  unduly  harsh"
    (see paragraph 94(1)).  The judge held that it was a  "finely  balanced
    decision" and on its own particular facts, but that he  would  have  to
    conclude that it will be unduly harsh for the Appellant's son  to  grow
    up in the UK without him (see paragraph  94(3)).   In  coming  to  this
    conclusion, the judge had regard to Section 117C of the 2002 Act and to
    paragraph 399B of  the  Immigration  Rules  (see  paragraph  95).   The
    conclusion reached by the judge was that it will be disproportionate to
    the child's Article 8 rights and interests  for  the  Appellant  to  be
    deported and the judge allowed the appeal on human rights grounds  (see
    paragraph 96).

Grounds of Application

10. The grounds of application state that there were a whole host of  well-
    established authorities to the effect that simply because a  family  is
    going to be split up, did not mean that there would  be  "unduly  harsh
    consequence"  such   that   it   would   render   deportation   to   be
    disproportionate and unlawful, without anything more.  These are  cases
    such as Lee v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 348, CT (Vietnam)  [2016]  EWCA  Civ
    488, LC (China) [2014] EWCA Civ 1310; NA  (Pakistan)  [2016]  EWCA  Civ
    662; and AJ (Zimbabwe) [2016] EWCA Civ 1012.

11. In particular, in the case of NA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 662, it  is
    made clear that, "the desirability of children being with both  parents
    is a common place of family life".  That is not usually a  sufficiently
    compelling  circumstance  to  outweigh  the  high  public  interest  in
    deporting foreign criminals.  As Rafferty LJ observed in  CT  (Vietnam)
    [2016] EWCA Civ 488 at paragraph 38:

         "Neither the British nationality of the Respondent's  children  nor
         their likely separation from their  father  for  a  long  time  are
         exceptional circumstances which outweigh the public interest in his
         deportation".

12. Similarly, in AJ (Zimbabwe) [2016] EWCA Civ 1012, it was stated that,

         "It was not open to the FTT to find  that  the  separation  of  the
         children from the father/stepfather  was  a  compelling  reason  to
         allow the Respondent to remain.   Far  from  being  an  exceptional
         circumstance, this is an everyday situation as  the  authorities  I
         have set out demonstrate.  They show that the separating  issue  of
         parent and child cannot, without more, be a good reason to outweigh
         the very powerful public interest in deportation.  No doubt the FTT
         was right to say that these  children  would  unfortunately  suffer
         from the separation but for reasons I have  already  explained,  if
         the concept of exceptional circumstances can apply in such a  case,
         it would undermine the  application  of  the  English  Rules"  (see
         paragraph 34 of NA (Pakistan)).

13. Finally, the Grounds of Appeal state that there was a  failure  by  the
    judge to give adequate reasons for findings on material issues.

14. Before the First-tier Tribunal, Judge  Osborne  refused  permission  to
    appeal, pointing out that the judge below  had  given  a  determination
    that was a "careful and well-reasoned decision" and that the judge  had
    set out the "pertinent issues, law and evidence relating to  the  facts
    of the appeal".  Judge Osborne in refusing  permission  to  appeal  had
    gone on to say that "in appeals of this nature it is  a  task  for  the
    judge to make findings of fact on the basis  of  the  evidence  and  to
    provide adequately clear reasons for those findings" and the judge  had
    done precisely this.  In particular, the judge had stated at  paragraph
    89 that the Appellant's son would be deprived of the comparatively high
    quality of healthcare, education, and social support that is  presently
    available to him as a UK citizen,  which  he  would  have  to  forsake.
    Secondly, there was nothing in the Respondent's file  to  suggest  that
    the judge was referred to any of the  authorities  that  had  now  been
    listed and referred to in the Grounds of  Appeal.   If  the  Respondent
    wished the judge to consider these  then  it  was  incumbent  upon  the
    Respondent to ensure that the judge was provided with copies  of  those
    authorities.  This did not appear to be the case.

15. One further  application  for  permission  to  appeal,  permission  was
    granted by the Upper Tribunal under  UTJ  C  Hanson.   In  what  is  an
    extensive and comprehensive set of reasons, the UTJ refers to  how  the
    judge sets out his findings at paragraph 62 onwards,  as  well  as  the
    references to the Immigration Rules and to the law at paragraphs 51 and
    61.  The judge had also been satisfied below that the Appellant and his
    partner were in a subsisting relationship and have a  child.   However,
    the judge appears to have formally concluded that there will be  unduly
    harsh consequences for the child simply because a family was  going  to
    be split, without properly explaining why.  The  judge  also  erred  in
    failing to provide adequate reasons for finding why the  separation  of
    the child from the Appellant would result in an  unduly  harsh  outcome
    for the child.

16. There is no Rule 24 response from the Appellant.

Submissions

17. At the hearing before me on 17th July 2017,  the  Respondent,  who  was
    appealing in the present case before this Tribunal was  represented  by
    Mr Wilding, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer, and  he  submitted
    that there was a fundamental failure by the judge to make  findings  on
    the issue as to how it would be "unduly harsh" for the Appellant's  son
    if the Appellant were to be  deported.   Extensive  guidance  had  been
    given by the Court of Appeal in NA  (Pakistan)  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  662,
    where it had been established that  not  even  the  status  of  British
    citizenship is enough to show exceptional circumstances.  Moreover,  in
    the pre-Rule change in the case of Lee v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ  348  the
    same had been said.  The fact was that there was a high public interest
    in the deportation of foreign criminals.  This was a  matter  that  the
    judge had overlooked.

18. Second, the more recent judgment of WZ (China)  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  795,
    actually saw Sir Stanley Burnton conclude that,

         "I cannot see how a Tribunal properly applying the law as it was at
         the date it heard the Appellant's  appeal,  and  given  the  public
         interest in the deportation of a person  sentenced  to  two  years'
         imprisonment the weight that was appropriate, I  have  allowed  his
         appeal.  I take into account that until he committed his offence he
         had been of  good  character,  and  that  the  reports  before  the
         Tribunal showed that he was unlikely to reoffend.  I bear  in  mind
         that he has an established family life in this  country  ..."  (see
         paragraph 14).

    Mr Wilding submitted that this was a statement that was very similar to
    the situation that appertained in the instant  case.   As  Sir  Stanley
    Burnton had indicated, "none of these facts takes his case out  of  the
    ordinary" and this was an entirely "ordinary" case in that  respect  as
    well.

19. Third, if consideration is now  given  to  the  determination  of  this
    appeal by Judge J C Hamilton, it is plain that  the  same  errors  have
    been made,  submitted  Mr  Wilding.   For  example,  the  judge  simply
    proceeds to conclude that there are adverse consequences  of  remaining
    in the UK for the child "J" if his father, the Appellant, is  deported.
    What appeared at paragraph 92 was, what had been  referred  to  by  the
    Court of Appeal as the "common place of family life", and  it  was  the
    "ordinary" case where there is an inevitable splitting up of the family
    following deportation.  Similarly, if one looks at  paragraph  94,  the
    judge, in three separate subparagraphs simply proceeds to conclude that
    the consequences for the Appellant's child will be unduly harsh if  the
    deportation were to proceed.

20. Finally, at paragraphs 64 to 66 of the determination  the  judge  makes
    observations in relation to whether someone who  has  committed  crimes
    can be said to be socially or culturally integrated into the UK,  which
    were beyond his remit.  Mr Wilding drew my attention at this  point  to
    the case of Rocky Gurung [2012] EWCA Civ 62, where the Court of  Appeal
    had criticised the Tribunal below on the basis that,

         "Much of the determination has  the  appearance  of  a  search  for
         reasons for not deporting him rather than - as in our view it ought
         to have been, an enquiry into whether, despite the statutory policy
         of automatic deportation, Article 8  of  the  Convention  would  be
         violated by its implementation" (see paragraph 21).

21. For all these reasons, Mr Wilding submitted that the  only  appropriate
    course of action was for this matter to be remitted back to the  First-
    tier Tribunal, so that an intention can be  focused  on  how  the  mere
    splitting up of the family would  have  adverse  consequences  for  the
    Appellant's child in a way that  would  make  the  deportation  "unduly
    harsh" and disproportionate.

22. For her part, Miss Record, drew my attention to the  skeleton  argument
    that was before the First-tier Tribunal, dated 12th August  2016.   She
    submitted that this was nothing  more  than  a  disagreement  with  the
    decision of the judge below.  It was not the case that matters had  not
    been properly considered and gone into.

23. First, if one looks at paragraph 65, it explained that  the  judge  has
    had regard to the fact that the Appellant has been in the UK  from  the
    age of 11 onwards and that from the 7 years of age  onwards,  he  would
    have been in a position to form social relationships and relate to  the
    environment around him.

24. Second, the decision  letter  conceded  that  the  Appellant  formed  a
    relationship with his partner, [JF], at  a  time  when  the  status  of
    neither was precarious (see paragraph 73).

25. Third, the judge had regard to the assessor's report from the OASy  who
    confirmed that the Appellant posed a medium risk of serious harm to the
    public, which meant that he "was unlikely to do so unless there  was  a
    change in his circumstances" (paragraph 80).  The judge  also  referred
    to the fact that, "the Appellant expressed a high level of remorse  for
    his actions" and that the sentencing judge  had  referred  to  this  as
    something which "was obviously not  a  hopeless  case".   It  was  just
    unfortunate for the Appellant that he  had  committed  three  offences,
    because had  he  committed  one  he  would  have  had  a  non-custodial
    sentence.

26. Fourth, the judge recognised that  the  Appellant's  "family  had  been
    highly supportive.  All the witnesses I heard from were  consistent  in
    their description of the shock, disapproval and concern experienced  by
    the family ..." (paragraph 84).

27. Fifth, the judge noted how in his letter to the Crown Court Judge,  the
    Appellant's father had said that, "as far as I am aware  he  has  never
    been in any trouble with the law during his years n the  UK",  although
    it was the case, as the judge openly recognised, that the Appellant had
    received a reprimand and two cautions, but this  only  showed,  as  the
    judge found, that the father only had "limited knowledge of  his  son's
    activities".  Nevertheless, it  was  the  case  that  "the  Appellant's
    offending was clearly brought home to  his  family  and  his  need  for
    support and guidance" (paragraph 85).

28. Sixth, the judge observed that, "almost all  criminals  who  have  been
    caught claim to be remorseful" and that "it  is  difficult  to  give  a
    great deal of weight to such expressions of remorse".  Nevertheless the
    judge took a clear view that,

         "It does seem likely that the significant adverse  consequences  of
         his offending behaviour will have brought home  to  the  Appellant,
         the likely consequences of further criminal activity in the future.
          Furthermore, I  have  found  that  the  Appellant  has  a  genuine
         relationship with his partner and his son.   I  therefore  find  it
         likely that the possibility of losing these relationships will have
         led  the  Appellant  to  reflect  about  the  consequences  of  his
         behaviour and further diminish the  chances  of  future  offending"
         (paragraph 86).

29. Miss Record ended her submissions with the statement that, contrary  to
    what was being said in relation to the judge's conclusion at  paragraph
    92, namely, that the consequences of the deportation would  be  "unduly
    harsh" for the Appellant's child, evidence  had  been  put  before  the
    judge  to  demonstrate  precisely  this.   This  evidence  lay  in  the
    statement of [JF] at paragraphs 5 to 6, which confirm the  3  year  old
    child actually being conscious of, and in need of the presence  of  his
    father in his life.  In any event, submitted Miss Record, the  position
    of the child was only one factor, and the judge had regard to  numerous
    other factors, such  as  remorse,  and  the  family  support,  and  the
    sentencing judge treating this as not a hopeless case.

30. In reply, Mr Wilding submitted that the only aspect of the  case  which
    the judge self-identified, as coming to the aid of the  Appellant,  was
    the adverse consequences of the deportation upon his child, and in this
    regard, he had failed to make the  findings  to  demonstrate  how  such
    consequences can be said to be "unduly harsh, on the facts as found  by
    him".

No Error of Law

31. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error of law (see Section 12(1) of TCEA 2007).
      My reasons are as follows.

32. First, I agree with Judge Osborne bellow,  who  had  initially  refused
    permission to appeal, when  he  had  pointed  out  that  the  judge  JC
    Hamilton actually given a determination that was a "careful  and  well-
    reasoned decision." This is because  he  had  set  out  the  "pertinent
    issues, law and evidence relating to the facts of the  appeal".   Judge
    Osborne had correctly stated, in my view,  that  "in  appeals  of  this
    nature it is a task for the judge to make findings of fact on the basis
    of the evidence and to  provide  adequately  clear  reasons  for  those
    findings" and the judge had done precisely this. It is well established
    that 'perversity' is a high hurdle and that all too often practitioners
    use this epithet when it has no application (see R (Iran)  [2005]  EWCA
    285, at paras 11-12).  I agree with Judge Osborne that at paragraph  89
    Judge JC Hamilton had referred to the fact  that  the  Appellant's  son
    would be deprived of the  comparatively  high  quality  of  healthcare,
    education, and social support that is presently available to him  as  a
    UK citizen, which he would have to  forsake.   Furthermore,  there  was
    nothing in the Respondent's file to suggest that the judge was referred
    to any of the authorities that had now been listed and referred  to  in
    the Grounds of Appeal.  If the Respondent wished the judge to  consider
    these then it was incumbent upon the  Respondent  to  ensure  that  the
    judge was provided with copies of those authorities.  This  was  now  a
    disagreement with the findings of the judge  who  was  carrying  out  a
    proper judicial function which he was entrusted to carry out.

33. Second, I have  considered  the  grant  of  permission  by  UTJ  Hanson
    subsequently, who in observing how Judge JC Hamilton was satisfied that
    the Appellant and his partner were in  a  subsisting  relationship  and
    have a child, had then simply moved onto concluding that there will  be
    unduly harsh consequences for the child simply  because  a  family  was
    going to be  split,  without  properly  explaining  why.   Upon  closer
    examination in this Tribunal, I am not satisfied that this is  in  fact
    the case. JC Hamilton did provide adequate reasons for finding why  the
    separation of the child from the Appellant would result  in  an  unduly
    harsh outcome for the child.  He had given his conclusion at  paragraph
    92, namely, that the consequences of the deportation would  be  "unduly
    harsh" for the  Appellant's  child.  The  evidence  for  this  was  not
    lacking.  It was before the Judge in the form of the statement of  [JF]
    at paragraphs 5 to 6. These confirm that he 3 year old  child  actually
    being conscious of, and in need of the presence of his  father  in  his
    life.  It would have been  otherwise  if  the  evidence  had  not  been
    available before the Judge.

34. Third, the relationship between the Appellant and  his  child  was  but
    only one factor.  It was incumbent upon the Judge to give consideration
    to the wider issues applicable as well.  It is in fact in this  context
    that the Determination of Judge JC Hamilton needs to be considered.  At
    paragraph 65 he explains that the Appellant has been in the UK from the
    age of 11 onwards and that from the 7 years of age  onwards,  he  would
    have been in a position to form social relationships and relate to  the
    environment around him.  The decision letter had also conceded that the
    Appellant formed a relationship with his partner, [JF], at a time  when
    the status of neither was precarious  (see  paragraph  73).   Judge  JC
    Hamilton also gave consideration to the assessor's report from the OASy
    and this confirmed that the Appellant posed a medium  risk  of  serious
    harm to the public, which meant that he "was unlikely to do  so  unless
    there was a change in his circumstances"  (paragraph  80).   The  judge
    also referred to the fact that, "the Appellant expressed a  high  level
    of remorse for his actions" and that the sentencing judge had  referred
    to this as something which "was obviously not a hopeless case".  It was
    just  unfortunate  for  the  Appellant  that  he  had  committed  three
    offences, because had he  committed  one  he  would  have  had  a  non-
    custodial sentence.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 8th August 2017



