
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/10304/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination promulgated    |
|On 7 January 2014                             |On 15 January 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

                         MR ABDIFATAH ABDULAHI HERSI
                        (No anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NAIROBI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr I Palmer of counsel instructed by Fadiga & Co
solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr J Parkinson a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


1. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia who was born on 1 January 1980. He
   has been given permission to appeal the determination of a First-Tier
   Tribunal Judge ("the FTTJ") who dismissed his appeal against the
   respondent's decision of 30 April 2012 to refuse him entry clearance to
   join the sponsor who he claims is his wife and a refugee in this country
   under the provisions of paragraph 352A of the Immigration Rules.

2. The respondent was not persuaded that the appellant was married to the
   sponsor or that the documents submitted to show that they were married
   were genuine. It was considered that the application failed both under
   the Immigration Rules and on Article 8 human rights grounds. There had
   been an earlier application and appeal which had failed.

3. The appellant appealed and the FTTJ heard the appeal on 18 January 2013.
   Both parties were represented and oral evidence was given by the sponsor.
   Another possible witness was present who had submitted a witness
   statement.

4. The FTTJ placed no weight on the certificate from the Muslim Supreme
   Council in Uganda and concluded that the appellant had not established
   that he was married to the sponsor. It was not believed that the sponsor
   would send approximately 50% of her income to the appellant. The FTTJ
   reached the conclusion that that the marriage was not genuine or
   subsisting. The appeal was dismissed under the Immigration Rules and on
   Article 8 human rights grounds.

5. The appellant sought permission to appeal which was refused by a judge
   in the First-Tier Tribunal. However, on renewal to the Upper Tribunal,
   permission was granted.

6. The grounds submit that there was procedural impropriety. It is alleged
   that the FTTJ directed that the proposed witness should not give oral
   evidence but then went on to give his written evidence "little weight".
   It is argued that in fact the FTTJ gave evidence no weight. There is a
   witness statement from counsel in support of the allegation and a request
   that the FTTJ be asked for comments and the record of proceedings. It is
   also submitted that there was insufficient consideration of the
   appellant's witness statement setting out the circumstances in which the
   certificate from the Muslim Supreme Council was obtained and that the
   FTTJ effectively concluded that the marriage certificate was a forgery
   without giving proper reasons for doing so. There were no clear reasons
   for rejecting the sponsor's evidence as to the amounts which she had sent
   to the appellant and the FTTJ failed to have proper regard to the
   background evidence. It is also submitted that the errors of law in
   relation to the grounds under the Immigration Rules impinged on the
   FTTJ's consideration of the Article 8 grounds with the same consequences.

7. The Upper Tribunal Judge who granted permission to appeal directed that
   the grounds of appeal and counsel's witness statement be sent to the FTTJ
   for comments. Unfortunately this has not been done. I considered whether
   this could still be done if there was an adjournment. However, on making
   enquiries, I was reliably informed that the FTTJ is seriously ill and not
   likely to be able to assist within a reasonable period. I informed the
   representatives of this.

8. Mr Parkinson informed me that even without this information the
   respondent was of the view that this was a case where there were errors
   of law such that the decision should be set aside with no findings
   preserved and that it should be remitted to the First-Tier Tribunal for
   rehearing. I asked Mr Parkinson whether the respondent wished to submit
   that if there were errors of law they did not make a material difference
   to the outcome. He said that this was not a course which the respondent
   wished to follow. Although counsel who appeared before the FTTJ and had
   prepared the witness statement was present and willing to be cross-
   examined he did not wish to cross examine her.

9. It is unfortunate but in the circumstances unavoidable that whilst I
   have the grounds of appeal and counsel's witness statement setting out
   what happened at the hearing I do not have the benefit of a response from
   the FTTJ. I have looked at the record of proceedings but it is not
   sufficiently clear to me to obtain any help from it. Having seen only one
   side of the story I am not in a position to make a clear finding as to
   exactly what happened at the hearing but it is sufficiently clear that
   there is a genuine perception of unfairness which makes it desirable for
   the decision to be set aside and the appeal reheard.

10. I find that there are errors of law and I set aside the decision of the
   FTTJ. No findings of credibility or fact are to be preserved and the
   appeal should be reheard in the First-Tier Tribunal by a judge other than
   the FTTJ who conducted the previous hearing.





Signed:........................................
    Date: 11 January 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

