
[pic]
IAC-AH-sc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/10982/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 3 November 2014                         |On 5 November 2014             |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVID TAYLOR

                                   Between

                           Sivanayaki Subramaniam
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Adama-Adams of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State is the appellant to this  appeal  but,  for  the
    sake of consistency, I refer to her as the respondent (as  she  was  in
    the First-tier Tribunal) and to the original appellant as such.

2.   The appellant is a 78 year old female  citizen  of  Sri  Lanka.   In  a
    determination promulgated on 30 July 2014 in the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    Judge Raymond allowed her appeal against the Entry Clearance  Officer's
    decision refusing  her  entry  clearance  to  the  United  Kingdom  for
    settlement as the adult dependent relative of her son.  Her son is  her
    sponsor and is a British citizen who is now resident and settled in the
    UK.

3.   The judge heard oral evidence from the  sponsor  but  at  [24]  of  the
    determination he found that the sponsor was not a credible witness.  He
    noted that there were two conflicting medical reports as to the  health
    of the appellant and found that "the most credible explanation is  that
    the sponsor has obtained  a  report  from  Dr  Nagarajah  which  is  an
    exaggeration".  At [25] the judge concluded in the following terms:

         "However, despite the despite lack of credibility of  the  sponsor,
         who  I  consider  has  inappropriately  sought  to  exaggerate  and
         embellish upon the physical and mental health of his  mother.   The
         fact remains that  the  appellant  was  born  in  1936,  so  as  to
         presently be 78 years of age.  She is also a widow.  Whose two sons
         live in the UK, being the sponsor, and in Switzerland.   By  virtue
         of her age alone, she will as a widow, without immediate family  at
         hand to  provide  support,  become  increasingly  vulnerable.   Her
         brother, who may well live nearby  and  would  have  been  of  some
         support for her, was himself born in 1944, thus presently being  71
         years of age, and therefore himself no doubt needing the  certainty
         of increasing support from his own family.  I  accept,  despite  my
         view of  his  general  credibility  turning  principally  upon  the
         claimed medical evidence, that the sponsor's  four  visits  to  Sri
         Lanka in the last two years will have been largely motivated by his
         naturally increasing concerns over his mother's ability to cope  as
         an elderly widow.  I therefore accept that given the age  alone  of
         the appellant, combined with her being a widow, it is reasonable to
         expect that her two sons in Europe, one being the sponsor who is an
         economically viable person settled in this country, are best placed
         to undertake the responsibility of her long-term personal care."


4.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  T  R  P
    Hollingworth on 19th September 2014 as follows:

         "Seen alongside an  adverse  credibility  of  the  UK  sponsor  (at
         paragraph 24) and wholly inconclusive medical evidence,  the  judge
         has attached undue weight to the appellant's age and her claim  not
         to have support in Sri Lanka as the basis for allowing  the  appeal
         under the Rules."


5.    I  heard  submissions  from   both  representatives.   The  Presenting
    Officer relied on the grounds and, in particular, on the reasons  given
    above for the granting of permission to appeal.  In  reply,  Mr  Adama-
    Adams urged me to find that there had been no error of law and that the
    judge was entitled to make the findings that he did notwithstanding the
    lack of credibility of the sponsor or of the medical evidence.

6.   I am satisfied that the determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  did
    contain a material error of law such that it must be set aside  in  its
    entirety.   The  judge's  decision  is  wholly  inconsistent  with  the
    specific findings that he made.  He found  the  sponsor's  evidence  to
    lack credibility.  In relation to the medical evidence he himself  said
    at [24] that "it is not possible to make  any  sense  of  the  conflict
    between the two medical reports".  He then went on to  conjecture  what
    he regarded as "the most credible  explanation".   But  the  burden  of
    proof was on the appellant and,  with  respect,  it  was  not,  without
    further evidence, for the judge to conjecture or seek to reconcile  the
    two clearly conflicting medical reports.  It is also  clear  from  [25]
    that, without any independent evidence, the judge conjectured as to the
    support that  the  appellant's  brother  (who  either  lives  with  the
    appellant or very nearby) would be able to continue to give her.

7.   The error of law is such that the determination must be  set  aside  in
    its entirety.  The evidence will need to be heard again and a  decision
    taken under the appropriate parts of Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  For that reason I have decided to remit the appeal to the First-
    tier Tribunal for hearing afresh.

Notice of Decision

8.   The First-tier Tribunal determination contained an  error  of  law  (as
    set out above) and is hereby set aside in its entirety.

9.   I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal (at Hatton Cross)  to  be
    heard afresh by any judge (other than Judge Raymond).

10.  No anonymity direction is made.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge David Taylor
3 November 2014
