
[pic]
IAC-TH-CP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/10067/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|(Sitting at Taylor House)            |                                     |
|On 15 October 2015                   |On 29 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON


                                   Between

                         Mrs Teresita Cantero Jones
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      Entry Clearance Officer - MANILA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Karnik
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of  the  Philippines  who  was  born  on  11
    November 1950.  She applied for  entry  clearance  as  partner  of  her
    husband, the sponsor, who is a British citizen present and  settled  in
    the United Kingdom.  The application was refused by a decision dated 28
    July 2014.  The appellant appealed that decision and  the  matter  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Somal.  In a decision  promulgated  on
    30 April 2015 the judge dismissed the appeal.

 2. The appellant sought permission to appeal the  decision  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal and this was granted in a decision dated 28 July 2015.  It was
    held to be arguable that "in carrying out  the  balancing  exercise  in
    terms of Article 8 the judge applied  the  "exceptional  circumstances"
    test and not one of proportionality which could affect the way in which
    the relevant facts of the case could  be  considered  (see  R  (on  the
    application of Ganesabalan) [2014] EWHC 2712 (Admin) and Izuazu v  SSHD
    [2013] UKUT 00045 (IAC))."

 3. The respondent filed a Rule 24 response to the effect that  the  First-
    tier Judge properly considered the claim and it was open to  the  judge
    to find that in all the circumstances of the case Article  8  does  not
    confer a right of choice where  private  and  family  life  are  to  be
    exercised.  It was properly open to the judge to find that the  refusal
    of entry clearance to the appellant is proportionate.

 4. It is common ground that the appellant and sponsor were unable to  meet
    the financial requirements of the Immigration Rules and thus Article  8
    ECHR was the only provision that could come to the aid of the appellant
    if the appeal was to be allowed.

The Hearing Before Me

 5. Adopting the grounds of appeal (that  were  not  settled  by  him),  Mr
    Karnik submitted that the judge erred in law in requiring the appellant
    to show exceptional circumstances for leave to be granted  outside  the
    Immigration  Rules.   An  assessment  of  proportionality  involves   a
    balancing exercise weighing up the respective interests of the parties.
     If the balance favours an appellant, an appeal may be allowed.   There
    is no requirement for an appellant  to  demonstrate  such  "exceptional
    circumstances".  Mr Karnik further submitted that what had to be placed
    in the balance was also the private life  of  the  sponsor.   He  is  a
    British citizen and has therefore  ties  to  the  United  Kingdom.  For
    instance, this is a place where he cared for his late  wife  until  her
    untimely death and he visits the area where her ashes  were  scattered.
    Furthermore, the reality is that there is plenty of money available  to
    ensure that the appellant and sponsor would not be a  drain  on  public
    funds.  The sponsor owns his own house and has income and savings. Even
    though that is insufficient to enable the Immigration Rules to  be  met
    this all had to go into the article 8 balancing exercise.

 6. Mr Clarke on behalf of the respondent argued that there was no error in
    the decision of the First-tier Judge and that the decision was properly
    balanced and one that was open to the judge in all the circumstances.

Decision

 7. In paragraph 16 and the following paragraphs the judge sets out a  self
    direction in relation to the  law.   In  paragraph  20  she  considered
    whether any interference  in  the  private  and  family  lives  of  the
    appellant and the sponsor would be proportionate to the legitimate  aim
    which, in this case, is that of immigration control.  I see no error in
    what the judge sets out in paragraph 20 which includes  that  decisions
    taken pursuant to the lawful operation of immigration control would  be
    proportionate in  all  save  a  small  minority  of  exceptional  cases
    identifiable only on a case by case basis.

 8. The judge thereafter considered all the  evidence  in  the  round.  The
    judge gave sufficient reasons why this is  not  a  case  that  although
    falling  outside  the  new  Rules  nevertheless   in   the   particular
    circumstances would  entail  a  breach  of  Article  8  rights  if  the
    application were refused.  Although stating "I find that there  are  no
    exceptional circumstances such that leave should be granted outside the
    Immigration Rules" this cannot and does not amount  to  an  error  when
    read in context.  The judge was in effect saying that for  the  reasons
    set out in her decision the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer  to
    refuse entry was not a disproportionate one.  The judge has weighed all
    the circumstances in the balance and came to the  conclusion  that  she
    did for the reasons given.  There is no error of  law  and,  even  more
    certainly, no material error.

 9. I can well understand the frustration of the sponsor  who  has  clearly
    been upset by the original decision and by the decision of  the  First-
    tier Judge and my own decision  that  was  announced  at  the  hearing.
    Nevertheless the unpalatable truth for him and the  appellant  is  that
    the judge's decision stands and that decision is  that  the  appeal  is
    dismissed.

10. I was not addressed  on  the  matter  of  anonymity  but  no  anonymity
    direction has been made previously and the circumstances do not  appear
    to warrant that one should be made now.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton
