
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/10964/2013
     OA/10965/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7 July 2014                                |On 29th July 2014            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                     MISS RANJEENA PUN (FIRST APPELLANT)
                     MISS SHANTI PUN (SECOND APPELLANT)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr H Shoeb, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The Entry Clearance Officer has been granted permission to  appeal  the
    decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Charlton-Brown  allowing  the
    appeals of the appellants against refusal to grant them entry clearance
    to settle as the adult children  of  their  sponsor,  their  father  Mr
    Phakta Bahadur Pun.

2.   The appellants  who  are  sisters  are  both  citizens  of  Nepal  born
    respectively on 15 December 1988 and 25 April 1984.  Their  father  and
    mother and their brother were granted settlement  visas,  although  the
    two appellants were not.  Their father  was  a  former  member  of  the
    brigade of Ghurkhas, having served from April 1972 until  August  1987.
    The appellants were now the only members of the family  unit  remaining
    in Nepal.  They are in full-time  education,  unemployed  and  entirely
    dependent financially on their father.

3.   At the hearing the  judge  was  told  that  the  appellants  could  not
    succeed under the  substantive  Immigration  Rules  and  therefore  the
    appeal was to be dealt with solely on the basis of  Article  8  of  the
    ECHR, with the alternative suggestion that  the  policy  had  not  been
    exercised properly in respect  of  the  appellants  and  there  was  an
    argument that the cases should be remitted to the respondent  for  such
    consideration.

4.   The judge did not consider that it was appropriate for these  cases  to
    be  remitted  to  the  respondent  because  it  appeared  to  her  from
    reconsideration of the refusal notices that there was  a  reference  to
    discretion and "exceptional circumstances" and in the review  completed
    by the Entry Clearance Manager, again it appeared that  the  respondent
    had arguably applied herself to the question of whether or not  it  was
    appropriate to exercise discretion.

5.   In considering the appeal on its substantive merits with  reference  to
    Article 8 of the ECHR, the judge  found  that  there  was  family  life
    between the sponsor and other family members now present in the UK  and
    the two appellants were based in Nepal.  The two appellants were living
    together in a property that was constructed by their father.  They  are
    unmarried, in full-time education and financially  dependent  on  their
    father.

6.   The judge found that it was not disputed by  the  respondent  that  the
    two appellants had always lived with their parents until they  came  to
    the UK, and neither has founded a  family  of  their  own.   The  judge
    accepted the submission made on behalf of the appellants  that  at  all
    material times the intention of the family had been to effect a reunion
    of the appellants with their parents in the UK.  The other close family
    member, their  brother  was  successful  in  being  granted  settlement
    together with his parents.

7.   The judge  found  the  witness  credible  and  therefore  accepted  his
    evidence that he had thought of coming to the UK  but  the  opportunity
    simply did  not  exist.   In  considering  whether  or  not  there  was
    interference with the appellant's family  life,  the  judge  relied  on
    Ghising (Family Life - Adults - Ghurkha Policy) Nepal [2012] UKUT 00160
    (IAC) which said that where the respondent had  granted  settlement  to
    the Ghurkha sponsor, it had therefore been accepted that his future lay
    in the UK and it would be unreasonable  to  expect  him  to  return  to
    Nepal.  The judge also relied on MM [2013] EWHC 1900 where Blake J made
    it clear that there was no proper distinction to  be  observed  between
    entry clearance and leave to remain cases with regards to interference,
    and a person with settlement in the UK  was  entitled  to  found  their
    family life, even if that included family members abroad.

8.   The judge then considered proportionality.  The judge  noted  that  the
    conclusion in the notices  of  decision  by  the  respondent  was  that
    Article 8 was not engaged  and,  even  if  it  were,  the  respondent's
    decisions were proportionate.  The judge found that the recent case law
    does not assist the respondent.  She found that Lord Dyson MR in Gurung
    at paragraphs 40 to 44 made it clear that the adult dependent child  of
    a Ghurkha veteran who can establish an Article 8(1) right, had  such  a
    strong claim to have that right vindicated, notwithstanding the potency
    of the legitimate aim argument, if they could show that they would have
    settled in the UK years before, had that been  possible.   Further,  in
    Ghising (Ghurkhas - BOCs: Historic Wrong;  Weight)  [2013]  UKUT  00567
    (IAC)  the  Upper  Tribunal  held  that  the  historical  wrong   would
    ordinarily  determine  the   proportionality   assessment   where   the
    respondent only relies on fair immigration  policy  as  the  legitimate
    aim.

9.   The judge found that to be the respondent's  position.   She  found  on
    the available evidence, taking into account the credible, albeit  brief
    evidence she heard from the UK-based sponsor Mr Pun, that had  it  been
    possible, he would have settled in the UK on an earlier  occasion,  but
    that simply was not possible.  Indeed,  as  with  many  others  in  his
    position, when on being discharged from the army in 1987, he went  back
    to Nepal but he did not in fact stay  there  for  longer  than  a  year
    before he went to Brunei.  Self-evidently, this was because  he  needed
    to find employment that was not available to him in Nepal which was  of
    course why he went to Brunei.  In summary the judge considered that the
    appellants have established not only that they have  family  life  with
    the sponsor and other UK based families, but this would  be  interfered
    with particularly taking account of recent  developments  in  case  law
    that such interference is not necessary and further,  that  it  is  not
    proportionate.  She accordingly allowed the appellants'  appeals  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR.

10.  Mr Kandola relied on the grounds of appeal submitted on behalf  of  the
    respondent upon which permission was granted.  He  submitted  that  the
    judge having accepted Counsel's submission that the  Immigration  Rules
    could not be met, did not at that stage  place  proper  weight  on  the
    failure to meet the Immigration Rules.  Following Nagre and Gulshan the
    judge needed to consider if there were exceptional circumstances as  to
    why they could not meet the Immigration Rules.  Their failure  to  meet
    the maintenance and accommodation requirements of the Immigration Rules
    was relevant to the Article 8 exercise.  The judge  moved  to  consider
    Article 8 without proper direction.  He submitted that  the  fact  that
    the sponsor was a Ghurkha did not of itself exempt  the  judge  from  a
    consideration of MF.  The judge had  to  consider  whether  their  case
    disclosed exceptional circumstances.

11.  Mr Kandola submitted that  the  ECO  considered  that  because  of  the
    exceptional position  of  Ghurkha  veterans  and  their  families,  the
    Secretary of State had made special provisions for their entry  to  the
    UK outside the Immigration Rules as an acknowledgement that it  was  in
    the public interest to remedy the injustice.  As the  judge  had  found
    that the appeal could not be remitted to the ECO this  meant  that  she
    was satisfied that the ECO had  properly  considered  and  applied  the
    policy and this meant that there were no exceptional  circumstances  in
    this case.  The judge should have stopped there as  Gulshan  and  Nagre
    say that if there are no exceptional circumstances  then  there  is  no
    need  to  go  on  to  consider  Article  8.   Therefore   the   judge's
    consideration of Article 8 was an error of law.

12.  Mr Shoeb relied on his response to the grant of permission.

13.  I accept Mr.  Shoeb's   argument  in  the  response  that  the  judge's
    finding that there is family life between the appellants, their  father
    and other family members in the UK discloses no error of law  in  light
    of the evidence relied on by the judge to reach that finding.

14.  More importantly I  accept  his  submission  at  paragraph  13  of  his
    response that the exceptionality  of  appeals  relating  to  the  adult
    dependent children of former Ghurkha servicemen  is  discussed  in  the
    cases of Ghising (Family Life - Adults - Ghurkha Policy)  Nepal  [2012]
    UKUT 160, Ghising and Others [2013] UKUT 567 IAC and R (Gurung)  [2013]
    1WLR 2546.

15.  In this case the judge has found that Article 8  is  engaged  and,  but
    for the historic wrong, the appellants would have  settled  in  the  UK
    long ago.  The Upper Tribunal held that this will ordinarily  determine
    the  outcome  of  the  Article  8  proportionality  assessment  in  any
    appellant's favour where the matters relied  on  by  the  Secretary  of
    State/Entry Clearance Officer consist solely of the public interest  in
    maintaining a firm immigration policy.  This was relied on by the judge
    at paragraph 17.

16.  In Ghising and  Others  the  Upper  Tribunal  also  held  that  if  the
    respondent can point to matters over and above the public  interest  in
    maintaining a firm immigration policy, which argue in favour of removal
    or the  refusal  of  leave  to  enter,  these  matters  must  be  given
    appropriate weight in the balance in the respondent's favour.  Thus,  a
    bad  immigration  history  and/or  criminal  behaviour  may  still   be
    sufficient to outweigh the powerful factors being  on  the  appellant's
    side with the balance.

17.  In this case the respondent could not  point  to  any  bad  immigration
    history and or criminal behaviour on the part of the appellants.

18.  Consequently I find that the judge adopted the right  approach  as  set
    out in Ghising and Others.  In so doing the judge did not err in law.

19.  The judge's decision allowing  the  appeals  of  the  appellants  shall
    stand.


Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
