

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/10245/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 14 June 2016                        |On 29 July 2016                     |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                               HUAY MING CHAI
                            (NO ANONYMITY ORDER)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, MANILA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Pipe, instructed by Lin & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal against  the  decision  and
    reasons  statement  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cameron  that  was
    promulgated on 20 August 2015.  Judge Cameron dismissed the appellant's
    appeal against the Entry Clearance Officer's decision of 18 August 2014
    refusing the appellant entry clearance as a child.

 2. In his submissions, Mr Pipe reminded me that the appeal below had  been
    solely on the question of whether the refusal of entry clearance was  a
    disproportionate interference in the appellant's  family  life  rights.
    The appellant had conceded  that  she  could  not  meet  the  financial
    requirements of appendix FM to the immigration rules.   The  Presenting
    Officer had conceded that the appellant enjoyed family  life  with  her
    mother and stepfather who live in  the  UK.   The  question  for  Judge
    Cameron was, therefore, whether the refusal of entry clearance amounted
    to a disproportionate interference with family life.

 3. Mr Pipe argued that the judge erred in her  assessment  because  rather
    than considering the positive obligation under article 8 of  the  human
    rights convention to maintain family life  the  judge  had  focused  on
    maintaining the status quo.  Mr Pipe submitted this approach was  wrong
    in law because it resulted in key facts  being  ignored,  such  as  the
    close relationship between the appellant and her stepbrother who  lives
    in the UK.

 4. In addition, or in the alternative, Mr Pipe argued that  Judge  Cameron
    had  failed  to  identify  the  best  interests  of   the   appellant's
    stepbrother who is a British citizen living in the UK.  Under article 8
    of the human rights convention, the judge had to  consider  the  effect
    excluding the appellant might have on all members  of  the  family  and
    therefore it was necessary for the  judge  to  make  findings  of  fact
    regarding the best interests of the stepbrother.  It is trite law  that
    failure to make relevant findings is a legal error in itself.

 5. Mr Pipe's last argument was that at several points it would appear that
    the judge regarded the appellant as an adult.  At the date of  decision
    she was 17 years and 9 months old.   Mr  Pipe  suggested  that  it  was
    improper for the judge to treat her as an adult even though by the date
    of hearing she had turned 18.  Although case law indicates there is  no
    bright line as to when a child might no longer be  dependent  on  their
    parents, there was no case law to suggest that a person under 18  could
    be treated as an adult.

 6. Mr Mills responded to these issues and accepted there was  no  explicit
    consideration of the best interests of the appellant or her stepbrother
    despite this having to be a relevant factor  (see  TE  (Jamaica)).   Mr
    Mills sought to persuade me that Judge Cameron's reliance on the  Court
    of Appeal's judgment in SS (Congo) meant it was open to me to find that
    it was implicit that the  best  interests  of  the  children  had  been
    considered.  Mr Mills also pointed out that it was clear from paragraph
    53 that Judge Cameron regarded the appellant as being a  child  at  the
    date of decision.

 7. Mr Mills reminded  me  that  family  life  rights  cannot  be  used  to
    circumvent the requirements of the immigration rules.  At paragraphs 53
    and 54 the judge properly considered the appellant's  circumstances  at
    the date of decision and those of her immediate family and at 57  found
    there was nothing  compelling  to  outweigh  the  requirements  of  the
    immigration rules.  As Mr Pipe  had  reminded  me,  the  appellant  had
    conceded that she could not meet  the  financial  requirements  of  the
    immigration rules.

 8. Mr Mills acknowledge that Judge Cameron did not expressly consider  the
    impact exclusion of the appellant might have on her stepbrother  or  of
    the family not being together. He submitted that although  this  was  a
    failure, it could not be material to the outcome given the guidance  in
    SS (Congo).

 9. Whilst discussing  with  both  Mr  Pipe  and  Mr  Mills  the  competing
    arguments, Mr Mills acknowledged that it would  not  be  reasonable  to
    expect family life to be established  in  Malaysia.   In  other  words,
    there was no  argument  that  the  appellant's  family  life  could  be
    maintained by her mother, stepfather and  stepbrother  moving  to  live
    with her.  The question, therefore,  in  relation  to  the  appellant's
    family life rights was limited to whether in all the  circumstances  it
    was proportionate to expect the family group to live separately.

10. Mr Pipe took me to the witness statements which were the only  evidence
    before Judge Cameron relating to the best interests  of  the  children.
    Although such evidence was limited, the failure of the  judge  to  make
    any findings in connection with the evidence was a clear  legal  error.
    In particular, the judge failed to have regard to the clear  wishes  of
    the appellant to live with her family in the UK or the  fact  that  the
    appellant had established a good relationship with her stepbrother.  It
    was appropriate to expect the relationships to  be  maintained  without
    living together.

11. Having considered the competing arguments and as I announced at the end
    of the hearing I find that Judge Cameron erred  in  law.  There  is  no
    challenge to her findings in relation to the first four questions posed
    by the House of Lords in Razgar and those finding must stand.   But  it
    is evident that she failed to make relevant findings in relation to the
    appellant's personal and family  circumstances.   This  undermines  her
    proportionality assessment because she did not correctly carry out  the
    balancing exercise.  Although she made appropriate findings in relation
    to the public interest considerations expressed in s.117B of  the  2002
    Act (as amended) she did not make findings on key  issues  relating  to
    the appellant's circumstances.  She cannot, therefore, have had in mind
    all relevant factors when reaching her conclusion.

12. In reaching this conclusion I reject Mr Mills's submission that I could
    find that Judge Cameron had implicitly considered the best interests of
    the children.  To do so would be to read into the decision and  reasons
    statement findings which were not made.  I have no power to so do.

13. As relevant findings on the  available  evidence  were  not  made,  the
    failure must be regarded as being potentially material to  the  outcome
    and for that reason I find it is necessary to set aside Judge Cameron's
    decision.

14. Mr Pipe and Mr Mills suggested  that  I  remake  the  decision  on  the
    evidence provided to the First-tier Tribunal.  As I  indicated  at  the
    end of the hearing, I would consider whether that was possible  but  if
    it was not then I would remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for
    findings to be made.

15. Having reviewed the evidence I have decided that it is not  appropriate
    for the Upper Tribunal to remake the decision.  It is  clear  that  the
    arguments in this case have developed since the witness statements were
    made and it is not clear that those making the statements were aware of
    their significance.  It is not in the interests of justice to limit the
    evidence to that previously submitted.

16. I remit the appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  with  the  following
    directions.

17. It can be heard by any judge other than Judge Cameron.

18. The findings in  relation  to  the  first  four  Razgar  questions  are
    preserved.

19. The issues are limited to the proportionality exercise and it  will  be
    for the judge to make findings as to the  nature  of  the  family  life
    (including the best interests of the children) as they were at the date
    of decision.

20. The parties are at liberty to provide any additional evidence in regard
    to this issue subject to all evidence being received by the  First-tier
    Tribunal at least 14 calendar days before the re-hearing.



Decision

The decision and reasons statement of Judge Cameron contains an error  on  a
point of law and is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal subject to the  directions
given in paragraphs 16 to 19 above.




                               Signed                     Date 29 July 2016


                               Judge McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
