
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/10837/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Sheldon Court, Birmingham            |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9 October 2014                             |On 24 October 2014           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ROBERTSON


                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                               INDIA (CHENNAI)



                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                          MRS PUSHPAMMA GOWRIKUTTY
                        ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr S Kandola, Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:   Ms N Bustani, Counsel, instructed by Paul John & Co,
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Claim History


1. The Appellant in this  appeal  was  the  Respondent  at  the  First-tier
   Tribunal hearing on 6 May 2014. However,  for  ease  of  reference,  the
   Appellant and Respondent are hereinafter referred to as they were before
   the First-tier Tribunal. Therefore Mrs Gowrikutty is referred to as  the
   Appellant and the Secretary of State is referred to as the Respondent.


2. The Appellant, a citizen of India, applied for leave to enter the United
   Kingdom as a dependent relative under Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration
   Rules. Her application was refused and her appeal  against  refusal  was
   allowed by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Elliman  under  the  Immigration
   Rules.

3. In the grounds of application, the Respondent  submits  that  the  Judge
   erred materially in law because:

        a. EC-DR.2.5 requires the Appellant to establish that she  requires
           "long term care to perform everyday tasks" and that she "must be
           unable, even with the practical and financial  support  help  of
           the sponsor, to obtain the required level of care in the country
           where they are living, because (a) it is not available and there
           is no person in that country who can reasonably provide  it,  or
           (b) it is not affordable." The Judge  had  noted  that  "It  was
           suggested that the sponsor  could  readily  find  care  for  his
           mother but there was no evidence to suggest that there are  care
           facilities or carers available in the same way that they are  in
           the United Kingdom." It is submitted that the Judge reversed the
           burden of proof by requiring the Respondent to provide  evidence
           when the burden is on the Appellant; and

        b. The medical  evidence  provided  confirmed  that  the  Appellant
           suffered from "dysthymia, a disorder that is  primarily  due  to
           lack of family  and  social  support"  and  that  "it  would  be
           beneficial if she could stay  with  her  son  and  his  family".
           However, simply because the condition is due to lack  of  family
           and social support does not mean that it  family  and/or  social
           support is  required  to  treat  it.  Furthermore,  the  Judge's
           finding that care was not available to her was inconsistent with
           the Country of Origin Information Report (COIR) for India  dated
           March 2012, which confirmed that private care was available  and
           affordable for the Appellant.

4. Permission to appeal was granted on the  basis  that  the  grounds  were
   arguable.

5. A Rule 24 response was not submitted by the  Appellant  but  Ms  Bustani
   supplied a detailed skeleton argument on which she relied.

 The Hearing

6. Relying on the grounds of application, Mr  Kandola  submitted  that  the
   burden of proof was on the Appellant but that the Judge  did  appear  to
   reverse the burden of proof when he stated that there was no evidence to
   show that care would be available in India. The Appellant was in receipt
   of care as established by the evidence  from  the  Amrita  Institute  of
   Medical Sciences. The fact that it would be beneficial for her  to  live
   with her son and his family was only one aspect of care; the absence  of
   it would not  mean  that  she  was  bereft  of  all  medical  care.  The
   Appellant's case was that she needed the care of her immediate family to
   counter loneliness but the care she in fact  needs  is  for  her  mental
   health issues. It was not correct that no evidence  was  available  that
   care would be available to the Appellant in India; COIR did not  confirm
   that there were no mental health facilities. Medical care was  available
   in certain areas and the Appellant had  not  provided  any  evidence  to
   establish that treatment was not available.


7. Ms Bustani relied on her detailed skeleton argument  which  I  will  not
   repeat here but will refer to in my decision and reasons. I indicated to
   the parties at the hearing that I would be dismissing the appeal because
   I was not persuaded from the written and oral submissions that the Judge
   reversed the burden of proof and because she gave sufficient reasons for
   finding that the care required by the Appellant would not  be  available
   to her but that written reasons for my decision would follow.

 Decision and reasons

8. There was no challenge to the Judge's findings of fact  and  these  were
   set out at paragraph 5 of Ms Bustani's skeleton  argument.  I  will  not
   repeat them here but suffice to say  that  the  Appellant  was  in  poor
   health, was having falls due to dizziness  (one  of  which  resulted  in
   dislocation of her shoulder which required  hospitalisation  in  October
   2012) and that her health was in fact was deteriorating. The Judge found
   that "the Appellant does, as a result of her age and  illness  (physical
   and mental) require long-term  professional  care  to  perform  everyday
   tasks" [14]. This finding is not challenged.

9. The Judge was well aware that the legal threshold was  high;  she  state
   that the Appellant "has the very difficult task  of  showing  that  even
   when the sponsor can provide practical care and financial help he  could
   not obtain the required level of care in the country where his mother is
   living, either because it is not available and there  is  no  person  in
   that country who  can  reasonably  provide  it  or  because  it  is  not
   affordable". This does not suggest that the Judge was not aware of where
   the burden was or  that  her  reference  at  [16]  to  the  Respondent's
   suggestion that care could readily be provided reversed  the  burden  of
   proof. The Judge's remark that there "was no evidence  to  suggest  that
   there are care facilities or carers available in the same way that  they
   are in the United Kingdom" was simply a comparison in provision  between
   the two countries on which the Judge did not rely for  the  purposes  of
   his conclusions.

10. The Judge's conclusion is that the Appellant  requires  "round-the-clock
   care", a finding which is not challenged, and that "on balance"  she  is
   inclined to accept the Sponsor's evidence  that  there  are  few  or  no
   professional carers  who  can  provide  "round-the-clock  care"  in  the
   Appellant's case because she had "very specific emotional  and  physical
   needs", again a finding that was not challenged and  was  based  on  the
   Sponsor's evidence that he had employed  carers  to  take  care  of  the
   Appellant but that they had been unable to stay with her "because of  he
   emotional disturbance from which she suffers when in the  company  of  a
   stranger." The Judge found that "...whatever  care  there  is  would  be
   difficult to provide when the (sponsor's) mother has a  genuine  illness
   that renders her emotionally 'disordered' and when she cannot  trust  or
   live with strangers." She found  that  "the  Appellant  suffers  from  a
   specific mental health problem that, I accept,  genuinely  requires  the
   immediate care of her family so that such care  cannot  be  provided  by
   'professional' carers." These findings were made in the context  of  the
   Judge finding that the Sponsor was a credible witness.

11. The Judge's reasons for allowing the appeal were therefore based on  the
   particular facts of the Appellant's  circumstances.  Her  findings  were
   open to her on the evidence before him; they have not  been  challenged.
   She did not misdirect herself in law and she correctly applied  the  law
   to the facts. Read as a whole the determination  discloses  no  material
   errors of law and  the  grounds  are  simply  a  disagreement  with  the
   findings of the Judge.

Decision


12. The determination of Judge Elliman contains no material errors  of  law
    and her decision therefore must stand.


13. The Respondent's appeal is dismissed.


14. There was no application for an anonymity order before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal or before us. In the circumstances of  this  case,  I  see  no
    reason to direct anonymity.











Signed                                  Date 23 October 2014

M Robertson
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



TO THE RESPONDENT


     In light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a fee award
(Rule 23A (costs) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules
2005 and section 12(4) (a) of the Tribunals Courts and Enforcement Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance Note: Fee Awards in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011). As the Respondent's appeal has been
dismissed, Judge Elliman's fee award is confirmed.




Signed                          Dated 23 October 2014

M Robertson
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
