
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: oa/10448/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Sheldon Court Birmingham               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 14th October 2014                            |On 20th October 2014       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                      Entry Clearance Officer - tirana
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     m d
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Pipe of Counsel instructed by Premier
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) appeals against  a  determination  of
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Thomas promulgated on 31st March 2014.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  I will refer to her as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant is a female national of Albania born 17th January 1997 who
    applied for entry clearance to enable  her  to  settle  in  the  United
    Kingdom with her father to whom I shall refer as the Sponsor.

 4. The application was refused on 5th April 2013.   The  ECO  doubted  the
    claimed relationship between the Claimant  and  Sponsor  but  this  was
    subsequently proved by DNA evidence.  The application  was  refused  in
    reliance upon paragraph 320(7A) of the Immigration Rules, that the  ECO
    contended that the Sponsor had submitted, in connection with the  entry
    clearance application, his British passport, which records that he  was
    born in Mitrovica in  Kosovo.   However  documentation  had  also  been
    submitted with the application which indicated that the Sponsor was  in
    fact born in Albania and not in Kosovo.

 5. The ECO contended that the Sponsor had fraudulently claimed  asylum  by
    claiming to be Kosovan, and he  had  eventually  been  granted  British
    citizenship based upon deception, that being his claim  to  be  Kosovan
    rather than Albanian.  The ECO contended that a false document had been
    submitted in connection with the application for entry clearance,  that
    being the Sponsor's British passport which contained false information,
    and that this had  been  done  dishonestly,  hence  the  refusal  under
    paragraph 320(7A).

 6. The Claimant's appeal was heard by Judge Thomas  (the  judge)  on  20th
    March 2014 who found that the ECO had  not  discharged  the  burden  of
    proof to establish that dishonesty or deception had been used.

 7. The ECO was given permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal and  at  a
    hearing before me on 25th June 2014 I found that the judge erred in law
    in her consideration of paragraph 320(7A) and the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal was set aside.

 8. Full details of the application for permission to appeal, the grant  of
    permission, and my reasons for finding an error of law are contained in
    my decision dated 4th July 2014, which was  promulgated  on  17th  July
    2014.

Re-Making the Decision

Submissions

 9. Mr Pipe confirmed that it was accepted, in view of my findings  at  the
    error of law hearing, that the  appeal  could  not  succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules, because of the application of paragraph 320(7A).  Mr
    Pipe indicated that further evidence would not be called, but  that  he
    intended to make submissions on the basis that  the  appeal  should  be
    allowed under Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention on Human Rights
    (the 1950 Convention) outside the Immigration Rules.

10. Mr Pipe relied upon his skeleton argument dated 9th January  2014.   Mr
    Pipe submitted that the finding by  Judge  Thomas  that  the  witnesses
    before the First-tier Tribunal were credible, had not  been  challenged
    and should stand.

11. Mr Pipe submitted that the application had been  made  under  paragraph
    297 of the Immigration Rules, and the requirements  of  that  rule  had
    been satisfied, as the refusal had been based upon paragraph 320(7A).

12. I was asked to accept that the Claimant should not be  blamed  for  the
    submission of false documents, and that she is a child,  and  therefore
    her best interests must be a primary consideration.   It  was  conceded
    that the finding that paragraph 320(7A) applied was a  negative  factor
    in the balancing exercise.

13. I was reminded that the Sponsor's three children had all  been  granted
    entry clearance in 2005 and had joined him in the United Kingdom.   The
    Sponsor's sons were born  in  1993  and  1995  and  they  have  British
    passports and remain in the United Kingdom.  The Claimant  returned  to
    Albania after living in the United Kingdom for eleven months.  She  had
    been looked after by her grandparents, and this application  for  entry
    clearance was made following the death of her grandfather in 2012.

14. Mr Pipe indicated that it was not known whether  any  action  would  be
    taken by the authorities in the United Kingdom to deprive  the  Sponsor
    of his British nationality which he had obtained by deception,  but  in
    any event, this would not affect the Claimant's two adult brothers  who
    would be remaining in the United Kingdom as British citizens.

15. I was asked to accept that the Claimant's paternal uncle had taken over
    her care following the death of her grandfather, and that he  does  not
    wish to be responsible for her, and hoped  that  she  would  accept  an
    offer of marriage in Albania.

16. In relation to factors to be taken into  account  pursuant  to  section
    117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act)
    I was asked to accept that the Claimant's school reports at pages 85-87
    of the Claimant's bundle indicated that she had  studied  English  when
    she was in the United Kingdom in  2005-2006,  and  that  she  could  be
    adequately financially supported by the  Sponsor  if  she  was  granted
    entry clearance.  There were no issues with accommodation.

17. I was asked to find that the best interests of the Claimant would be to
    live with her father and brothers in the United Kingdom, and that  this
    outweighed  the  public  interest  in  the  maintenance  of   effective
    immigration control.

18.  Mr  Smart  submitted  that  the  issue  in  this  appeal  related   to
    proportionality.  The Sponsor arrived in the  United  Kingdom  in  1998
    having left the Claimant in Albania  at  a  very  young  age.   He  was
    granted refugee status  in  2001,  and  became  a  naturalised  British
    citizen in 2004.

19. It was not until 2005 that the  Claimant  joined  the  Sponsor  in  the
    United Kingdom and she subsequently indicated that she wished to return
    to live in Albania which she did in 2006.

20. I was asked to  note  that  the  Claimant's  uncle  had  made  a  brief
    statement at page 102 of the Claimant's bundle, and made  no  reference
    to a wish to have the  Claimant  married.   Mr  Smart  questioned  what
    reliance should be placed upon  any  assertion  made  by  the  Sponsor,
    bearing in mind the deception that he  had  carried  out  in  order  to
    obtain British citizenship.

21. Mr Smart pointed out  that  the  Claimant's  father  and  brothers  had
    visited her in Albania on a regular  basis,  and  then  submitted  that
    there was no reason to go outside the  Immigration  Rules  to  consider
    Article 8, but if Article 8 was considered, then I should find that the
    decision to refuse entry clearance is proportionate.

22. By way of response Mr Pipe submitted that Article 8 must be looked  at,
    as this is not a case covered by Appendix FM of the Immigration  Rules.
    The Sponsor had not attempted to have the  Claimant  join  him  between
    2001 and 2004, because at that time he had obtained refugee status as a
    Kosovan national.  He did not become a British citizen until  2004.   I
    was reminded that the Judge had found the Sponsor and his  sons  to  be
    credible.

23. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

24. As this is an entry  clearance  appeal  I  consider  the  circumstances
    appertaining at the date of refusal that being 5th April  2013.   I  am
    satisfied that this applies to consideration  of  human  rights  in  an
    entry clearance appeal, as was confirmed in AS (Somalia) v SSHD  [2009]
    UKHL 32.

25. I have taken into account all the evidence that was before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, and taken into account  the  submissions  made  by  both
    representatives.

26. This appeal cannot succeed under the Immigration Rules because  of  the
    application of paragraph 320(7A).

27. I am asked to consider Article 8 outside the rules.  In my  view  where
    the  provisions  in  the  Immigration  Rules  permit  consideration  of
    exceptional circumstances and other factors, then the Immigration Rules
    can be regarded as being a complete code and there will usually  be  no
    need to consider Article 8 directly.  This is because the same  outcome
    will derive from the application of  the  Immigration  Rules  as  under
    Article 8.  Where the Immigration Rules  contain  no  such  provisions,
    then they are not a complete  code  and  Article  8  will  need  to  be
    considered directly.

28. The Court of Appeal considered this issue in MM [2014] EWCA Civ 985 and
    I set out below paragraph 135 of that decision;

    135. Where the relevant group of IRs (Immigration  Rules),  upon  their
         proper construction, provide a "complete code" for dealing  with  a
         person's Convention Rights in the context of  a  particular  IR  or
         statutory provision, such as in the case  of  "foreign  criminals",
         then the balancing exercise and the way the various factors are  to
         be taken into account  in  an  individual  case  must  be  done  in
         accordance with that  code,  although  references  to  "exceptional
         circumstances"   in   the   code   will   nonetheless   entail    a
         proportionality exercise.  But if the relevant group of IRs is  not
         such a "complete code" then the proportionality test will  be  more
         at large, albeit guided by the Huang tests and  UK  and  Strasbourg
         case law.

29. Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act  2009  does
    not apply because although the Claimant is a child, she is not  in  the
    United Kingdom, and section 55 relates to the  need  to  safeguard  and
    promote the welfare of children who are in the United Kingdom.  However
    the Upper Tribunal in Mundeba [2013] UKUT 88  (IAC)  decided  that  the
    exercise of the duty by an ECO  to  assess  an  application  under  the
    Immigration  Rules  as  to  whether   there   are   family   or   other
    considerations making the  child's  exclusion  undesirable,  inevitably
    involves an assessment of what the child's welfare and  best  interests
    require.  Where an Immigration Decision engages Article 8  rights,  due
    regard must be had to the UN Convention on the  Rights  of  the  Child.
    Therefore  the  best  interests  of  the  child  should  be  a  primary
    consideration.

30. The best interests of the Claimant should  therefore,  in  my  view  be
    considered under Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.   I  set  out
    below Article 8 of the 1950 Convention;

    (1)  Everyone has the right to respect for his private and family life,
         his home and his correspondence.

    (2)  There shall be no interference by  a  public  authority  with  the
         exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with the law
         and is necessary in  a  democratic  society  in  the  interests  of
         national security, public safety or the economic well-being of  the
         country,  for  the  prevention  of  disorder  or  crime,  for   the
         protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the rights
         and freedoms of others.

31. In considering Article 8 I adopt the step-by-step approach advocated in
    Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 which involves answering the following questions;

      i) Will the proposed removal be an interference by a public  authority
         with the exercise of the  applicant's  right  to  respect  for  his
         private or (as the case may be) family life?

     ii) If so, will such interference have consequences of such gravity  as
         potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?

    iii) If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

     iv) If so, is such interference necessary in a  democratic  society  in
         the interests of national security, public safety or  the  economic
         well-being of the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime,
         for the protection of health or morals, or for  the  protection  of
         the rights and freedoms of others?

      v) If so, is such interference proportionate to the legitimate  public
         end sought to be achieved?

32. Although Razgar concerned a removal case, I find  that  the  principles
    are relevant to an entry  clearance  case.   I  also  accept  that  the
    decision in Beoku-Betts [2008] UKHL 39 means that I  have  to  consider
    the family life of all the family, and not only that of the Claimant.

33. This is a case that is concerned with family life as opposed to private
    life.  I am satisfied that the Sponsor and  Claimant  have  established
    family life because they are father and daughter.  I am also  satisfied
    that the family life includes the Claimant's  two  adult  brothers.   I
    take into account the  decision  in  Tuquabo-Tekle  v  The  Netherlands
    [2006] 1 FLR 798, which confirms that Article  8  contains  a  positive
    duty inherent in effective respect for  family  life  and  family  life
    should be enabled to develop.

34. I am satisfied that refusal of entry clearance is an interference by  a
    public  authority  with  the  Claimant's   family   life,   which   has
    consequences of such gravity as potentially to engage the operation  of
    Article 8.

35. Dealing with the third question in Razgar, I find that the interference
    is in accordance with the law.  This is  because  the  Claimant  cannot
    satisfy the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules,  in  order  to  be
    granted leave to enter the United Kingdom.

36. The ECO has to prove that the interference is necessary for one of  the
    reasons set out in Article 8(2), and is proportionate to the legitimate
    public end sought to be achieved.

37. Section 117B of the 2002 Act confirms that the maintenance of effective
    immigration control is in the public interest.

38. In making a  proportionality  assessment  under  Article  8,  the  best
    interests of a child must be a primary consideration which  means  that
    they should be considered first, although those best interests  can  be
    outweighed  by  the  cumulative  effect  of  other  considerations,  as
    explained in ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4.  It was also explained in ZH,
    that the best interests of a child broadly means the  well-being  of  a
    child, and although  nationality  is  not  a  "trump  card"  it  is  of
    particular importance in assessing the best interests of any child.

39. The Upper Tribunal decided in MK (India) [2011]  UKUT  00475  that  the
    best interests of a  child  must  be  addressed  first  as  a  distinct
    inquiry, and factors relating to the public interest in the maintenance
    of effective immigration  control  must  not  form  part  of  the  best
    interests of the child considerations.

40. The Upper Tribunal decided in Azimi-Moayed [2013] UKUT 00197 that as  a
    starting point it is in the best interests of children to be with  both
    their parents.  It is generally in the interests of  children  to  have
    both stability and continuity of social and educational provision,  and
    the benefit of growing up in the cultural norms of the society to which
    they belong.

41. When considering the best interests of the Claimant, I note the lack of
    any independent evidence.  There  is  no  witness  statement  from  the
    Claimant, nor from her grandmother.  There is a  very  brief  statement
    from her uncle who confirms that he is unemployed.

42. The Sponsor and both his sons have made witness  statements  indicating
    that they are British citizens and  that  the  Claimant  lived  in  the
    United Kingdom in 2005-2006 for a period of eleven months, and  made  a
    mistake in returning to Albania.  They are of the view  that  the  best
    interests of the Claimant would be to live  with  them  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

43. The Claimant made a choice  when  she  was  very  young  to  return  to
    Albania.  There appear to have been no particular  problems  until  the
    death of her grandfather.  The Claimant has had the benefit of  growing
    up in the cultural norms of the society to which she belongs.   However
    on balance, I conclude that the  Claimant's  best  interests  would  be
    served by being with  her  father,  the  Sponsor,  and  her  two  elder
    brothers.

44. I accept on balance, that her best interests would probably  be  served
    by being in the United Kingdom rather than in Albania but I do not find
    that this is overwhelmingly in her best interests.  As  was  stated  in
    paragraph 36 of EV - (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874;

         "If it is overwhelmingly in the  child's  best  interests  that  he
         should not return, the need to  maintain  immigration  control  may
         well not tip the balance.  By contrast if it is in the child's best
         interest to remain, but only on balance (with some factors pointing
         either way), the result may be the opposite."

45. This is a case where I do find that the Claimant's best  interests,  on
    balance would be to be reunited with her father  and  brothers  in  the
    United Kingdom but not overwhelmingly so.  This is a case  where  there
    are no relevant medical issues, and the Claimant has been brought up in
    Albania, and she is an Albanian citizen.  It is not the case  that  she
    is living in poverty, and if financial support is needed, this  can  be
    supplied, and has been, by the Sponsor.

46. Having decided the best interests of the Claimant would  be  served  by
    being with her father and brothers, I have to  consider  whether  there
    are  any  countervailing  factors.   The   maintenance   of   effective
    immigration control is in the public interest, and it is in the  public
    interest that an individual seeking to enter  the  United  Kingdom  can
    speak English, and be financially independent.

47. I do not accept that the Claimant has proved that she is able to  speak
    English.  The school reports referred to by Mr Pipe go  back  to  2005-
    2006.  There is  no  recent  evidence  of  the  Claimant's  ability  in
    English, and there is no evidence that she has undertaken  any  English
    courses.  The Claimant would be financially supported by the Sponsor if
    she came to the United Kingdom and I accept that he has employment  and
    accommodation.

48. This is not a case where the child seeking entry to the United  Kingdom
    is a British citizen.  It is the case that  the  child's  father  is  a
    British citizen, but here we have a situation where it is accepted that
    British citizenship has been obtained through deception.  As  indicated
    by Mr Pipe, it is not clear whether the immigration authorities in  the
    United Kingdom intend to take action against the Sponsor to deprive him
    of British citizenship.  There would certainly appear to be grounds for
    such action to be taken.  I accept that such action is not likely to be
    taken against the Claimant's elder brothers,  who  entered  the  United
    Kingdom when they were minors.

49.  Therefore  the  future  status  of  the  Sponsor  is  uncertain.    If
    proceedings are successfully taken against him, then  he  may  have  to
    leave the United Kingdom and return to Albania.

50. I find that considerable weight  has to be given to the fact  that  the
    Immigration Rules cannot be satisfied, because of  the  application  of
    paragraph 320(7A) which involved serious deception.

51. It is accepted  that  the  Sponsor  and  the  Claimant's  two  brothers
    regularly visit her in Albania and the  family  maintain  contact  with
    each other by  modern  methods  of  communication.   The  Claimant  has
    adequate accommodation in Albania,  and  close  family  members  there,
    including her grandmother, and it would seem from the evidence that  it
    was primarily her wish to be with her grandparents, that caused her  to
    return to Albania.

52. I conclude that very significant weight must be attached to the  public
    interest in maintaining effective immigration control.  In my view this
    outweighs the weight to be  attached  to  the  best  interests  of  the
    Claimant, and I also take into account that it may be that  proceedings
    are brought against the Sponsor to deprive him of British  nationality.
    I therefore conclude that in all the circumstances of  this  case,  the
    decision of the ECO to refuse entry clearance is proportionate and does
    not breach Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.

Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and
was set aside.  I substitute a fresh decision.

The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules.

The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

Anonymity

Because this appeal involved the consideration of the best  interests  of  a
minor, I have made  an  anonymity  order  under  rule  14  of  The  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008.   This  order  is  to  remain  place
unless or until this Tribunal,  or  any  other  appropriate  Court,  directs
otherwise.  No report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify the Claimant or any member of her family.  Failure to  comply  with
this direction could amount to a contempt of court.






Signed                              Date: 16th October 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.






Signed                              Date: 16th October 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

