
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/10024/2014
                                                               OA/10026/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27th October 2015                 |On 6th November 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        MISS G N M (FIRST respondent)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                       MISS C M B (SECOND respondent)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen
For the Respondents:   Mr M Patel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant before the Upper Tribunal is the Entry Clearance  Officer
    and is,  hereinafter,  simply  referred  to  as  "the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer".  The two Respondents are, hereinafter,  referred  to  as  the
    first claimant and the second claimant.  The First-tier  Tribunal  made
    anonymity orders with respect to each claimant  and  I  have  continued
    those orders. That is why they are not named in full above.

 2. This is the Entry Clearance Officer's  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    directed against a decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Cox)
    promulgated on 15th June 2015 allowing the  appeals  of  each  claimant
    against decisions of the Entry Clearance Officer,  both  made  on  25th
    July 2014, refusing to grant them entry clearance to come to the UK for
    the purposes of settlement as children of a parent settled here.

 3. The first claimant was born on 7th July 1997, and the  second  claimant
    on 20th September 1998.  They were,  therefore,  as  at  the  date  the
    original decisions of the Entry Clearance Officer  were  made,  minors.
    The applications were refused because the Entry Clearance  Officer  did
    not think the requirements  of  paragraph  297(i)  had  been  met.   In
    particular, the Entry Clearance Officer was not satisfied that  the  UK
    based Sponsors were the parents of the claimants.

 4. The relevant Immigration Rule reads as follows:

         "297.    The requirements to be met by a person seeking  indefinite
             leave to enter the United Kingdom as the child  of  a  parent,
             parents or a relative present and settled  or  being  admitted
             for settlement in the United Kingdom are that he:

             (i)  is seeking leave to enter to accompany or join a  parent,
                  parents or relative in one of the following circumstances:

                  (a)  both parents are present and settled  in  the  United
                      Kingdom; or

                  (b)  both parents are being admitted on the same  occasion
                      for settlement; or

                  (c)  one parent is  present  and  settled  in  the  United
                      Kingdom and the other is being admitted on  the  same
                      occasion for settlement; or

                  (d)  one parent is  present  and  settled  in  the  United
                      Kingdom or being admitted on the  same  occasion  for
                      settlement and the other parent is dead; or

                   (e) one parent is  present  and  settled  in  the  United
                      Kingdom or being admitted on the  same  occasion  for
                      settlement and has had sole  responsibility  for  the
                      child's upbringing; or

                  (f)  one parent or a relative is present  and  settled  in
                      the United Kingdom or  being  admitted  on  the  same
                      occasion for settlement and  there  are  serious  and
                      compelling family or other considerations which  make
                      exclusion  of  the  child  undesirable  and  suitable
                      arrangements have been made for the child's care; and

             (ii) is under the age of 18; and

             (iii)    is not leading an independent life, is unmarried  and
                  is not a civil partner, and has not formed an  independent
                  family unit; and

             (iv) can, and will, be accommodated adequately by the  parent,
                  parents or relative the child is seeking to  join  without
                  recourse  to  public  funds  in  accommodation  which  the
                  parent, parents or relative the child is seeking to  join,
                  own or occupy exclusively; and

             (v)  can, and will, be maintained adequately  by  the  parent,
                  parents or relative the child is seeking to join,  without
                  recourse to public funds; and

             (vi) holds a valid United Kingdom entry clearance for entry in
                  this capacity; and

             (vii)    does not fall for refusal under the  general  grounds
                  for refusal".

 5. In this case, only paragraph 297(i) has ever been placed in issue.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal held a single oral hearing of the  two  appeals
    on 28th May 2015.  The claimants and the Entry Clearance  Officer  were
    both represented.  It was said on behalf of the  claimants  that  their
    two Sponsors were married to each other, that  the  male  Sponsor  (the
    first Sponsor) was the father of the first claimant,  that  the  female
    Sponsor (the second Sponsor) was the mother  of  the  second  claimant,
    that the mother of the first claimant and  the  father  of  the  second
    claimant were deceased and that, consequently, the requirements set out
    at paragraph 297(i)(d) were met in respect of each of them.  There  was
    some  DNA  evidence  available  which  supported  the  claimed   family
    relationships and which had not been available to the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer when the original decisions were made.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal, in general terms, found the evidence presented
    on behalf of the two claimants to be credible.  As  to  that,  it  said
    this;

         "15. I note that the report states  that  the  probability  of  the
             First Sponsor being the First Appellant's father is  described
             as 99.999% and the probability of the Second Sponsor being the
             Second Appellant's mother  is  99.90%.   Further,  the  report
             states that the DNA results are 1,000 times more likely if the
             Second Sponsor is related  to  the  Second  Appellant  as  her
             mother than if they are unrelated and ten times more likely if
             the Second Sponsor is related to the Second Appellant  as  the
             mother than as an aunt or grandmother.

         16.   The  Presenting  Officer  stated  that  the  DNA   does   not
             conclusively establish the claimed  relationships.   I  agree,
             but on balance, I am satisfied that it is more likely than not
             that the First Sponsor is the First Appellant's father and the
             Second Sponsor is the Second Appellant's mother.

         17.  The Sponsors explained, in their witness statement,  that  the
             Appellants were children from earlier relationships.  However,
             they have  always  considered  themselves  as  their  parents,
             especially as the other parent has had no involvement  in  the
             Appellants' upbringing.

         18.  The First Sponsor stated that they starting living together in
             1999, when the Second Appellant was only about 1 or  2  months
             old.  The Sponsors married in November  1999  and  the  family
             unit continued living together until the Second  Sponsor  fled
             Congo.

         19.  The First Sponsor also stated that after  the  Second  Sponsor
             fled to the UK, he sought to formally  adopt  the  Appellants.
             He took the proceedings on behalf of  the  Second  Sponsor  as
             well, even though she was in the UK and was  unaware  of  what
             actual steps he took.  During this time, the First Sponsor and
             the Appellants stayed with the First Sponsor's neighbour,  who
             is also a close friend.  The Appellants continue to live  with
             the First Sponsor's close friend.

         20.  The First Sponsor went to court and once the  adoption  orders
             were issued in 2002, he left Congo.  Since his arrival in  the
             UK the Sponsors have had three  children  and  have  regularly
             sent money back to Congo to support the Appellants.  They also
             speak to the Appellants over the telephone two or three  times
             a week.

         21.  The Sponsors obtained British citizenship in  2010  and  after
             obtaining his passport, the  First  Sponsor  has  returned  to
             Congo every year.  He stays for about three  weeks  and  lives
             with the Appellants.  Whilst the Second Sponsor stays  in  the
             UK to look after their other children.

         22.  In relation to  the  other  parents  of  the  Appellants,  the
             Sponsors explained that they have both passed away.  The First
             Sponsor told me that the First Appellant's mother had not  had
             any involvement with the  Appellant's  upbringing  and  passed
             away about four years ago.  He also told me that he had  never
             seen the Second Appellant's father.

         23.  The Second Sponsor told me that the Second Appellant's  father
             passed away, while she was pregnant with the Second Appellant.

         24.  The Presenting Officer accepted that step-children can qualify
             under 297(i)(a), but stated that this is a question  of  fact.
             He noted that the Appellants have not provided any evidence of
             the claimed adoption procedure or  provided  any  evidence  to
             show that the Appellants' other parents have passed  away.   I
             also note that there is a lack of  direct  evidence  from  the
             Appellants.

         25.  The Presenting  Officer  also  submitted  that  the  Sponsors'
             evidence in respect of the other parents was vague.  I  agree.
             For example, although the Second Sponsor knew that  the  First
             Appellant's mother had passed away while she was  in  the  UK,
             she could not tell whether it was before or after the birth of
             her youngest child  (seven  years  ago).   Further  the  First
             Sponsor could not  tell  me  whether  the  Second  Appellant's
             father had passed away before or after he came to the UK.   In
             my view this damages their credibility.

         26.  I am  also  troubled  by  the  lack  of  supporting  evidence,
             nevertheless on the totality of the evidence, I  am  satisfied
             that the Sponsors and the Appellants were a family unit, prior
             to  the  Second  Sponsor  fleeing  Congo,  for  the  following
             reasons.

         27.  Although some aspects  of  their  oral  evidence  were  vague,
             generally, I found the Sponsors  credible.   In  particular  I
             found the First Sponsor an impressive witness.   He  generally
             answered the questions clearly and  without  hesitation.   For
             example, he described in detail the steps he had  taken  after
             the Second Sponsor had left Congo  to  try  to  'resolve'  the
             Appellants' circumstances.  In summary he had gone  to  see  a
             number of  officials  and  had  been  questioned  extensively.
             Finally he went to court and obtained an adoption  order.   He
             said that unfortunately, he had to leave Congo in a hurry  and
             had not been able to bring any personal documents with him.

         28.  The Sponsor also explained why the birth  certificates  listed
             the Sponsors as the Appellants' parents.   He  told  me  that,
             when he returned to Congo in 2012, he  had  checked  with  the
             authorities that the  Sponsors  were  still  recorded  as  the
             Appellants' parents and  the  authorities  had  confirmed  the
             position.  He then sought to get the birth certificates issued
             and recalled that having set out  the  background,  the  Congo
             official asked him a number of questions,  including  who  are
             the parents now and he replied the Second Sponsor and himself.
              I found his evidence has the ring of truth.

         29.  Further the Appellants provided some evidence to  support  the
             application.    In   particular   the   Appellants    provided
             international calling cards and  at  the  hearing  (copied  at
             pages  90-99  of  the  Respondent's  bundle  for  the   Second
             Appellant).    The   Sponsors   confirmed   that   they   used
             international calling cards to phone  the  Appellants  two  or
             three  times  a  week,  as  they  are  the  cheapest  form  of
             communication.

         30.  In addition, the copy of the First Sponsor's British  passport
             shows that since 2010 he has gone  to  Congo  every  year  and
             stayed  for  about  three  weeks  (pages  43  to  76  of   the
             Respondent's bundle  for  the  First  Appellant).   The  First
             Sponsor confirmed that he stayed with the Appellants.

         31.  The couple also provided  money  transfer  receipts  with  the
             application (pages 71 to 89 of the Respondent's bundle for the
             Second Appellant).  Unfortunately, the handwriting for some of
             the receipts is illegible but there are  others  that  clearly
             show that the Sponsors have been sending  money  back  to  the
             Appellants since 2012.  In my view this is  significant.   Why
             would the Sponsors, who have three young children  to  support
             and are working hard, send money to Congo to  the  Appellants,
             if they did not consider themselves as their parents.

         32.  Finally, and in my view significantly, the  Sponsors  told  me
             that they had mentioned the Appellants during  their  previous
             immigration applications.  In particular,  the  First  Sponsor
             told me that he had been interviewed in relation to his asylum
             claim and specifically told the interviewing officer  that  he
             was the Appellants' father.  I note  that  the  Sponsors  also
             applied for British citizenship.  In my  experience  in  these
             types of cases,  the  Respondent  often  cross-references  the
             information  provided  in  earlier  applications,   with   the
             information now being provided.  In addition,  the  Respondent
             regularly refuses applications, when the information  provided
             is not consistent with earlier applications.  I do not know if
             the Respondent undertook such checks in the  present  appeals,
             but it seems to me that the Respondent could have checked  the
             information  in  the  Sponsors'  immigration  files.    As   a
             footnote, it seems to me that as part the Respondent's  duties
             under Section 55, the Respondent ought to have considered  any
             information available, prior to making the decision.

         33.  I note that the Respondent has not suggested that the Sponsors
             claim that they are the Appellants'  parents  is  inconsistent
             with information held on the Sponsors' immigration  files.   I
             find that I have no reason to doubt the Sponsors' claims  that
             they have consistently told the Home Office that they are  the
             Appellants' parents.

         34.  On the totality of the evidence, I find that the Appellant has
             discharged the burden of proof.  I attach  significant  weight
             to my positive credibility finding and to my finding that  the
             Sponsors  have  consistently  described  themselves   as   the
             Appellants' parents.

         35.  In particular, I am satisfied that the Second Sponsor  is  the
             First Appellant's step-mother and that the  First  Sponsor  is
             the Second Appellant's step-father".

 8. An  application  for  permission  to  appeal  followed.   The  grounds,
    essentially, contended that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  failed  to
    adequately  explain  its  findings  and  its   favourable   credibility
    assessment bearing in mind difficulties with the documentary  evidence.
    Further, at paragraph 32 of its determination it  had  generalised  and
    speculated and, given that the other parents of the two claimants might
    still be alive, had failed to consider the "sole responsibility" issue.



 9. Permission to appeal was granted by a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal.
     The salient part of the grant reads as follows;

         "It is arguable that the judge failed to give adequate reasons  for
         allowing the appeal despite his express concerns (at 26) about  the
         lack of supporting documentary evidence that was  material  to  the
         core of the Appellants' appeals.  The Appellants  did  not  provide
         their  parents'   death   certificates;   the   Appellants'   birth
         certificates only reflected what information the DRC officials were
         told; there was no evidence  before  the  judge  to  show  why  the
         Sponsors had failed to obtain adoption order whilst  they  were  in
         the DRC.  The judge failed to give  reasons  why  he  accepted  the
         money transfer receipts as reliable evidence  when  the  recipients
         were not known.  The judge accepted that the  Sponsors  claim  that
         they had mentioned the Appellants in their asylum  interviews  when
         the relevant interview records were not before him".

10. A hearing before the Upper Tribunal was convened so that  it  could  be
    decided whether the decision of the First-tier Tribunal,  with  respect
    to both claimants, involved an error of law  such  as  to  justify  its
    setting aside.  Provision  was  also  made  for  the  remaking  of  the
    decision should that prove necessary.

11. Mrs Pettersen, for the Entry  Clearance  Officer,  indicated  that  she
    would rely upon the Grounds of Appeal.  The birth certificate issue was
    significant. On the face of it  the  certificates  contained  incorrect
    information since they  had  indicated  that  both  Sponsors  were  the
    parents of both claimants.  There was a lack  of  documentary  evidence
    supporting what the two Sponsors and the claimants had asserted.  There
    was no proof that the other parents had passed  away.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal had acknowledged that it was troubled by a lack of  supporting
    evidence but had then simply swept those concerns aside.  Mr Patel, for
    the two claimants, submitted, essentially, that the First-tier Tribunal
    had reached findings and conclusions which had  been  open  to  it  and
    which it had adequately explained.

12. I have concluded that the First-tier Tribunal did not err  in  law  and
    that its decision, with respect to both claimants, shall stand.  I have
    explained why I have reached this view below.

13. The above passage demonstrates that, in general terms,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal set about its task with care and diligence.   It  acknowledged
    that  there  were  some  difficulties  with  respect  to  the  evidence
    presented to it and, in particular, it set out a concern  at  paragraph
    26 regarding the lack of supporting evidence (it may have had  in  mind
    in particular the lack of death certificates) and with respect  to  the
    vagueness of aspects of the  oral  evidence  (paragraph  27).   It  was
    proper for it to make it clear what concerns it had and the  fact  that
    it did have concerns did not mean it had  to,  ultimately,  reject  the
    thrust of the contentions which had been made  on  behalf  of  the  two
    claimants.

14. The First-tier Tribunal clearly did find the oral evidence it heard  to
    be credible.  Although it did not say very much about why it found  the
    oral evidence of the second Sponsor, as opposed to the  first  Sponsor,
    to be credible, its assessment of the oral evidence was  a  matter  for
    it.  It was entitled to believe what it had been  told  notwithstanding
    deficiencies within the documentation.

15. As to the claimed deaths of the two other  parents,  it  did  accept  a
    submission that the evidence of the two Sponsors, in this respect,  had
    been vague (paragraph 25 of the determination).   Indeed,  I  did  find
    myself wondering whether it had in fact decided that it was not able to
    accept the evidence of the claimed deaths and that that might be why it
    had, at a later point in the determination, focused upon  the  question
    of whether the female Sponsor was the stepmother of the first  claimant
    and the male Sponsor was the stepfather of the  second  claimant.   The
    determination might have benefited from a little more clarity  in  this
    regard.  However, as I say, it is clear  that  the  oral  evidence  was
    accepted.  It seems to me that if the First-tier Tribunal was  deciding
    to reject a discrete part of the evidence, being the claimed deaths  of
    the other parents, it would have said so.  I do,  therefore,  read  the
    determination as containing a finding that the two other  parents  were
    deceased  and  Mrs  Pettersen  did  not  urge  upon  me   a   different
    interpretation.  It  is  true  that  no  death  certificates  had  been
    provided, as was noted in the grant of  permission,  and  as  was  also
    noted by Mrs Pettersen in her submissions to me, but that did not  mean
    the First-tier Tribunal was obliged to reject the claims which had been
    made in this  regard.   It  properly  took  into  account  all  of  the
    evidence, including the oral evidence, and, having done  that,  it  was
    entitled to conclude that the other parents had passed away.   That  is
    what it did.

16. Having reached that finding  it  was,  despite  what  is  said  in  the
    grounds, not obliged to go on to consider any  issue  with  respect  to
    "sole responsibility".  That is because once  it  had  made  sufficient
    findings for it to conclude that paragraph 297(i)(d)  was  met  it  was
    relieved of considering the other possibilities set out in (e) and (f).



17. I did have  some  concern  with  respect  to  what  had  been  said  at
    paragraphs 32 and 33 of the determination.  In particular,  I  wondered
    whether the First-tier Tribunal had simply taken the view that  because
    the Entry Clearance Officer had failed to produce documents  evidencing
    what the Sponsors had said concerning their  own  previous  immigration
    applications that it should be  assumed  they  had  mentioned  the  two
    claimants, and the claimed  family  relationships,  when  making  those
    applications.  However, it seems to me that, in fact, all it was saying
    was that the two Sponsors had given oral evidence to  the  effect  that
    they had mentioned the claimed family relationships when  making  those
    applications, that they could be believed about that,  that  there  was
    nothing produced by the Entry Clearance Officer  to  suggest  otherwise
    and that, therefore, the finding that they had  mentioned  them  was  a
    factor  supportive  of  their  overall  credibility.   The   First-tier
    Tribunal was entitled to take that view.

18.  In  light  of  all  the  above  it  seems  to  me  that  the  grounds,
    notwithstanding the grant of permission, amounted to  no  more  than  a
    determined disagreement with findings and conclusions which the  First-
    tier Tribunal was entitled to make on the evidence before it and  which
    it adequately explained.  Accordingly, I conclude that it did  not  err
    in law and that its decision, with respect  to  both  claimants,  shall
    stand.

Conclusions (both Claimants)

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve an error of law.

Its decision shall stand.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did make an order, with respect to  both  claimants,
pursuant  to  Rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum   and   Immigration   Tribunal
(Procedure) Rules 2005.  I continue, with respect to  both  claimants,  that
order pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee awards.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway
