
[pic]
IAC-AH-dh-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/10858/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 December 2015                  |On 10 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                            Nivethika alageswaran
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                    THE Entry Clearance Officer - CHENNAI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Coleman of Counsel instructed by Tamil Welfare
                    Association
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton of the Specialist Appeals Team


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant, Nivethika Alageswaran, is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on
    28  December  1989.   On  17  August  2013  she   married   Balasingham
    Alageswaran, a naturalised British citizen. They are both Tamils.

 2. On 18 November 2013 she applied to the Respondent for  entry  clearance
    as the wife of a British citizen resident in the United Kingdom.

 3. On 12 August 2014 the Respondent under reference  1584976  refused  the
    application by reference only to a finding that the Appellant  had  not
    shown her husband met income threshold requirements  of  paragraph  EC-
    P.1.1  of  Appendix  FM  to  the  Immigration  Rules.  The   Respondent
    considered there were no exceptional circumstances which  might  engage
    the United Kingdom's  obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention.

The First-tier Tribunal Proceedings

 4. On 9 September 2014 the Appellant lodged notice of appeal under Section
    82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended  (the
    2002  Act).   The  grounds  asserted  the  Respondent  had  incorrectly
    assessed the evidence of the husband's income and had applied the wrong
    test, that of exceptionality, to assess whether the State's obligations
    under Article 8 were engaged.

 5. By a decision promulgated on 26  June  2015  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Thanki dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

 6. On 5 October 2015 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal McDade  granted  the
    Appellant permission  to  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the  Judge  had
    overlooked the  two  letters  from  the  Respondent  to  the  Appellant
    requesting additional information about her husband's income which  had
    been sent to the wrong address.  This might have led to unfairness such
    that had further evidence been supplied the Judge might have come to  a
    different decision.  By a notice of 13 October 2015 served pursuant  to
    Rule 24 of the Tribunal  (Upper  Tribunal)  Procedure  Rules  2008  the
    Respondent reserved his position because he did not have access to  the
    Respondent's file.

The Upper Tribunal Proceedings

 7. The Appellant's husband attended the hearing.  The representatives  for
    both parties informed me they agreed that the  correspondence  sent  by
    the Respondent to the  Appellant  requesting  additional  documents  to
    establish whether her husband was earning sufficient to meet the income
    threshold requirements of the Immigration Rules for entry clearance  as
    a spouse had not been properly served because of  deficiencies  in  the
    description of the address to which the correspondence was sent.

 8. They invited me to find there was a material error of law in the First-
    tier Tribunal's decision  and  to  set  it  aside  and  find  that  the
    Respondent's original decision had not been in accordance with the  law
    and to remit it to the Respondent  to  enable  him  to  make  a  lawful
    decision.  Both representatives confirmed they agreed this.

Findings and Consideration

 9. I find the grounds upon which permission to appeal was granted are made
    out.  I am satisfied that the enquiries made by the Respondent  of  the
    Appellant had been inaccurately addressed with the consequence that she
    had not had the opportunity to submit the missing evidence to  complete
    the series of documents which she had submitted with her application.

10. Additionally, I note that the Judge at paragraphs 35 and 38 applied the
    provisions of Sections 85A(3)(b) and (4) of the 2002  Act  relating  to
    the admissibility of evidence in an  appeal  under  the  "Points  Based
    System".  This was not an appeal under  the  Points  Based  System  and
    evidence subsequent to the  date  of  the  application  was  admissible
    although subject to  the  restrictions  described  in  DR  (ECO:  post-
    decision evidence) Morocco* [2005] UKIAT 00038.

11. The consequence of the Judge's decision is infected by an error of  law
    such that it should be set aside.  The Respondent having sought,  quite
    properly, to exercise the discretion referred to in paragraph  D(f)  of
    Appendix FM-SE of the Immigration Rules. The  effect  of  not  properly
    addressing correspondence to the Appellant  is  that  having  exercised
    such discretion the Respondent then  made  the  decision  under  appeal
    before the exercise of  that  discretion  could  have  been  given  any
    efficacy so as to render the decision not in accordance with the law.

12. I conclude, as suggested and agreed by both parties, that the  decision
    of the Respondent was not in accordance with the  law  and  the  matter
    should be remitted to the Respondent for a lawful decision to be made.

Anonymity

There was no request for an anonymity direction and having heard the  appeal
I do not consider one is warranted.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of law  such
    that it should be set aside.

    The decision of the Entry Clearance Officer is not in  accordance  with
    the law and the matter is remitted for a lawful decision to be made.

    Anonymity direction not made.


Signed/Official Crest  Date 23. xii. 2015

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



TO THE RESPONDENT: FEE AWARD

The appeal has been allowed to the extent that it is  remitted.   There  was
no application for a fee award.  I have considered the position and  do  not
consider  it  appropriate  to  make  any  fee  award.   A  fully  documented
application in the first place might well have obviated  the  need  for  the
Respondent  to  consider  exercising  his  discretion  and  making   further
enquiries.


Signed/Official Crest  Date 23. xii. 2015

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
