
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: oa/10018/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 2 May 2013                                   |On 1 August 2013           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                         amr mohamed ismail hussein

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mrs Wendy Ismail, Sponsor


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State against  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal allowing  the  claimant's  appeal  against  the
    Entry Clearance Officer's refusal to grant him  entry  clearance  as  a
    spouse under appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.

 2. The application for  entry  clearance  was  refused  for  a  number  of
    reasons, only one  of  which  is  still  in  issue,  and  that  is  the
    claimant's English language ability.  When submitting his  application,
    the claimant indicated that he hoped to be exempted  from  the  English
    requirements of the Rules on the grounds of disability.   The  claimant
    has a speech and memory disability and a weakness in one hand,  due  to
    hemiparesis, which he contended prevented him from sitting the  English
    language test required by the Rules in the usual  form.   He  had  been
    employed since 2009 by Egypt Air, which has a 5% disabled staff  quota.
    The Entry Clearance Officer declined to make Special  Arrangements  and
    it is common ground that  at  the  date  of  the  ECO's  decision,  the
    claimant had not passed the  English  language  test  at  level  A1  as
    Appendix FM requires.

 3. The claimant accepted that  his  English  was  poor.  The  sponsor  was
    learning Arabic.  They had family support from the  claimant's  father,
    who considered that the sponsor was a  'nice  wife'  for  him  and  had
    purchased a flat in Cairo which the couple could use when they  visited
    Egypt.

 4. The refusal is dated 29 April 2012; the claimant  appealed  on  23  May
    2012 and on 28 May 2012, after Special Arrangements had  been  made  to
    assist him, he passed the English language test at level A2.  The Entry
    Clearance Manager's review of his application on 25 November 2012 post-
    dated the claimant passing the test but the Entry  Clearance  Officer's
    refusal decision was made just under a month before he passed it.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal judge heard evidence from the claimant's  wife,
    the sponsor, who also appeared before me.  Her evidence was accepted as
    credible, and the evidence she produced  resolved  almost  all  of  the
    issues under appendix  FM  which  had  caused  the  application  to  be
    refused.  There  remained  the  question  of  the  claimant's  language
    ability in English. The claimant had passed the English  language  test
    at level A2 on 28 May 2012,

 6. The material part of the decision is in paragraph 23:

         "I have seen a letter dated 18 July 2012 from the  sponsor  to  the
         Tribunal dated 18 July 2012.   The  letter  confirms  that  Special
         Arrangements were previously refused by the Examination Services in
         Cairo but that decision was reversed in an e-mail of 28  May  2012.
         The appellant was given 50% extra time,  separate  invigilation,  a
         special requirements speaking pack, a speaking test  with  a  dummy
         partner, a special needs listening test paper and a  special  needs
         CD.  He passed the key English test (level  A2)  with  a  score  of
         71/100 in June 2012.  I find that the English language  requirement
         was met before the review by the Entry Clearance Manager.  Had  the
         respondent been aware of the appellant's success in the  test  then
         the point would have been conceded as part of the  Entry  Clearance
         Manager review."

 7. The First-tier Tribunal judge allowed the appeal on that basis.



Upper Tribunal hearing

 8. The sponsor was present at the hearing before me.  She  made  no  legal
    argument.  For the Secretary of State, Mr Wilding relied on the grounds
    of appeal.  The claimant had known at the date of application  that  he
    could not meet the English language requirement of the  Rules  and  the
    fact that with Special Arrangements he had met it at a later date, five
    days after filing his notice of appeal against the decision  to  refuse
    him entry clearance, did not remedy the defect in his application.

 9. I indicated to the sponsor  at  the  hearing  that  I  agreed  with  Mr
    Wilding.  I gave an  oral  decision  which  forms  the  basis  of  this
    determination.

Discussion

10. The requirement for English language at level A1 appears in appendix FM
    at paragraph E-ECP.4.1:

         "English language requirement
         E-ECP.4.1. The applicant must provide specified evidence that they-
         ...

         (b) have passed an English language test in speaking and listening
         at a minimum of level A1 of the Common European Framework of
         Reference for Languages with a provider approved by the UK Border
         Agency; ... or
         (d) are exempt from the English language requirement under
         paragraph EECP. 4.2.
         E-ECP.4.2. The applicant is exempt from the English language
         requirement if at the date of application- ...
         (b) the applicant has a disability (physical or mental condition)
         which prevents the applicant from meeting the requirement; ...."

11. The Secretary of State did not accept that  the  claimant's  disability
    prevented him from meeting the requirement.  She has been proved  right
    in that, since with special arrangements, he was later able to meet it.
     However, the claimant did not meet that requirement  at  the  date  of
    application, nor before filing grounds of appeal.  He  met  it  between
    the appeal and the ECM's review of his case. He does not now argue that
    his disability  was  such  that  he  was  prevented  from  meeting  the
    requirement and is exempt from the English language test.

12. The date of application for these purposes is as set out in   paragraph
    34G of the Rules:

         "Determination of the date of an application (or  variation  of  an
         application or claim) in connection with immigration

         34G. For the  purposes  of  these  rules,  the  date  on  which  an
         application or claim (or a variation in accordance  with  paragraph
         34E) is made is as follows:

             (i) where the application form is sent by post,  the  date  of
             posting,
             (ii) where the application form is submitted  in  person,  the
             date on which it is accepted by a public enquiry office of the
             United Kingdom Border Agency of the Home Office,
             (iii) where the application form is sent by courier, the  date
             on which it is delivered to the United Kingdom  Border  Agency
             of the Home Office, or
             (iv) where the application is made via the online  application
             process, on the  date  on  which  the  online  application  is
             submitted."

13. The application date preceded the passing of the test and the  claimant
    had not even sat the test when he applied.  The  date  of  decision  is
    that of the Entry Clearance Officer, not the Entry  Clearance  Manager.



14. In the result although the judge was entitled to reach the  conclusions
    she did on the evidence before  her,  in  relation  to  all  the  other
    requirements of  Appendix  FM,  so  far  as  the  English  language  is
    concerned, her conclusion that the claimant had met the requirement  by
    the 'date of  decision',  treating  that  as  the  date  of  the  Entry
    Clearance Manager's review of the Entry Clearance  Officer's  decision,
    is plainly wrong.  The decision of the Court of Appeal in Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department v Raju & Ors [2013] EWCA Civ 754 is clear
    as to the proper approach to ascertaining the dates of application  and
    decision, and the application itself made it clear  that  the  claimant
    knew he had not met all the requirements of the Rules.

15. The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  erred  in  finding  that  the  English
    language requirements were met and allowing  the  appeal.   That  is  a
    material error of law.  I therefore set aside the First-tier Tribunal's
    decision and re-make the determination.

16. The positive findings of fact in relation to all other elements of  the
    Rules which are set out at paragraph 12 and paragraphs  18  to  22  are
    maintained, but I find that the claimant did not produce to  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer with his application for settlement, evidence that he
    had passed the English language requirements at the relevant standard.

17. I substitute a decision dismissing the appeal.









    Signed                              Date 24 September 2013




    Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
