
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/10905/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 February 2016                   |On 3 March 2016                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                        HANAN MOHAMMED ABDULLA ASEEL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Wilkins, instructed by Pepperells Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Hanan Mohammed Abdulla Aseel, was born on 1 January 1982
    and is a female citizen of  Sudan.   She  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Birkby) against a decision of the respondent  dated  12
    August 2014 refusing her application for entry clearance to the  United
    Kingdom to settle pursuant to paragraph 352A of HC  395  (as  amended).
    Judge Birkby dismissed her appeal.  She now appeals,  with  permission,
    to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. I am grateful to Ms Wilkins of Counsel who had clearly  spent  a  great
    deal of time and preparation of this case and was able to explain to me
    why confusion  appears  to  have  arisen  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    regarding  various  items  of  documentary  evidence  adduced  by   the
    appellant.  Judge Birkby [23(i)] appears to have assumed  that  he  had
    before him  one  "marriage  document"  but  two  translations  of  that
    document which he considered differed in ways that persuaded  him  that
    the evidence was not consistent or relaible.  Ms Wilkins told me  there
    were, on the contrary, two separate marriage documents  issued  by  two
    different courts, a regional court and the High Court in Khartoum.  One
    of these documents  contained  the  names  of  the  witnesses  who  had
    attended the wedding, and the other did not.  It was  also  clear  from
    the evidence that there were relatives "giving away" the parties to the
    marriage but who were not also witnesses.  The  judge  appears  not  to
    have taken into account that evidence when he found [23(ii)]  that  the
    sponsor gave inconsistent evidence as to who had attended and witnessed
    the wedding.  The confusion over the identity of the documents  appears
    to have compounded the problem because the judge then  gave  additional
    weight  to  inconsistencies  between  what  he  considered  to  be  two
    different translations of one marriage document  when  there  were,  in
    fact, two documents before him.

 3. I am satisfied that the confusion generated at  the  hearing  regarding
    the documentary evidence was such that it misled the judge and that his
    findings as to the  credibility  of  the  appellant's  evidence  cannot
    stand.  I therefore  set  aside  the  decision.   The  matter  will  be
    remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (not  Judge  Birkby)  for  that
    Tribunal to re-make the decision following a fact-finding exercise.   I
    set aside  all  the  findings  of  fact  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    However, as I pointed out  to  Ms  Wilkins,  the  judge  recorded  oral
    evidence from the sponsor and also a Mr Abdulrahman  [23(v)  and  (vi)]
    which raised legitimate doubts in the mind  of  the  judge  as  to  the
    credibility of both witnesses.  The record of what  was  said  by  both
    witnesses at the hearing,  and  which  is  recorded  in  the  decision,
    constitutes evidence which may well be raised by the respondent at  the
    next hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.  If the  witnesses  attend
    and give evidence and seek to reconcile the apparent inconsistencies in
    the evidence which they gave to Judge Birkby, they  may  well  need  to
    explain why their evidence has changed.  However, that is a matter  for
    the First-tier Tribunal on remittal.

Notice of Decision

 4. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated  on  15
    June 2015 is set aside.  None of the findings of fact shall stand.  The
    appeal is returned to the First-tier Tribunal (not  Judge  Birkby)  for
    that Tribunal to re-make the decision.

 5. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 18 February 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
