
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/10105/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 November 2015                   |On 20 November 2015                  |
|Prepared 4 November 2015             |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          JEYASUTHA NAVARATHINARASA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs S Sreeraman, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Gilbert, Counsel, instructed by Tamil Welfare
                    Association (Romford Road)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In this decision the Appellant is  referred  to  as  the  Secretary  of
    State and the Respondent is referred to as the Claimant.

2.   The Claimant, a national of Sri Lanka, date of birth 28 February  1981,
    appealed against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse  to  grant
    entry clearance under paragraph 319L of the Immigration  Rules  HC  395
    (The Rules) on 20 August 2014.  Her out of country appeal  came  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge A C Moler (the  judge)  who,  in  a  decision
    dated 3 July 2015, allowed the appeal under the Rules on the basis that
    the Claimant had satisfied  the  criteria  for  entry  clearance  under
    paragraph 319L of the Rules.

3.   The Claimant's claim was refused  because  she  had  not  obtained  the
    necessary English language requirements under the  Rules.   Before  the
    judge a number of arguments were raised, but not by Mr Gilbert,  as  to
    why the Claimant succeeded under the Rules.  The judge simply failed to
    apply the correct approach which was to be satisfied that the Appellant
    had, on a balance of probabilities, met the  relevant  requirements  of
    the Rules for the purposes of an acceptable English language test.   Mr
    Gilbert, for the Claimant, correctly accepted that the judge's decision
    on this matter was in error of law albeit now the Claimant has met  and
    passed the relevant test requirements.

4.   In the Grounds of Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal it was  clear  that
    the issue of Article 8 was raised  but  also  that  the  judge  in  the
    decision of 27 June 2015 as signed did not address Article 8 ECHR  save
    to say it did not require consideration outside of  the  Rules  because
    the Claimant had satisfied the requirements of paragraph  319L  of  the
    Rules.

5.   The pity of that aspect of the decision is quite simply  that  it  left
    open the issue of Article 8 ECHR.  It was clear  to  me  that  had  the
    judge not made the error in  relation  to  the  English  language  test
    qualification he would have had to go on and decide the  whether or not
    Article 8 should be looked at outside the Rules.  In the  circumstances
    therefore I am satisfied that the  Secretary  of  State's  grounds  are
    right in challenging the judge's decision under the Rules.

6.   To that extent therefore the Original Tribunal's decision cannot  stand
    and the following decision is substituted. The appeal of the  Secretary
    of State is allowed as set out below.

7.   However in relation to the Article 8 claim, it seemed to me  that  that
    having been raised it needed to be addressed.  Whilst I express no view
    whatsoever on the likely outcome, on which I have formed no  conclusion
    at all, I was satisfied that  the  matter  did  need  to  be  addressed
    because,  at  least  prima  facie,  it  appeared  that  there  may   be
    exceptional circumstances which  enabled  the  case  to  be  looked  at
    outside of the Rules under Article 8 ECHR.  Those issues are  a  matter
    for another day.

Notice of Decision

8.   I am satisfied that the Original Tribunal's decision cannot stand.

    The appeal is allowed to the extent that the Article 8 ECHR claim  will
    have to be decided.



    Directions

    (1)  Remake in the Upper Tribunal.

    (2)  Before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey if available

    (3)  List for 1 hour

    (4)  Tamil interpreter required

    (5)  Any further documents bearing in mind this is an  out  of  country
         appeal and the relevant date for consideration will be the date  of
         the Secretary of State's decision

    (6)  Any further material being advanced in support of  the  Article  8
         claim to be served not less than 10 working days before the further
         hearing to remake the decision.




8.   No anonymity direction is made nor required.


Signed   Date 13 November 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

