
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/10896/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 8 August 2014                                |On 26 August 2014          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                      Mr Shadikul Islam Protik Mohammad
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       IMMIGRATION OFFICER - BRUSSELS
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Paramjorthy, instructed via the Direct Access
Scheme
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, born 10 May 1993, is a Dutch national.  On 20  May  2013
    he presented himself to an  Immigration  Officer  at  the  Eurostar  UK
    control in Brussels, with the intention of  travelling  to  the  United
    Kingdom.  The Immigration Officer identified  that  the  appellant  has
    five criminal convictions in the United Kingdom - all obtained  between
    June 2012 and April 2013, and refused  him  entry.  The  appellant  had
    previously been refused to entry into the United Kingdom  on  30  April
    2013.  His criminal convictions relate to  matters  of  shoplifting  in
    Oxford Street, fare evasion on the underground, as well  as  breach  of
    court orders.

 2. The appellant appealed the Immigration Officer's decision to the First-
    tier Tribunal.  This appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ross
    on 21 March 2014 and dismissed in  a  determination  promulgated  on  1
    April 2014.  The core of  the  reasons  given  by  Judge  Ross  are  as
    follows:

         "11. I find that the Immigration Officer was entitled to  base  his
             decision on the conduct of the appellant, who is a person  who
             has visited the United Kingdom and has  shoplifted  in  Oxford
             Street during some of his visits.  Whilst fare evasion is  not
             of itself the most serious of offences, it displays antisocial
             behaviour which the Immigration Officer was entitled  to  take
             into account.  The Immigration Officer faced with the  history
             of the appellant's recent conduct, was  entitled  to  conclude
             that his personal conduct represents  a  genuine  present  and
             sufficiently serious threat affecting one of  the  fundamental
             interests of society, namely the maintenance of law and order.

         12.  I am satisfied that the appellant's exclusion was not based on
             his previous convictions themselves and took into account  the
             appellant's  likely  conduct  if  admitted  into  the   United
             Kingdom.  I find that Regulation 21(6) is not applicable given
             that the appellant is not resident in the United  Kingdom  and
             is resident in Netherlands.  I reject the submission that  the
             appellant was a jobseeker and therefore  a  qualified  person,
             given that Regulation 6(4) defines a jobseeker as a person who
             enters the UK in order to  seek  employment  and  can  provide
             evidence that he is  seeking  employment  and  has  a  genuine
             chance of being engaged.  No evidence of any job  applications
             or  chance  of  being  employed  has  been  submitted.   I  am
             satisfied that the appellant's exclusion was proportionate  to
             the aim of maintaining law and order."

 3. In a decision of 22 May 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge  McDade  granted
    the appellant permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.   Thus  the
    matter came before me.

 4. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal  Ms  Isherwood  accepted  that
    there  were  two  fundamental  errors  in  the  First-tier   Tribunal's
    determination that required the determination to  be  set  aside.   She
    identified these errors to be as follows:

      i) The judge misdirected himself in fact and/or came to an  irrational
         conclusion of fact when finding that the appellant had  lived  with
         his father in The Hague since 30 May 2011.

     ii) The judge erred in law in concluding that Regulation 21(6)  of  the
         2006 EEA Regulations was not applicable to his considerations

 5. Given this concession I need do no more than express my agreement  with
    it and briefly set out my reasons for so doing.

 6. As to the first of the errors accepted by Ms Isherwood,  it  has  never
    been the appellant's case that he had lived in  the  Netherlands  since
    May 2011. Indeed it was the appellant's evidence that  he  entered  the
    United Kingdom in July 2011 along with his family  and  had  thereafter
    made the United Kingdom his home. In his interview with the Immigration
    Officer on 20 May 2013  the  applicant  identified  that  he  lived  in
    England, providing his residential address in London,  and  he  further
    stated that he had lived at this address since 2011.  This was also the
    evidence he gave in a witness statement to the Tribunal.

 7. In addition to the appellant's own testimony, there was ample  evidence
    before Judge Ross that the appellant had studied at  Stratford  College
    between January 2012 and July 2013. There was additional evidence  from
    Jobcentre Plus identifying dates on which the appellant had signed at a
    centre in the United  Kingdom.  The  Tribunal  also  had  before  it  a
    Community Order dated 17 July 2012, which  required  the  appellant  to
    carry out 80 hours 'community service' thereafter.  These  are  just  a
    number of a wide range of documents which all point  to  the  appellant
    having lived in the United Kingdom from 2011 onwards rather than in The
    Hague. Where the appellant has been living for  the  past  3  years  is
    clearly relevant  to  the  assessment  of  the  issue  of  whether  his
    exclusion  is  proportionate  and  the  First-tier   Tribunal's   error
    regarding this issue is plainly capable of affecting the outcome of the
    appeal.

 8. As to the second accepted error, this flows from the  error  identified
    above; the First-tier Tribunal's failure to consider  Regulation  21(6)
    of the 2006 EEA Regulations being founded on its  conclusion  that  the
    appellant was 'not resident' in the United Kingdom .

Decision

For the reasons set out above I set aside the determination  of  the  First-
tier Tribunal.

It was agreed between the parties, and I accept  that  this  should  be  so,
that the appeal be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  determined
afresh and I so direct.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 11 August 2014















