
[pic]
IAC-AH-SC-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/10167/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 6 November 2014                         |On 13 November 2014            |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GIBB


                                   Between

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, NEPAL
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     N K
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Blundell, Counsel, instructed by Rashid &
Rashid, Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Nepal, born  on  18  May  1996.   He  was
    refused entry clearance to  settle  in  the  UK  with  his  mother  and
    stepfather.  His appeal was then allowed by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Shamash, following a hearing at  Taylor  House  at  which  the
    appellant's mother, stepfather, and a friend of the appellant's  mother
    gave oral evidence.  The determination was promulgated on 8 April 2014.

2.   Permission to appeal was granted to the Entry Clearance Officer  on  12
    May 2014 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Cruthers.   The  grounds  seeking
    permission to appeal had been concerned with a procedural issue, namely
    that the appellant's mother's friend had been present  in  the  hearing
    room during the appellant's mother's evidence,  had  subsequently  been
    called as a witness, and that the judge erroneously  placed  weight  on
    her evidence, without  taking  this  irregularity  into  account.   The
    permission decision noted that it  was  arguable  that  the  judge  had
    attached significant weight to the evidence of the appellant's mother's
    friend, without explicitly considering whether the weight  should  have
    been reduced on account of what had occurred at the hearing.

3.   Although the appellant in the Upper Tribunal  is  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer I will refer, in this determination, to  the  parties  as  they
    were before the First-tier Tribunal.

4.   Mr Blundell, for the appellant, produced a witness statement  by  David
    Sellwood, Counsel, who appeared for the  appellant  at  the  First-tier
    hearing.  Attached to the witness statement was Mr Sellwood's  note  of
    the events on the day of the hearing, signed by him  on  that  day,  27
    February 2014.  Mr Blundell also produced  a  copy  of  JK  (Democratic
    Republic of Congo) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 831, on which he  relied  for
    the proposition that asylum proceedings before an Immigration Judge are
    adversarial in nature.

5.   Mr Bramble, for the Secretary of State,  produced  an  attendance  note
    written by Sarah Ramsey, Counsel,  who  represented  the  Secretary  of
    State at the First-tier hearing.  The note is dated 29 March 2014, just
    over a month after the hearing took place.

6.   Mr Bramble, for the Secretary of State, relied  on  the  grounds.   The
    note from the respondent's Counsel showed that the  witness  had  heard
    part of the appellant's mother's evidence.  There was  nothing  in  the
    judge's determination setting out these events.  It was clear from  the
    determination that weight had been placed on  the  witness's  evidence.
    The silence on this issue in the determination showed  that  there  had
    been a failure to consider whether less weight should be placed on  the
    evidence in the circumstances.  This was a material  error  because  it
    could have altered the outcome.

7.   Mr Blundell, for the  appellant,  made  submissions  as  follows.   The
    application by the ECO was based on a misunderstanding.  The notes from
    both counsel showed that the Home Office counsel raised  no  objection.
    Relying on paragraph 20 of JK (DRC) the proceedings  were  adversarial.
    It was also the case that the Home Office counsel had  not  raised  any
    concerns in submissions.  The Home Office  were  therefore  effectively
    seeking to make fresh submissions after the event, since there  was  no
    suggestion that any had been raised at the First-tier hearing.

8.   In response Mr Bramble indicated that  he  did  not  disagree,  but  it
    remained uncertain on the basis of the notes from the two counsel  that
    that had really been the position taken by counsel for the Secretary of
    State.  Mr Blundell, for the appellant, responded by  pointing  to  the
    burden being on the Secretary of State, who was bringing  this  appeal,
    to provide evidence if it was considered to be lacking.

Decision and Reasons

9.   I have decided that it has  not  been  established  that  there  was  a
    procedural irregularity amounting to a material error  of  law.   As  a
    result there is no basis for  interfering  with  the  judge's  decision
    allowing the appeal.

10.  It is perhaps  unfortunate  that  the  judge  was  not  asked  for  her
    comments, at the  stage  when  permission  was  granted.   It  is  also
    unfortunate that there was no record of proceedings to be found on  the
    file.  In addition to the determination, however, I have been  provided
    with two attendance notes from both counsel instructed  to  appear  for
    the respective sides at the hearing.

11.  The two notes differ in a number of respects.  That by the  appellant's
    counsel is longer and considerably more detailed.  It was also  written
    and signed on the day of the hearing.  The note by counsel who appeared
    for the Secretary of State, in contrast, is brief, and focuses on  only
    one issue.  It was signed about a month after the hearing.

12.  What both notes show is that it became  clear  during  the  appellant's
    mother's evidence that the friend  that  had  accompanied  her  to  the
    hearing could give relevant evidence, although no witness statement had
    been prepared for her.  Appellant's counsel sought and  was  granted  a
    brief adjournment to take instructions, and following on from this  she
    gave evidence.  In her note  the  Home  Office  counsel  describes  the
    incident as one in which  the  judge  was  "furious"  with  appellant's
    counsel for not bringing to her  attention  the  fact  that  there  was
    another person present with relevant evidence.

13.  The note by the  appellant's  counsel  includes  the  comment  that  no
    submissions were made by the Home Office.  At  the  hearing  before  me
    there was some discussion of the fact that  the  judge's  determination
    included a short paragraph (18) noting that she heard submissions  from
    both parties and had taken these into account in reaching her decision.



14.   I  accept  the  submission  made  by  Mr  Blundell  that  these   were
    adversarial proceedings.  It appears to me to be likely, on  the  basis
    of the evidence that I have seen, that counsel for the Home  Office  at
    the hearing did not challenge the evidence  given  by  the  appellant's
    mother's friend, and did not make submissions, beyond the formal one of
    relying on the refusal.  It appears to me that I can place considerable
    weight on the detailed notes produced by Mr Sellwood, which were signed
    on the day of the hearing.  It is also important to note, in  my  view,
    that there is no indication in Ms Ramsey's note  that  she  raised  any
    objection  to  the  evidence  being  heard,  or  made  any  submissions
    challenging that evidence, or any other aspect  of  the  evidence.   In
    fact the note from the appellant's counsel is entirely silent as to her
    role at the hearing.  The only basis for the application for permission
    to appeal is the section of the note  where  Ms  Ramsey  describes  the
    judge indicating that she wanted to hear from the appellant's  mother's
    friend, and raising the concern about her having been present.

15.  If there does remain some uncertainty, in that there could  potentially
    be further evidence to contradict  that  provided  by  Mr  Sellwood,  I
    accept the submission made on the appellant's behalf before me that  it
    was for the Entry Clearance Officer,  in  seeking  to  establish  these
    facts, to provide such evidence.

16.   It  therefore  appears  to  me  to  be  established,  on  balance   of
    probabilities, that Home  Office  counsel  at  the  hearing  raised  no
    objection to the evidence of the witness, and raised  no  objection  to
    any of the evidence following the closing  of  that  evidence,  in  her
    submissions.  Given that these were adversarial proceedings  the  judge
    was not required to imagine points that might have been taken by one of
    the parties, but which had not been taken, and then deal with those  in
    the determination.  The judge was entitled,  having  raised  the  issue
    directly at the hearing with both parties, to proceed on the basis that
    no objection was being taken to the evidence of the witness.

17.  Even if it could be said that the judge erred in law by not  mentioning
    the issue in her determination, despite the fact that it was clear that
    she was aware of it because it was she that raised it at  the  hearing,
    nevertheless it appears to me that the outcome would have been the same
    even if no weight at all had been placed on the evidence of  the  third
    witness.  What the  judge  accepted  in  her  findings,  based  on  the
    evidence  from  the  appellant's  mother,  his  stepfather,   and   the
    documentary evidence, as well as that of  the  witness,  was  that  the
    appellant's father had never  played  any  role  in  his  life,  having
    abandoned the appellant's  mother  when  she  was  pregnant;  that  the
    appellant's grandfather  is  a  long-term  abusive  alcoholic  and  the
    environment is unsuitable  for  the  appellant;  that  the  appellant's
    mother had been raising him as a single parent; and that the  situation
    with the  appellant's  grandfather  had  worsened,  so  that  both  the
    appellant's mother and stepfather were  concerned  about  his  welfare.
    Looking at these findings it appears to me that the witness's  evidence
    had some significance, in that she had helped the appellant's mother in
    various ways with looking after the appellant, when she was  in  Nepal,
    as a result of  the  appellant's  grandparents'  various  failings.   I
    accept that it is clear from the judge's determination that she  placed
    weight on this evidence, but it does not appear to me to be established
    that the outcome would have been  different  if  the  evidence  of  the
    witness had been entirely excluded, or given less weight.

18.  In essence the point is that the Secretary of State on  behalf  of  the
    Entry Clearance Officer cannot properly raise an objection at the error
    of law stage, having conceded the matter, and raised no such objection,
    at the First-tier.  Appeals are  often  poorly  prepared,  for  various
    reasons, and judges will often need  to  take  sensible  and  pragmatic
    decisions to hear evidence without a witness  statement,  or  with  one
    being drafted in haste on the day.  Where both  sides  are  represented
    there has to be an expectation that representatives on the day will  be
    able to respond, and raise any objections to  admissibility  or  weight
    before the judge.  If this opportunity has not been taken the error  of
    law appeal system is not an arena in which to  raise  submissions  that
    could have been made but were not.  It  also  appears  to  me,  in  the
    alternative, that any procedural error would not in any event have been
    material.

19.  As a separate point it would  be  necessary,  for  a  procedural  error
    amounting to an error of law to be established, to show that the  judge
    gave no consideration to the issue of the weight to be attached to  the
    witness's evidence because of the  irregularity.   The  note  from  the
    appellant's counsel, however, makes it clear that she was  fully  aware
    of it, given that she raised the issue herself.  The judge's silence in
    the determination on the issue does not therefore  reflect  a  lack  of
    awareness of the  point,  but  probably  reflects  the  fact  that  the
    Secretary of State's counsel raised no objection and did not  challenge
    that or any other aspect of the evidence.

20.  For these reasons I have decided that a material error of law  has  not
    been shown, and the judge's decision allowing the appeal should  remain
    undisturbed.

21.  Given the appellant's age I have decided that the determination  should
    be anonymised.  The First-tier Judge made no fee award, and this aspect
    was not challenged before me.

Notice of Decision

22.  It has not established that there was a material error of  law  in  the
    judge's determination, and her decision allowing the  appeal  therefore
    remains undisturbed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 6 November 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Gibb



