
IAC-AH-KEW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/10156/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 June 2015                       |On 12 June 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                             HUSAM FAWZI MNAJID
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                   ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - AMMAN, JORDAN
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Brooksbank, Simpson Millar, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Husam Fawzi Mnajid, was born on 17 August 1990 and is  a
    citizen of Iraq.  The appellant  had  sought  entry  clearance  to  the
    United Kingdom as a dependent relative but his application was  refused
    by the Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) on 7 August 2014.   The  appellant
    appealed to the  First-Tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Dearden),  which,  in  a
    determination promulgated on 8 January 2015, dismissed the appeal.  The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant's mother,  father  and  brother  have  been  accepted  as
    refugees in the United Kingdom  with  limited  leave  to  remain.   The
    appellant's sister is a doctor in the United  Kingdom  and  is  also  a
    British citizen.  The appeals of the  appellant's  father  and  brother
    against decisions of the Secretary of State refusing their  claims  for
    asylum were allowed in July  2013  by  Judge  Ince  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Judge Ince accepted in the course of those proceedings  that
    the appellant had been kidnapped and abused by political opponents  and
    detained by them for a period of fifteen months between  February  2013
    and May 2014.  Judge Dearden  accepted,  following  the  principles  in
    Devaseelan [2007] UKIAT 00702, that the appellant had

         "... indeed  been  kidnapped  and  abused  by  political  opponents
         between 26 February 2013 and 12  May  2014.   He  then  managed  to
         escape from the militia group assisted by a friend.  He  eventually
         contacted his relatives  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  with  their
         assistance has managed to  establish  himself  in  a  flat  in  the
         Baghdad area [of Iraq]."

 3. Judge Dearden noted that the appellant appealed under the provisions of
    paragraph 317 but also 319V of HC 395 (as amended).

 4. There are three grounds of appeal.  I shall deal first  with  Ground  3
    because it is determinative of the outcome of this appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Ground 3 deals with the judge's findings  as  regards  "most
    exceptional and compassionate circumstances, "a  mandatory  requirement
    of qualification under both paragraph 317 and 319V.   As  noted  above,
    the appellant is living in a flat in Baghdad and  receives  funds  from
    his relatives in the  United  Kingdom.   The  judge  was  concerned  at
    [26(5)]  that  the  witnesses  who  gave  evidence  before   him   (the
    appellant's  brother  who  is  a  refugee  and  also  Dr  Monajid,  the
    appellant's  sister),  had  given  discrepant  evidence  regarding  the
    presence of family members of the appellant in Iraq.   The  appellant's
    brother had said  that  the  appellant  had  "no  extended  family  and
    relatives in Iraq" whilst Dr Monajid said there were probably "40  plus
    relatives still living in Iraq."  In any event, the judge noted that

         "... Baghdad is a very large city and even  Dr  Monajid  could  not
         advance to me that the security situation in Baghdad  was  so  dire
         that people were afraid to move out of their houses.  The  fact  is
         that this appellant has to go and buy  his  food  and  has  availed
         himself of the assistance of at least two doctors: in my conclusion
         to suggest he is not able to go out of the  house  because  of  the
         previous kidnap is not credible."

 5. The judge considered that the appellant was,

         "...  by  Iraqi  standards  ..   living   in   fairly   comfortable
         circumstances having his rent paid and having monies sent to him in
         excess of that amount.  In my conclusion the appellant is living on
         his own but could not be said to be living in the most  exceptional
         compassionate circumstances."

 6. Ground 3 concentrates on what  may  be  described  as  Judge  Dearden's
    alternative finding  as  regards  "most  compassionate  circumstances,"
    namely that, if the appellant did not wish to live alone, he could move
    to live elsewhere in Iraq with one of  his  "40  plus  relatives."   Ms
    Brooksbank, for the appellant, submitted that it would not be safe  for
    the appellant to travel to stay with relatives and that  his  relatives
    only lived in Anbar Province where the security situation was such that
    Article 15 of the Qualification Directive  would  be  breached  if  the
    appellant were compelled to live there.

 7. The problem with that submission is that it is, as I have noted  above,
    in the nature of an alternative secondary finding  to  Judge  Dearden's
    primary  finding  which  is  that  the  appellant  is  not  living   in
    exceptional compassionate circumstances in his  apartment  in  Baghdad.
    As regards that finding, the grounds only assert that

         "Judge Dearden found that the appellant had  been  kidnapped,  held
         for fifteen months, tortured and  abused.   This  appellant  is  in
         circumstances which  can  only  be  described  as  exceptional  and
         compassionate and fall within the scope of those envisaged  by  the
         Rules."

    That is, in my opinion, an  assertion  which  is  little  more  than  a
    disagreement with a finding which was open to Judge Dearden on the face
    of the evidence.  Ms Brooksbank submitted that the  appellant  was,  in
    effect, living in a prison cell since he was unable to leave  his  flat
    for fear of encountering further abuse at the hands of  those  who  had
    kidnapped him in 2013/14.  However, Judge Dearden has  found  that  the
    security situation in Baghdad is not so bad that  people  living  there
    generally are  unable  to  leave  their  homes  or,  indeed,  that  the
    appellant is confined  to  his  home;  the  judge  also  made  specific
    findings that the appellant leaves his apartment in order to  buy  food
    and to visit his doctors.   Those  were  findings  which  were  plainly
    available to the judge on the evidence.  It is irrelevant  whether  the
    judge may have erred in law as regards the security situation elsewhere
    in Iraq because his  primary  finding  was  sound.   I  find  that  the
    appellant has failed to  show  that  Judge  Dearden  erred  in  law  by
    concluding that the appellant is not living  in  the  most  exceptional
    compassionate circumstances in Iraq.  The consequence of that  finding,
    is appeals under the Immigration Rules in respect of paragraphs 317 and
    319B must fail.

 8. The remaining grounds of appeal raise interesting points as regard  the
    construction of paragraph 317 and 319V.  Judge Dearden found [26]  that
    the appellant fell foul of KA  and  Others  (Adequacy  of  Maintenance)
    [2006] UKAIT 0065.  The judge found that "effectively [the  appellant's
    refugee brother] has been living at a level less than income support in
    order to fund his brother.  There are public policy reasons why this is
    unacceptable."  As a result,  the  judge  declined  to  find  that  the
    appellant was financially wholly or mainly dependent  on  the  relative
    who has limited leave to remain as a refugee in the United Kingdom.  Ms
    Brooksbank challenged that finding on the basis that  paragraph  317(3)
    simply requires an applicant to prove that they are financially  wholly
    or mainly dependent; the further requirement at [4A] that the applicant
    "can and will be maintained and  accommodated  adequately  ...  without
    recourse to public funds" is a separate requirement which could be  met
    by the appellant having entered the United  Kingdom  because  he  would
    receive financial  support  and  accommodation  from  Dr  Monajid,  his
    sister.  She made  the  point  that,  at  paragraph  317(4),  the  Rule
    introduces the expression "sponsor" for the first time ("can  and  will
    be accommodated adequately ... without  recourse  to  public  funds  in
    accommodation which the sponsor owns  or  occupies  exclusively");  she
    submitted "the sponsor" providing the accommodation and  funding  after
    the appellant had arrived in the United Kingdom need not necessarily be
    the same individual who is currently "financially  or  wholly"  funding
    the appellant whilst he is  living  abroad.   This  is  an  interesting
    submission but I do not agree  with  it.   It  is  unhelpful  when  the
    Immigration Rules introduce new items of nomenclature half way  through
    a  provision.   However,  it  is  reasonably  plain,  on   any   proper
    construction of this Rule, that the word "sponsor" is the same  "person
    present and settled in the United Kingdom" referred to at sub-paragraph
    (3).  In the present case, Dr Monajid is, in effect, acting as a shadow
    sponsor whilst the appellant's brother acts as the main sponsor.  In my
    opinion, such a joint or hybrid sponsorship does not  fall  within  the
    provisions of paragraph 317.  The arrangement in  this  case  certainly
    cannot fall within the provisions of 319V because Dr Monajid is  not  a
    "person with limited leave to enter  or  remain  ..  as  a  refugee  or
    beneficiary of humanitarian protection."  However,  these  observations
    are somewhat academic given that I have found that this  appeal  cannot
    succeed because the appellant is unable to show that he  is  living  in
    Iraq in the most exceptional and compassionate circumstances.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date 10 June 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane




I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed   Date 10 June 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

