
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
Number:     OA/10525/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester                   |Determination Promulgated|
|On: 12th June 2014                     |On 6th August 2014       |
|                                       |                         |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Jamila Begum
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Nicholson, Counsel instructed by Sandbrook
                    Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of Pakistan  date  of  birth  1st  January
    1976. On the 22nd January 2014 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Crawford)
    allowed her appeal against a refusal to grant her  entry  clearance  as
    the spouse of a person present and settled in the UK.


 2. The matter in issue had been whether the Respondent  could  demonstrate
    that she met the requirements of the Immigration Rules  in  respect  of
    maintenance (E-ECP 3.1). Her British husband is living  here  with  his
    three eldest British citizen children who are all  in  education.   The
    Respondent and her British citizen son, aged two,  live  in  Hong  Kong
    where she manages the family business.   Because this is an application
    for entry clearance the Respondent could not rely on  any  of  her  own
    income, nor any projected income that she might earn in the UK. She had
    to demonstrate that her husband earned enough money. This she submitted
    she could do with reference to his earnings as the manager of a snooker
    hall and the rental income he receives on a property that they own.

 3. At the appeal hearing Mr Nicholson had conceded  that  the  application
    had not been supported by all of the documents specified in Appendix FM-
    SE.   The sponsor failed to provide 12 months of  payslips  because  he
    had only been in full time employment for the 4  months  preceding  the
    application being made. Although it could now be shown that the Sponsor
    did in fact earn over the required amount and had done so for a year it
    was admitted that the Respondent had not provided the right evidence at
    the date of application. On that basis the appeal fell to be  dismissed
    under the Rules and this is what Judge Crawford did.

 4. The determination goes on to consider Article 8.   It is found that the
    Respondent and her young son are the only members of this family of six
    people who are not living in the UK. The sponsor and his  three  eldest
    sons are all here.  The child who  is  living  with  his  mother  is  a
    British citizen and cannot be excluded from the country. Judge Crawford
    finds this situation to be an interference with the Respondent's  right
    to family life that cannot be justified. He  allows  the  appeal  under
    Article 8.

 5. The grounds of appeal are that Judge Crawford failed to mention Gulshan
    [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC)  or  Nagre  [2013]  EWHC  720  (Admin)  in  his
    determination. It is submitted on behalf of the Entry Clearance Officer
    that an Article 8 assessment shall only be carried out when  there  are
    compelling circumstances not recognized by the  Rules.  It  is  further
    submitted that Gulshan states that an appeal  should  only  be  allowed
    where there are exceptional circumstances.

 6. I am not satisfied that either of these grounds of appeal is made  out.
    The propositions identified are not supported by Gulshan or Nagre.  The
    point that both these cases make is this:   if  there  is  not  a  good
    arguable case to look at Article 8 then it is not necessary to  do  so.
    Neither case is authority for saying that the court  cannot  go  on  to
    look at Article 8 unless the claimant has surmounted some  intermediate
    hurdle  of  exceptionality.   The  "exceptionality   test"   has   been
    comprehensively rejected by the House of Lords in Huang [2007] UKHL 11,
    by the Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 and
    indeed by recent ministerial statements.  All that Gulshan and Nagre do
    is re-emphasise that it is likely that only a  small  number  of  cases
    will succeed outwith the new Rules.  The fact that Judge Crawford  does
    not refer  to  them  is  neither  here  nor  there,  since  he  plainly
    considered this a case with merit on Article 8 grounds. Even if he  did
    not use the words "compelling" or "unjustifiably  harsh"  it  is  clear
    from his conclusions that he found the case to be just that.  This  was
    then one of those small number  of  cases  which  succeed  outwith  the
    Rules.


 7. If I am wrong and the decision was defective for a failure to  apply  a
    Nagre "test", I am satisfied that such an error is not  material  since
    the facts of the case  are  compelling  and  do  disclose  an  unlawful
    interference with family  life.   This  was  a  family  separated  only
    because the sponsor had failed to produce the right bits  of  paper  at
    the right time. In the vast majority of spouse entry applications  that
    fail on maintenance grounds the Entry Clearance Officer will be able to
    point to the importance of migrants being financially independent so as
    to protect the economy. In this case it appears to be accepted  by  all
    concerned that the family income in fact exceeds the thresholds set out
    in Appendix FM.  In those circumstances  I  struggle  to  see  on  what
    Article 8(2) grounds the ECO can justify the decision.  Ordinarily  the
    answer would be for the Respondent to re-apply, this time providing all
    the right bits of paper at the right time. That overlooks the fact that
    here is a British citizen child currently separated from his father  at
    a crucial point  in  his  development,  a  situation  that  is  plainly
    contrary to his best interests. Sending this family away to make a  new
    application is pointless and, to paraphrase Lord  Foscote,  Kafkaesque.
    Where this family actually have the right amount of money it cannot  be
    said to be proportionate to expect them to  make  a  fresh  application
    where there is a very young child involved.

 8. I do not consider that Judge Crawford erred in proceeding  to  consider
    Article 8 because there was a good arguable case for him to  have  done
    so.   The finding that this interference was a disproportionate lack of
    respect for the Appellant's family life was one that was open to him on
    the evidence before the Tribunal.

    Decision


 9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain errors of  law
    such that the decision should be set aside. It is upheld.


10. I would draw to the ECO's attention that the factor that rendered  this
    decision disproportionate is that there is a very young child involved.
    No doubt the ECO will wish to issue the Respondent with a visa as  soon
    as possible.

                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                              10th July 2014
