
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/10567/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 2 December 2015                   |On 14 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                                 AVTAR KUMAR
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Ahsan of Raghib Ahsan Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the determination promulgated on 4 June  2015
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Butler which allowed  the  appeal  against
    the respondent's decision dated 13 August 2014 to  refuse  to  issue  a
    family permit as the dependent adult son of an EEA national.

 2. The  application  was  made  under  Regulation  7  of  the  Immigration
    (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  (the  Regulations).  The
    appellant had to meet the  requirements  of  Regulation  7(1)(b)  which
    states:
         "7.  (1) Subject to  paragraph  (2),  for  the  purposes  of  these
         Regulations the following persons shall be treated  as  the  family
         members of another person-
                  ...
                  (b)  direct descendants of his, his spouse  or  his  civil
                  partner who are-
                      (i)  under 21; or
                      (ii) dependants of  his,  his  spouse  or  his  civil
                      partner ..."

 3. The application was  refused  as  the  ECO  did  not  accept  that  the
    appellant had shown that he was related as claimed to the EEA national.
    It was also refused as even if the appellant was related as claimed  as
    he was over 21 he had to show that he was dependent on the EEA national
    but had not done so.

 4. The appellant challenged the finding that he was not related to the EEA
    national and maintained that he was a dependent of the EEA national.

 5. In the Entry Clearance Officer Review dated 16 December  2014,  it  was
    conceded that the appellant was  related  as  claimed.  The  respondent
    remained of the view that the appellant  had  not  shown  that  he  was
    dependent on his father.

 6. The appeal came before Judge Butler on  Monday  11  May  2015.  It  was
    common ground before us that late on Friday 8 May 2015  the  respondent
    had faxed the appellant's  legal  advisers  to  give  notice  that  the
    decision to which the appeal related had been withdrawn "with a view to
    grant leave". The Tribunal file shows that a fax  in  these  terms  was
    received by the Tribunal at 16:51 on Friday 8 May 2015, date stamped as
    received at the Birmingham Hearing Centre on 11 May 2015.

 7. There was no appearance for the appellant before Judge Butler on Monday
    11 May 2015. Mr P Lawson  appeared  for  the  respondent.  It  was  not
    entirely clear to us if Judge Butler  had  seen  the  faxed  notice  of
    withdrawal but he certainly knew that it was the respondent's  position
    that the decision was withdrawn. He records this at [2]:
         "Prior to the hearing the  respondent  purported  to  withdraw  the
         decision with a view to granting leave. No consent of the appellant
         to this course of action was received so the hearing proceeded."

 8. Judge Butler then allowed the appeal, finding that the Regulations were
    met but  made  no  reference  to  the  outstanding  dispute  concerning
    dependency.

 9. The issue before us arises from his conclusion in the  second  sentence
    of [2] which appears to be to the effect that as the appellant had  not
    consented to the withdrawal it could not be effective. That is wrong in
    law.   Rule  17  of  The  Tribunal  Procedure   (First-tier   Tribunal)
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 states:
         17. -    (1)  A party may give notice of the  withdrawal  of  their
         appeal-
                    (a)    by providing to the Tribunal a written notice  of
                    withdrawal of the appeal; or
                    (b)    orally at a hearing,
                and in  either  case  must  specify  the  reasons  for  that
                withdrawal.
                (2)    The Tribunal must (save for  good  reason)  treat  an
                appeal as withdrawn if the respondent notifies the  Tribunal
                and each other party that the decision (or, where the appeal
                relates to more than one decision, all of the decisions)  to
                which the appeal relates has been  withdrawn  and  specifies
                the reasons for the withdrawal of the decision.
                (3)    The Tribunal must notify each party in writing that a
                withdrawal has taken effect under this  rule  and  that  the
                proceedings are  no  longer  regarded  by  the  Tribunal  as
                pending.

10. It was common ground that the respondent here complied with Rule  17(2)
    by providing notice of withdrawal of the decision  in  writing  to  the
    Tribunal and the appellant. There is no requirement  for  consent  from
    the appellant. The First-tier Tribunal was obliged to accept  that  the
    appeal was withdrawn unless there was good reason.  Nothing  before  us
    suggested that any reason at all existed for declining to  accept  that
    the appeal was withdrawn.

11. Although the parties were in agreement that Judge Butler erred  in  law
    in proceeding with the appeal (and, for what it is  worth,  failing  to
    deal with the outstanding dependency point) such that the decision  had
    to be set aside, they differed as to the course  of  action  we  should
    then take. The appellant requested that the appeal be allowed outright,
    the respondent's intention to grant leave showing that it was  accepted
    that the Regulations were met. The  respondent  continued  to  maintain
    that notice had been given of the withdrawal of the notice and that the
    appeal should be treated as withdrawn as a result.

12. Albeit we act under The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008
    and not the First-tier Tribunal Procedure Rules, and  although  we  did
    not hear detailed  submissions  on  the  point,  we  accepted  for  the
    purposes of this appeal that where the  respondent  has  withdrawn  the
    decision giving rise to the appeal, there can be no valid appeal before
    us.

13. It now remains for the  respondent  to  make  a  new  decision  on  the
    appellant's outstanding application for a family permit, an  indication
    having been given as long ago as June 2015 that this would be  granted.
    There was discussion before us as to how  long  it  might  take  for  a
    family permit to be issued but given that the application was made over
    a year ago we are confident that this is a matter the ECO will wish  to
    expedite.

Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error on  a  point
    of law and is set aside.

17. The respondent has withdrawn the decision. There is  no  appeal  before
    us.

Signed:  [pic]    Date: 3 December 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
