
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/10714/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 12 February 2014                             |On 27 February 2014        |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON

                                   Between

                  Entry Clearance Officer - rio de janeiro
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                    M T B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Jack
For the Respondent:    Mr S Mahmud

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. For ease of reference purposes hereafter I refer to the parties as they
    were before the First-tier Tribunal.  Hence MTB is  the  appellant  and
    the Entry Clearance Officer is the respondent.  There  were  originally
    linked appeals before the First-tier Tribunal Judge in respect  of  MTB
    and her dependent child.

 2. In relation to anonymity the First-tier Tribunal Judge granted that and
    anonymity is hereafter continued for the  same  reasons  and  I  direct
    accordingly.

 3. The appellant and her son appealed against  the  respondent's  decision
    dated 26 April 2012 to refuse them entry  clearance  as  the  unmarried
    partner and child of a refugee who has limited leave to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The judge allowed the appeal of MTB's child under  the
    Immigration Rules, decided that the decision in relation to MTB was  in
    accordance with the Immigration Rules, but allowed her appeal on  human
    rights grounds.

 4. The respondent sought leave to appeal the decision in relation  to  MTB
    on the grounds that the judge made a material misdirection  of  law  in
    relation to Article 8. The respondent further argued that  in  relation
    to the child the judge did not  give  adequate  reasons  for  accepting
    documents in relation to the sponsor's financial status on the  day  of
    the hearing, thus preventing the respondent from checking them  without
    a proper audit trail showing the amounts claimed.

 5. In granting permission to appeal in relation  to  MTB  only  the  judge
    doing so found no arguable material  error  of  law  on  the  financial
    status point because at the  hearing  the  respondent's  representative
    agreed to the matter  proceeding  based  upon  electronically  produced
    evidence.  Permission was, however, granted on the Article 8 ground. Mr
    Jack at the hearing before me did not seek to go behind the decision to
    refuse the application in respect of MTB's child.

 6. Before me I had all the documentation that was  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge and in addition some case law was handed up to me on the
    day.

 7. The first thing to note is that at the hearing before the  judge  there
    was a lengthy discussion as to what aspect of the Immigration Rules  or
    human rights law was likely to be relevant to this appeal.  It  appears
    that the appellant's legal representative had advised MTB  to  make  an
    application for refugee family  reunion  but  it  was  clear  that  the
    application could not succeed given that  the  couple  met  in  the  UK
    sometime after the UK refugee sponsor had left his country  of  origin.
    The appellant's  bundle  had  therefore  not  been  prepared  with  the
    necessary evidence that would be relevant to an entry clearance appeal.
     The judge then took the decision not to adjourn the matter for further
    evidence to be produced and  the  sponsor  was  given  time  to  access
    various financial documents electronically.

 8. The judge found the sponsor to be a credible witness.  The appellant in
    her witness statement said that she had to leave the United Kingdom  in
    2008, in part because her visa was about to run out.   However,  it  is
    unclear whether she had leave to remain or  had  overstayed  her  visa.
    The main reason given for choosing to return to Chile  with  her  child
    was because MTB's mother was in poor health.   The  appellant  and  the
    sponsor  have  continued  to  maintain  their  relationship  since  the
    appellant returned to Chile.  The sponsor  made  a  visit  to  see  his
    family in December 2011.  He has sent regular financial remittances  to
    his family.

 9. At paragraph 13 of the determination it is recorded  that  the  sponsor
    said that there had been no application for his family to return to the
    UK "for some time" because he wanted to make sure that he was in a good
    position to provide for them in the UK.  At the time he was  a  student
    and he thought that he may not have been  able  to  make  a  successful
    application for them to join him.  After he was recognised as a refugee
    he was able to increase his work hours and he is still working, earning
    a good salary.

10.  The sponsor gave evidence  that  he  finds  it  very  difficult  being
    separated from his son during such important early years of  his  life.
    He talked of his son being mildly autistic.  He outlined what  problems
    his son has in school in Chile and the difficulty in finding people who
    are able to address his behaviour.  The appellant had to take their son
    out of school recently because the school could not deal with him.  The
    sponsor thinks that he will be able to find a better school for his son
    that has experience of dealing with such  issues  here  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Although he enjoyed his visit to Chile the  sponsor  did  not
    think that it would be possible  for  him  to  move  there  on  a  more
    permanent basis because he does not speak Spanish and would not be able
    to get a good enough job to support his family.  They had all lived  in
    the UK previously and if possible he would prefer it if they could join
    him here.

11. The judge found in paragraph 17 that "the appellant is likely to  speak
    good English".  She commented that the emails  appear  to  be  in  good
    grammatical English and the sponsor said that it was their language  of
    communication.  The judge then commented that because the appellant and
    the sponsor were wrongly advised to make an application under paragraph
    352AA of the Immigration Rules:

         "It seems that very little evidence was produced  to  show  whether
         the appellant might have met the alternative  requirements  of  the
         Immigration Rules for post-flight family members".

    There was no evidence to show that the appellant produced a  recognised
    English  language  certificate  or  other  evidence  relating  to   the
    sponsor's finances or accommodation at the date of the decision.  There
    is recognition in paragraph 18 that the sponsor would have  been  in  a
    position to rent adequate accommodation for the family  in  preparation
    for their arrival in the UK. The judge went on to say that  whilst  the
    evidence before the judge shows on the balance  of  probabilities  that
    the  appellant  and  her  son  were  likely  to  have  been  adequately
    maintained and accommodated in  the  UK  the  fact  that  there  is  no
    evidence to meet the English language requirements shows that  she  was
    unlikely to meet all of the strict requirements of the Rule.  The  only
    aspect of paragraph 319O the appellant did not meet was the  evidential
    requirement for an English language test certificate.

12. The judge then found that the evidence before her shows that a  further
    entry clearance application for the appellant would have a good  chance
    of success but given the delays that have already occurred  found  that
    it would not be in the best interests of the child for there to be  any
    further delay.  The judge then reasoned that the effect of her decision
    in the son's appeal would be that he would be granted  entry  clearance
    but his mother would not.  It is clearly in his best interests for  his
    mother to accompany him to the UK and given the fact that the appellant
    failed to meet only one requirement of paragraph 319O which  she  could
    no doubt have provided the  relevant  evidence  for  if  she  had  been
    adequately advised the judge found that the decision showed a  lack  of
    respect for her family life with her  partner  and  son  and  that  was
    disproportionate in all the circumstances of this particular case.  The
    judge recognised that the application was made  and  decided  before  9
    July 2012 so the Article 8 definition contained in the new  Immigration
    Rules did not apply.

13. In paragraph 23 of the determination the judge  found  that  there  has
    been quite some delay because the appeal was  made  in  December  2011.
    The couple's child, who does meet the requirements of  the  Immigration
    Rules, has been separated from his father during an important period of
    his young life and it was only the lack of the  appellant  meeting  the
    formal requirement to produce  an  English  language  certificate  that
    prevented her from meeting the Rules and she is likely to speak English
    to a higher standard than would  be  required  in  an  entry  clearance
    application.  The judge concluded that the public interest  behind  the
    requirement would in fact be adequately addressed, i.e. the need for  a
    general ability to speak English, obtain work and  not  be  reliant  on
    public funds.

My decision on the Error of Law Point

14. I made my decision at the hearing and  announced  that  the  judge  had
    erred materially in law.  It  is  quite  obvious  that  the  judge  had
    considerable sympathy for the parties, not least because there had been
    a long separation since the appellant and their child went to Chile  in
    2008.  However, the application (under the wrong  Rule)  was  not  made
    until 31 December  2011  according  to  the  documents  on  file.   The
    decisions are dated in April 2012 which does not disclose  undue  delay
    on behalf of the Entry Clearance Officer and the file records show that
    an out of time appeal was not received until 18 June 2012 and  then  it
    was without payment of the fee that was required.  That problem was not
    resolved until 24 January 2013 when  a  decision  was  taken  that  the
    Tribunal would allow the appeal to  proceed  being  satisfied  that  by
    reason of special circumstances it would be unjust not to extend  time.
    The hearing in the First-tier Tribunal took place on 7  November  2013.
    The fact that there has been a long delay has certainly  not  been  the
    fault of the respondent and it appears to be that of the appellant  and
    sponsor.

15. More important, however, is the fact that  the  appellant  and  sponsor
    appear to have been poorly advised.  Although there is  acknowledgement
    that the Rules surrounding refugees and their families are  complicated
    the judge did her best  to  avoid  further  delay.  The  fact  is  that
    although the judge's confidence that the appellant speaks good  English
    appears  to  have  been  well-founded  one  of  the  recognised  strict
    requirements referred to by the judge was that the  appellant  did  not
    produce an  English  language  test  certificate.   I  agree  with  the
    respondent that the judge  was  not  entitled  to  dispense  with  that
    requirement even if it seemed to the judge that the appellant is likely
    to speak good English.

16. I further agree with  the  respondent  that  the  lawful  operation  of
    immigration control will be proportionate in all save a small  minority
    of exceptional cases identifiable on a case by case  basis.   The  case
    law prior to the introduction of additions to the Immigration Rules  in
    July 2012 still holds good.  The fact that the appellant has  not  been
    able to meet the Immigration Rules, the judge erred  in  not  reasoning
    sufficiently how Article 8 ECHR considerations meant that MTB succeeded
    in her appeal.

The Resumed Hearing

17. Having announced my decision both representatives announced  that  they
    were in a position to proceed with the resumed hearing.

18. I heard evidence from the sponsor, Mr MM.  Reference was  made  to  the
    documentation that had been produced for  the  Upper  Tribunal  hearing
    relating to the test certificate  concerning  the  appellant's  English
    proficiency.  The witness confirmed that he sent the  documentation  to
    his solicitor.  He was not sure why it had not  been  produced  at  the
    first hearing but it was in existence at the time of that hearing.

19. Cross-examined by Mr Jack the sponsor said that he has  been  to  Chile
    once since the appellant went there and that was in December 2011.   He
    has not returned since because it costs a lot of money to get there, he
    sends the appellant and his son money, and he has to  pay  legal  fees.
    The sponsor said that he was not aware how long it  might  take  before
    MTB and their son  could  come  into  the  country  if  the  appeal  is
    successful.  Did he know of any reason why the appellant could not make
    a new application?  The sponsor replied that he did not  know  why  she
    could not.  This has all gone on too long and he  finds  the  situation
    very  taxing  emotionally.  He  hoped  that  the  appellant  could   be
    successful at this hearing.  There was no re-examination.

20. In submissions Mr Mahmud said that this was not a near-miss case  under
    the Immigration Rules.  The appellant was able to satisfy  anyone  that
    she was proficient to a high level in English as  she  is  a  bilingual
    secretary and therefore the proficiency in English requirement was met.
     She did not take and miss by one mark, for instance, any test and  her
    employment shows that her abilities are higher than those  required  by
    the test.  There is also the issue  that  her  child  has  difficulties
    because of possible autism and he would come  to  the  UK  for  a  more
    understanding education.

21. Mr Jack responded that this is a near-miss case because  the  appellant
    had  shown  that  the  Immigration  Rules  have  not  been  met.    The
    documentation produced in 2014 should have been produced in  2012.   Mr
    Mahmud responded that policy is not a dogma designed to  keep  families
    apart and the appellant had been wrongly advised.

Findings and Conclusions

22. It is common ground that MTB did  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules as they relate to an entry clearance application  for
    settlement to join a sponsor in the United Kingdom.  The  determination
    of the First-tier Judge refers to and in essence defines Article 8 ECHR
    and is not repeated here.  (See paragraph 21).

23. There appears to be  no  challenge  to  the  relationship  between  the
    sponsor, MTB and their child, even though I am somewhat surprised  that
    despite the demands upon the sponsor's funds he has not  been  able  to
    make a trip to see his family since 2011,  the  appellant  having  left
    with their son to go to Chile in 2008.  An application now known to  be
    in the wrong form was made at the very end of 2011 and I  have  already
    commented as to the reasons for the delay before  the  application  was
    listed for hearing. The family communicates in the  ways  described  in
    the First-tier determination.  Quite obviously that  is  no  substitute
    for a family living together under the same roof.  I take into  account
    that the appeal of the couple's child has been allowed and that he  may
    therefore come to the United Kingdom albeit that  may  be  unlikely  to
    happen unless and until he is able to travel with his mother.

24. The judge in deciding whether it would be reasonable and  proportionate
    to expect the  appellant  to  make  a  further  application  for  entry
    clearance under Appendix FM  took  into  account  the  House  of  Lords
    decision in Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40.   However,  the  facts  in
    that case were very different to the current one.  The appellant is out
    of the country already and is not  being  asked  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom to make an application that might, may or would  be  likely  to
    succeed.  There would be a further fee to be paid but that is only what
    is required of any person seeking to settle in the  United  Kingdom  on
    similar facts.

25. Although it is true that the couple's child has been separated from his
    father during an important period of his  life  that  is  to  no  small
    degree a situation of his parents' making.  Although it may not  be  in
    his best interests for there to be any further delay  I  find  that  on
    balance it is a  proportionate  decision  to  refuse  MTB  in  all  the
    circumstances of this particular case.  If an application  is  made  in
    proper form and is supported by all the  necessary  documentation  then
    one supposes that the application would be successful and if it is not,
    for whatever reason, the appellant would have a right of appeal.  Given
    the current circumstances and the  history  of  this  case  it  is  not
    appropriate that  Article  8  should  trump  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules and for these reasons I find that this appeal fails.

Decision

26. The appeal of MTB is dismissed under the Immigration  Rules  and  under
    Article 8 ECHR.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  The  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                              Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton

