
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA101302015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 10 May 2017                        |On 26 May 2017                        |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         mr thirupathi babu mamindla
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Armstrong, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Bellara, Counsel instructed by Legend
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS
Details of Appeal

 1. The appellant in this case is the Secretary of State and the respondent
    is Mr Mamindla.  However for the purposes  of  this  decision  I  shall
    refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal  where
    Mr Mamindla was the appellant.

Background

 2. Mr Mamindla first entered the UK with a valid Tier 4 Student visa valid
    until 30 April 2009.  The appellant was  subsequently  granted  further
    leave to remain as a student until  30  August  2014.   His  leave  was
    curtailed on 23 March 2012 to expire on 22 May 2012 as his then college
    licence was revoked.  It was not disputed that Mr Mamindla then applied
    for further leave and was granted  further  Tier  4  (General)  Student
    leave until 6 September 2015.  However again, his college  licence  was
    revoked and  the  appellant  submitted  a  further  application  for  a
    variation on 16 August 2014.  The evidence indicates that the appellant
    was encountered during an enforcement visit  on  4  December  2014  and
    served with an IS151A and IS151A Part 2, notice to a person  liable  to
    removal.

 3. The Secretary of State in  the  IS151A  asserted  under  the  "Specific
    Statement of Reasons" that the appellant was considered as a person who
    had sought leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  by  deception  and
    specifically that  he  had  submitted  a  TOEIC  certificate  from  the
    Educational Testing Service (ETS) to the Home Office for  the  purposes
    of his application dated 26 November 2013.  It was  asserted  that  the
    appellant's scores from the test taken on 18th April 2012 at  Sevenoaks
    College had been cancelled by ETS.

 4. The appellant appealed.  The appellant (after an unsuccessful  judicial
    review) made an out of country appeal against a decision to remove.  In
    a decision promulgated on 6 September 2016 following an oral hearing on
    19 August 2016, Judge of the First-tier Tribunal S D Rodger allowed the
    appellant's appeal.

Error of Law Hearing

 5. The Secretary of State appeals with permission, granted  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal, on the grounds that it was  submitted  that  the  judge  gave
    undue weight to the appellant's evidence, given that the appellant  did
    not give oral evidence.  It was further argued that the judge  provided
    inadequate reasons for finding that  the  appellant  was  credible  and
    perverse or irrational reasons or  had  regard  to  immaterial  matters
    specifically in the judge's findings at paragraph [27] of the  decision
    and reasons.  Upper Tribunal Judge Frances found that it  was  arguable
    that the judge had taken into  account  irrelevant  considerations  and
    that his findings were against the weight of the evidence and that  all
    grounds were arguable.

 6. Mr Armstrong for the Secretary of  State  relied  on  the  grounds  for
    permission to appeal.  Mr Armstrong relied on:

      1) Court of Appeal decision in Secretary of State v  Muhammad  Shehzad
         and Md Chowdhury [2016] EWCA Civ 615;

      2) MA (ETS - TOEIC Testing) [2016] UKUT 00450 (IAC);

      3) SM and Qadir v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  (ETS  -
         evidence - burden of proof) [2016] UKUT 00229 (IAC);

 7. In particular Mr Armstrong reiterated that  the  appellant  could  have
    given evidence by video link or requested permission to  enter  the  UK
    and that the judge had given  an  appropriate  weight  to  the  written
    evidence.  Mr Armstrong further submitted that the judge's findings  in
    the various sub-paragraphs of [27] fell into error of law.

 8. Mr Bellara in reply submitted that there was no  material  error.   The
    judge had addressed the relevant  burden  of  proof  and  had  properly
    directed herself in line with SM and  Qadir.   He  submitted  that  the
    judge took into account a number of factors which were similar  to  the
    types of factors considered by the Upper Tribunal in Qadir  in  finding
    that the appellant in that case had been credible, including that  this
    appellant had been studying in the UK for a long time and that to  have
    cheated would have entailed engaging in a game of risk with  very  high
    stakes and that the Tribunal had no reason to question the  appellant's
    good character.

 9. The Secretary of State submitted  that  the  judge  gave  inappropriate
    weight to the  appellant's  evidence  and  had  not  properly  directed
    herself as Mr Mamindla was not giving oral evidence  nor  could  he  be
    cross-examined on that evidence.  However, the  judge  noted  that  the
    burden was on the appellant to prove that  his  appeal  should  succeed
    whereas the burden was on the respondent to prove the  allegation  that
    the certificate was obtained by fraudulent means.  The judge  carefully
    considered all the evidence  and  indicated  that  there  was  no  oral
    evidence  from  the  appellant.   The  fact  that  the  judge  did  not
    specifically record  that  less  weight  attached  to  the  appellant's
    evidence does not mean that the Tribunal did not attach the appropriate
    weight to the respondent's  evidence.   The  judge  also  had  no  oral
    evidence from the witnesses relied on by  the  respondent  and  equally
    made no specific reference to attaching less weight to  this  evidence.
    It is also  not  the  case  that  the  Tribunal  relied  alone  on  the
    appellant's untested witness statement evidence, but rather  considered
    all the evidence available including of the  appellant's  circumstances
    and  the  evidence  from  the  respondent  in  relation  to  the  test.
    Considering the decision in its entirety I am satisfied that  there  is
    no material error in this ground.

10. The Secretary  of  State's  main  challenge  was  in  relation  to  the
    Tribunal's findings at paragraph 27 which is subdivided into (a) to (g)
    subparagraphs.  The judge took  into  account  the  evidence  from  the
    respondent and correctly directing herself in line with  SM  and  Qadir
    was satisfied that the respondent had discharged the initial evidential
    burden of proving  deception  so  as  to  shift  the  burden  onto  the
    appellant.

11. The head note of SM and Qadir provides:

    (i)  The Secretary of  State's  generic  evidence,  combined  with  her
         evidence particular to these two appellants, suffice  to  discharge
         the evidential burden of proving that their TOEIC certificates  had
         been procured by dishonesty.

    (ii) However, given the multiple  frailties  from  which  this  generic
         evidence was considered to suffer and, in the light of the evidence
         adduced by  the  appellants,  the  Secretary  of  State  failed  to
         discharge the legal burden of proving dishonesty on their part.

12. The judge set out at [23] that she had  considered  SSHD  v  Shehzad  &
    Chowdhury as well as setting out extracts from SM and Qadir  separately
    in relation to the strength, or lack thereof of the evidence on  behalf
    of the Secretary of State.

13. The Court of Appeal in Shehzad and Chowdhury echoed the approach  taken
    by the Tribunal in SM and Qadir.  This was  summarised  in  MA  (ETS  -
    TOEIC Testing) [2016] UKUT 00450.   In  MA  the  Presidential  Tribunal
    confirmed "that the question of whether a person engaged  in  fraud  in
    procuring a  TOEIC  English  language  proficiency  qualification  will
    invariably be intrinsically fact sensitive".

14. It was open therefore to  the  Tribunal  in  this  case  to  take  into
    consideration that  although  in  addition  to  the  witness  statement
    evidence of Peter Millington and Rebecca Collings, the Tribunal had the
    additional evidence of Mona Shah and the  expert  report  of  Professor
    French dated 20 April 2016  (prepared  for  a  different  appeal),  the
    respondent did not provide a digital recording  of  the  speaking  test
    (the only test initially) and had not relied upon any  expert  evidence
    relating to the actual voice recording of this appellant's test.

15. The Tribunal was also entitled to take into  consideration  that  there
    was no witness evidence from anyone who had listened to the appellant's
    actual recording and no details as to the training or expertise of  the
    person that listened to the recording and assessed the  certificate  as
    invalid.  The judge  confirmed  that  all  she  had  available  to  her
    specific  to  the  appellant  was  a  spreadsheet  from  ETS  with  the
    appellant's name and that the certificate was invalid and the ETS  look
    up tool showing all results for Sevenoaks College on 18 April  2012  as
    well as a witness statement from Hilary Rackstraw the Senior Caseworker
    dealing with the appellant's appeal, relying on the  witness  statement
    of Rebecca Collings and Peter Millington.

16. The judge at [27(a)] took into consideration  that  the  appellant  had
    been studying in the UK for a number of years and went on to find  that
    it was unlikely that the appellant's level of  English  in  2012  would
    have been such that he needed a proxy test taker "given that  he  would
    have had to undergo earlier English speaking tests and  no  issues  are
    being raised with  his  earlier  English  language  speaking  or  other
    tests".  Although the respondent  raised  the  fact  that  two  of  the
    appellant's colleges had had their licence revoked which the respondent
    states suggests that they were not a bona fide college,  there  was  no
    evidence to support this assertion.  Although it was not disputed  that
    the colleges had had their licences revoked equally it was not disputed
    that the appellant subsequently, on a  number  of  occasions,  obtained
    further leave to remain in the UK.  It was open to the  judge  to  find
    that in these circumstances he would have  had  to  undergo  additional
    earlier English language speaking tests about which no issues had  been
    raised either with the speaking tests or any other tests.

17. At [27(b)]  the  judge  took  into  consideration  that  the  appellant
    "described with some detail the conditions of the test centre  on  that
    day".  There is no adequate  information  as  to  whether  this  is  an
    accurate reflection or not.  I have taken into consideration  that  the
    appellant in his witness statement stated  that  the  test  centre  was
    overcrowded and that he did not have any space but that he  managed  to
    take the test.  What the  judge  was  saying  was  that  the  appellant
    provided some details which,  when  considered  in  the  round  in  the
    context of all the evidence, led the judge to not be satisfied that the
    appellant had obtained a certificate by deception.  It is not the  case
    that the judge was relying solely on these details.  It  was  a  matter
    for the judge what weight he attached to the  evidence  and  there  was
    nothing perverse in his reliance on this information in the round.

18. The judge at [27(c)] relied on the fact that no issue  had  been  taken
    with the appellant's written test which was taken on the same  day  and
    the judge went on to find that it seemed unlikely that if  someone  was
    going to cheat by arranging for someone to take a test  for  them  that
    they would arrange for only one  test  to  be  taken.   The  respondent
    asserted that this ignored the fact that ETS never reviewed the writing
    scores but only reviewed the speaking tests and that the judge made  no
    allowance for the fact that many non-English native speakers can  write
    English very well  but  not  speak  it  very  well.   Again  the  judge
    carefully considered this in the context of an appellant who  had  been
    in the UK for a number of years and about whom no other issues had been
    raised in respect of alleged difficulties with  any  such  tests.   The
    judge was of the view therefore that it was less likely  in  all  these
    circumstances, when they were considered in their entirety,  that  such
    an appellant would have used a proxy.

19. The judge went on at [27(e)] to fully explore the report  of  Professor
    French.  The respondent submitted that the judge ignored the fact  that
    Professor French's report was submitted to "reduce the  probability  of
    false positives and therefore the appellant was more likely than not to
    have cheated on balance".  I do not agree that the  judge  ignored  the
    contents of Professor French's report.   In  addition  to  taking  into
    consideration that Professor French did not specifically  consider  the
    appellant's test the judge also set out that it was Professor  French's
    view  that  the  rate  of  false  positives  is  likely  to  be   "very
    substantially less than 1% after the process of assessment  by  trained
    listeners have been applied".  However there is  no  challenge  by  the
    Secretary of State to the judge's subsequent  findings  that  Professor
    French's opinion was very much based on the  subsequent  assessment  of
    the two  trained  listeners  but  that  there  was  a  lack  of  proper
    information from ETS as to how much training these listeners underwent,
    or as to the  details  of  the  training,  or  the  background  of  the
    listeners and the judge took into consideration that  Professor  French
    referred to it being far from ideal that  the  person  responsible  for
    training the staff may have had no university education or training  in
    phonetics/speech science.  The judge  went  on  to  consider  Professor
    French's report in some detail and gave  adequate  reasons  which  were
    open to her for not being satisfied that it was sufficient to discharge
    the legal burden of proving that this appellant cheated.

20. At [27(f)] the judge was satisfied that there was an absence of  detail
    in relation to the background or training of the listeners who assessed
    the appellant's speaking test  invalid  and  that  there  had  been  no
    disclosure of the actual speaking test.  The respondent submitted  that
    the judge took into account immaterial matters and that  there  was  no
    need for the respondent to obtain the voice recording and  checked  for
    itself, whilst it was open for the appellant to  do  so  to  rebut  the
    respondent's case but had chosen not to.  However I  am  not  satisfied
    that any error in that approach was material given  the  overall  fact-
    sensitive approach by the judge in relation to this  appellant's  case.
    As set out by the Tribunal in SM and Qadir the final question  for  the
    Tribunal is whether the Secretary of State  had  discharged  the  legal
    burden  of  establishing  on  the  balance  of  probabilities  that  an
    appellant procured a TOEIC certificate by deception and that the answer
    to such a question  required  a  balancing  of  all  the  findings  and
    evaluative  assessments.   That  must  include  an  evaluation  of  the
    respondent's evidence even though it was bound to discharge the initial
    burden.

21. The findings of the First-tier Tribunal were findings properly open  to
    the judge on the evidence and the respondent's grounds disclose no more
    than disagreement with those findings.  Whilst another Tribunal may not
    have reached the same  conclusion  it  has  not  been  shown  that  the
    findings were either inadequately reasoned or  that  they  reached  the
    high threshold of perversity.

22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an  error  of
    law and  shall  stand.   The  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  is
    dismissed.

No anonymity direction was sought or is made.


Signed                                  Date: 24 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

As  the  appellant's  appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal   ultimately
succeeds, I make a full fee award.


Signed                                  Date:  24 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

