
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/10618/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 15 September 2015                 |On 17 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, Istanbul
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MUSTAFA ADUGUZEL
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    no legal representative; sponsor present


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are as described above, but the rest of this  determination
    refers to them as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of  Turkey,  born  on  8  May  1985.  On  14
    September 2013 he married Hayley Whyte, a citizen of the UK, born on 13
    December 1982.  He has been in the UK three times  in  accordance  with
    visas obtained, and  has  an  impeccable  immigration  history.   On  4
    February 2014 he applied for entry clearance as a partner, based on the
    marriage.  On 20 February 2014 the ECO advised him that his application
    fell to be refused because the income requirement was not met, but that
    a decision had been put on hold dues  to  a  legal  challenge  to  that
    requirement.  That challenge was resolved by the Court of Appeal on  11
    July 2014.  By decision dated 14 November  2014  the  ECO  refused  the
    application.

 3. The appellant appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  case  came
    before Judge Thanki for decision "on the papers".  The income shortfall
    (a quite small amount) was  the  only  issue.   In  his  determination,
    promulgated on 29 April 2015, the judge held that it was shown that Mrs
    Adiguzel had self-employed income as  well  as  a  salaried  post,  and
    further evidence was produced to bring the figure over the limit, so he
    allowed the appeal.

 4. The ECO sought permission to appeal to the UT, on the grounds that  the
    judge erred by taking account of the sponsor's income in the  financial
    year 2013/14, when the Rules required income to have  been  established
    for the year 2012/13.  On 14 July 2015, permission was granted.

 5. The point taken by the respondent in the grounds  is  well  founded  in
    terms of  the  Rules.   Applications  must  be  supported  by  required
    evidence relating to the last full financial year prior to the date  of
    application.

 6. The sponsor pointed out that by the time this application was  decided,
    the last financial year was  2013/14  not  2012/13.   She  referred  to
    passages in the respondent's guidance on Appendix FM, e.g. at paragraph
    9.1.1, to the effect that income  can  be  used  "from  the  last  full
    financial year to meet the financial requirement"; at  9.3.3,  evidence
    submitted must cover the relevant financial year "most recently ended";
    and so on.  However, as Mr Mullen pointed out the guidance read in full
    makes it clear that it  relates  to  evidence  and  to  the  last  full
    financial year "at the date of application"  -  see  again  9.1.1,  and
    elsewhere.

 7. There might have been some  scope  for  a  finding  in  favour  of  the
    appellant if the wording of the guidance gave  a  latitude  not  to  be
    found in the Rules; but the guidance does not extend any further.

 8. My sympathies are entirely with the appellant  and  with  the  sponsor.
    They have plainly considered their position carefully and taken care to
    try to comply with the requirements of the Rules.  It was  not  through
    any fault of theirs that the decision was put on hold pending the legal
    challenge answered by the Court of Appeal on 11 July  2014  in  MM  and
    Others.  The decision did not issue very quickly  thereafter  (probably
    due to a backlog of similar cases).  Their hopes  were  further  raised
    and delay brought about due to the decision  in  their  favour  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal, which the  respondent  has  shown  to  be  legally
    flawed.  The system for entry of spouses  governed  by  the  Rules  and
    related guidance is  complex  and  confusing,  often  even  for  expert
    practitioners.  The appellant and  sponsor  have  done  their  best  to
    navigate it, and I can see how they unfortunately gained the impression
    that they were entitled  to  improve  their  case  as  it  went  along.
    Unfortunately, however, I can see no possible legal resolution in their
    favour.

 9. The only consolation to be  offered  is  that  the  appellant  has  the
    recourse of a fresh application to the  Entry  Clearance  Officer.   Of
    course,  the  appellants  should  not  take  this  determination  as  a
    guarantee of a successful outcome,  because  any  application  must  be
    decided on its own on its own merits, but if circumstances are as  they
    now appear, it is to be hoped that such an application can be made  and
    granted without any further undue delay.

10. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

11. The case raises no issue going outside the Rules.

12. The following  decision  is  substituted:  the  appeal,  as  originally
    brought to the First-tier Tribunal, is dismissed.

13. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.




           [pic]
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


           15 September 2015
