

                                    [pic]


The Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal number:
OA/10645/2014

                                THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester               |                    Decision & Reasons     |
|                                  |Promulgated                                |
|On December 14, 2015              |                    On January 4, 2016     |
|                                  |                                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                         THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MRS SABANA BEGUM
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Johnstone (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Represented by the Sponsor, Mr Islam

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Whereas the original respondent is the appealing party, I shall, in the
    interests of convenience and consistency, replicate the nomenclature of
    the decision at first instance.


 2. The appellant, citizen of Bangladesh applied for entry clearance  as  a
    spouse on September 12, 2013. This application was refused on August 4,
    2014 and the appellant appealed this  decision  on  September  4,  2015
    under section 82(1) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002.

 3. The appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal McCall on  June
    22, 2015 and he rejected the appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules  but
    allowed it under article 8 ECHR in a decision promulgated  on  July  6,
    2015.

 4. The respondent sought permission to appeal that decision  on  July  16,
    2015. Permission to appeal was  granted  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Cox on September 4, 2015 on the  basis  it  was  arguable  the
    Tribunal had taken into account  post-decision  evidence  (birth  of  a
    child) and its  proportionality  assessment  was  extremely  brief  and
    arguably inadequate.

 5. The matter came before me on the above date and on that  date  I  heard
    submissions from both the sponsor and Ms Johnstone.

 6. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
    pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I make no order now.

    ERROR IN LAW

 7. Ms Johnstone relied on the grounds of appeal and submitted the Tribunal
    had erred by allowing the appeal under article 8 ECHR. She referred  to
    the fact the Tribunal found the appellant had not satisfied  the  Rules
    as at the date of decision but then went onto allow  the  appeal  under
    article 8. In doing so the Tribunal placed emphasis  on  the  fact  the
    appellant gave birth to a child in January 2015  and  this  event  post
    dated the date of decision.  The  Tribunal  failed  to  carry  out  any
    proportionality assessment and there was an error in law.


 8. Mr Islam began by arguing the appellant had  satisfied  the  Rules  but
    then went on to argue that the decision was correct because  he  was  a
    British citizen who had lived here all his life with  his  family.  The
    Tribunal correctly placed weight on the fact there was a child  and  he
    invited me to reject the respondent's appeal.

    DISCUSSION AND FINDING

 9. The Tribunal had considered this application under both the  Rules  and
    article 8 ECHR. It rejected the  appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules
    because the appellant failed to comply  with  Appendix  FM-SE  and  the
    respondent was entitled to reject the application under Appendix  FM-SE
    paragraph D having given the appellant an opportunity  to  provide  the
    missing documents under that paragraph before the decision was taken.


10. The Tribunal proceeded to consider the application under article 8  and
    took into account firstly that the appellant appeared  to  satisfy  the
    Rules and secondly they now had child.

11. I am satisfied the Tribunal's approach was flawed. This was an  out  of
    country application and both the Rules and article 8 consideration  had
    to be as at the date of decision.

12. When the appellant submitted her application in September 2013 she  was
    not pregnant although when the application was refused in  August  2014
    she was. Similarly, when the application was submitted the  Rules  were
    not met and they were also not met at the date of decision.

13. The Tribunal, in considering article 8, considered the evidence  as  at
    the date of hearing.  In  finding  the  Rules  were  met  the  Tribunal
    considered the position not at the date of  decision  but  at  date  of
    hearing. If this had been an in-country appeal, then that stance  would
    have been open to it but this was an out of country application and the
    Tribunal erred in finding the rules were met for  the  purposes  of  an
    article 8 assessment.

14. Similarly, the Tribunal erred when approaching the issue of the  child.
    The child had not  been  conceived  at  the  date  of  application  and
    although the appellant  was  pregnant  at  the  date  of  decision  the
    Tribunal there was no actual child to take into account at that date.

15. At paragraph [57] of SS (Congo) and others [2015] EWCA 387 the Court of
    Appeal stated-

         "In certain of the appeals before us,  the  respondents  said  that
         improvements in the position of their sponsors were on the horizon,
         so that there appeared to be a reasonable prospect  that  within  a
         period of weeks or months they would in fact be able to satisfy the
         requirements of the Rules. They maintained that  the  Secretary  of
         State should have taken this into account when deciding whether  to
         grant LTE outside the Rules. In our judgment, however, this affords
         very weak support for a claim for grant of LTE outside  the  Rules.
         The Secretary of State remains entitled to enforce the Rules in the
         usual way, to say that the Rules have not been satisfied  and  that
         the applicant should apply again when the circumstances have indeed
         changed. This reflects a fair balance between the interests of  the
         individual and the public interest. The Secretary of State  is  not
         required to take a speculative risk as to whether the  requirements
         in the Rules will in fact be satisfied in the future when  deciding
         what to do. Generally, it is fair that the  applicant  should  wait
         until the circumstances have changed and the  requirements  in  the
         Rules are satisfied and then apply, rather than attempting to  jump
         the queue by asking for preferential treatment outside the Rules in
         advance."

16. The Court of Appeal in SS further reiterated that to allow  the  appeal
    outside of the Rules there had to be compelling circumstances.


17. The appellant did not meet the Rules as at the  date  of  decision.  Mr
    Islam submitted that he preferred to live here because he had been born
    because he was British and his family lived here and he had nothing  in
    Bangladesh whereas he and his wife could both live and work here.

18. The material relied on to allow  this  appeal  included  the  fact  the
    family simply preferred to live in the United Kingdom but there  is  no
    requirement  under  Article  8  that  such  a  preference   should   be
    accommodated. Accordingly, for the reasons set out above  I  allow  the
    respondent's appeal today.

19.  I  have  gone  onto  consider  whether  there  were   any   compelling
    circumstances requiring the grant of leave to enter outside the  Rules.
    The Rules were not met at the relevant time and the fact the Rules  may
    be met now is  not  a  reason  to  allow  the  appeal.  In  R  (on  the
    application of Chen) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    (Appendix FM - Chikwamba  -  temporary  separation  -  proportionality)
    (IJR) [2015] UKUT 189 the Tribunal made it clear that a  party  seeking
    to argue that a temporary separation would interfere disproportionately
    with protected rights had to place before the Tribunal evidence and  it
    was not enough to simply rely on Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40.

20. Any article 8 assessment must take place against the facts existing  as
    at the date of decision. The mere fact the Rules were met and there was
    a child were not factors to have regard to when considering  the  claim
    under article 8 ECHR as this was an entry clearance application.

21. If the appellant now meets the Rules then she should submit the correct
    application  with  the  correct  fee   and   documents.   It   is   not
    disproportionate to refuse this appeal under article 8 ECHR.

    DECISION


22. There was a material  error  and  I  set  aside  the  earlier  decision
    allowing the appeal under article 8 ECHR.


23. I uphold the decision to dismiss the application under the Rules and  I
    dismiss the appeal under article 8 ECHR.




Signed:

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

FEE AWARD

I make no fee award as dismissed the appeal.

Signed:

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

