
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/10489/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice,    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|Belfast                              |                                     |
|On 30 November 2015                  |On 5 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                           Entry Clearance Officer
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            JOYCE LUCENA SORRENTI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnyez, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance and not represented


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in these proceedings  is  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer.
    However, for convenience I refer to the parties as they were before the
    First-tier  Tribunal.   Thus,  the  appellant  is  a  citizen  of   the
    Philippines born on 22 April 1963.

 2. On 19 May 2014 she made an application for entry clearance as a partner
    under Appendix FM of  the  Immigration  Rules.   That  application  was
    refused in a decision dated 14 August 2014.  The basis of  the  refusal
    was in terms of  the  financial  requirements,  accommodation  and  the
    English  language  requirements  of  the  Rules.   However,  the  Entry
    Clearance Manager, on reviewing the decision,  conceded  the  financial
    requirements but maintained the decision in terms of accommodation  and
    the English language requirement.

 3. The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge M.M. Hutchinson  at  a
    hearing on 16 June 2015.  She found in favour of the appellant in terms
    of accommodation but concluded that the appellant had still not met the
    requirements of the Rules in terms of English language under  paragraph
    E-ECP.4.1.  However, she allowed the appeal  under  Article  8  of  the
    ECHR.

 4. The  respondent's  grounds  refer  to  the  judge's  justification  for
    allowing the appeal in terms of the couple having a daughter, M, who is
    15 years of age and who has been separated from the appellant for  some
    time.  It is argued that the judge had  failed  to  consider  that  the
    partner and parent  routes  under  Appendix  FM  deal  fully  with  the
    appellant's circumstances, striking a  balance  between  the  right  to
    family life and the public interest in immigration control.  The  judge
    had not identified circumstances not covered by the  Rules  to  warrant
    consideration outside the Rules.  Reference is made in the  grounds  to
    the decision in MM v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 985.  The appellant could not meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Rules as a parent and it is argued that the First-tier Judge applied "a
    lower test" outside the Rules when considering Article 8.

 5.  At  the  hearing  before  me  the  sponsor,  Mr  Peter  Sorrenti,  the
    appellant's husband, did not attend.  No explanation was given for  his
    non-attendance and as far as I am aware there was no application for an
    adjournment on the basis of his inability to attend.  I  was  satisfied
    that notice of the hearing before me had been served on the sponsor, as
    well as on the appellant.

 6. An attempt was made  by  Tribunal  staff  to  contact  the  sponsor  by
    telephone. A person who identified herself as his sister was spoken to.
     She reported that Mr Sorrenti was not in the country, having  gone  to
    Cairo because, she said, the appellant  is  gravely  ill.   No  further
    details were provided.

 7. Given that there was no indication as to when the sponsor had left  the
    country, and there being no request from him  for  the  hearing  to  be
    adjourned, I decided to proceed with the hearing, being satisfied  that
    it was in the interests of justice to do so.

 8. In submissions Mr Diwnyez relied on the grounds of appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal.  However, he was not able to  assist  in  terms  of  what  is
    referred to in the grounds as the judge's failure to take into  account
    the 'parent route' for entry clearance.

    My assessment

 9. The appellant, although a citizen of the Philippines, lives  in  Egypt.
    She and the sponsor have a daughter, M, who was born on 16 March 2000.

10. The First-tier Judge heard evidence from the sponsor and from  M.   The
    only issue under the Rules that was not met, at least in terms  of  the
    application for entry clearance as a partner, was the English  language
    requirement.

11. In considering Article 8 of the  ECHR  the  judge  said  that  she  had
    considered whether there was anything not adequately considered  within
    the Rules which could lead to a successful Article 8 claim.  She  noted
    in particular that the couple have a 15 year old  daughter  M  who  she
    said had now been separated from her mother for some time.   The  judge
    found that there was no adequate evidence that the ECO  had  considered
    the best interests of M.  She did note  however,  that  this  being  an
    entry clearance case there is no express duty to do so, albeit that  it
    is accepted as best practice.   She  nevertheless  concluded  that  the
    position of their child and the family life of the family  as  a  whole
    had not adequately been considered.

12. Referring to Razgar v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004]
    UKHL 27,  she  concluded  that  there  was  family  life  (between  the
    appellant and her daughter and the sponsor) and that  the  respondent's
    decision  interferes   with   that   family   life.    In   considering
    proportionality she referred to the best interests of M  as  a  primary
    consideration, repeating that she had been separated  from  her  mother
    for a considerable time.  She concluded that  regular  visits  are  not
    possible given that M is in school in the  UK.   She  referred  to  M's
    evidence that she keeps in touch with the appellant as much as possible
    by Skype but that she has now missed Christmas and her  birthday.   The
    judge found that it was clearly in M's best interests to have both  her
    parents in her life present with her.  She said that nevertheless,  M's
    best interests are not an overriding consideration, only a primary one.

13. In assessing the evidence of the sponsor and M, she concluded that they
    were  credible  witnesses,  noting  that  their  credibility  had   not
    specifically been disputed.  The sponsor's evidence  was  that  he  had
    been advised after the refusal that his wife should obtain the relevant
    English language certificate and that this should  then  be  submitted.
    He said that he was not advised at any time that  a  fresh  application
    would be necessary.  She accepted his evidence that if he had  been  so
    advised he would have reapplied.

14. At [22] she said that it was regrettable that  the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor had not sought independent legal advice, observing that it  was
    not clear to her why the appellant had not made an application under EU
    law as the family member of an EEA national exercising Treaty rights.

15. She considered that the relationship  between  the  appellant  and  her
    husband had  now  been  interrupted  for  approximately  a  year.   She
    accepted the sponsor's evidence that the appellant and the sponsor were
    not advised by the ECO  that  they  would  need  to  resubmit  a  fresh
    application, having been led to understand that submission of  evidence
    of the relevant English language test would  be  sufficient  (with  any
    other requisite evidence).  She found  that  this  led  directly  to  a
    further delay of six months after the English test was passed,  as  the
    appellant and her family waited for their appeal.

16. In that regard it is to be noted that at [16]  the  judge  referred  to
    evidence that the appellant  has  in  fact  now  passed  the  "required
    English language exam", but only in January  2015.   This,  of  course,
    postdated the  decision  which  was  on  14  August  2014.   The  judge
    concluded that she could not take that evidence into account because it
    was not evidence of the circumstances obtaining  at  the  date  of  the
    decision.

17. Referring to the public interest considerations in section 117  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, she also referred to  the
    public interest of those seeking to remain in  the  UK  being  able  to
    speak English, and she noted that the  appellant  had  now  passed  the
    English language test (about six months ago  as  at  the  date  of  the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal).  She also  took  into  account
    that financial independence was established.

18. At [27] she noted that the relationship between them  had  endured  for
    many years, they having been married in the Philippines in  July  2000.
    The appellant had previously visited the UK lawfully whilst the  family
    were living abroad.

19. At [28], she stated that "all things being equal" it would normally  be
    proportionate to expect an appellant to  reapply  for  entry  clearance
    with the relevant English language test results.  However, taking  into
    account the best interests of M, the significant delay to date and  the
    interruption in that family life for approximately a year, as  well  as
    the fact that the appellant and the  sponsor  relied  on  incorrect  or
    incomplete  advice  from  the  respondent,  she  concluded   that   the
    respondent's decision amounted to a disproportionate interference  with
    the appellant's family life.

20. The respondent's grounds before  the  Upper  Tribunal  state  that  the
    appellant could not meet the requirements of the parent route  "as  the
    Appellant cannot meet E-ECPT 2.4 and 2.4. (sic)".  E-ECPT.2.4. provides
    as follows:

         "(a) The applicant must provide evidence that they have either -

             (i)  sole parental responsibility for the child; or

             (ii) access rights to the child; and

         (b)  The applicant must provide evidence that they are taking,  and
             intend to continue to take, an  active  role  in  the  child's
             upbringing".

21. It may be that the grounds also intended to refer to E-ECPT.2.3.  which
    provides that:

         "Either -

         (a)  the applicant must have sole parental responsibility  for  the
             child; or

         (b)  the parent or carer with whom the child normally lives must be
             -

             (i)  a British citizen in the UK or settled in the UK;

             (ii) not the partner of the applicant; and

             (iii)    the applicant must not be eligible to apply for entry
                  clearance as a partner under this Appendix".

22. It appears therefore, that the  respondent's  contention  is  that  the
    Rules cater for circumstances where an applicant seeks entry  clearance
    to join a child in the UK.  The appellant  is  not  able  to  meet  the
    requirements of those Rules as a parent, not least because there was no
    evidence  before  the   First-tier   Tribunal   that   she   has   sole
    responsibility for M, or access rights to her.  That is aside from  the
    fact that under E-ECPT.2.3 she  is  not  able  to  establish  that  the
    sponsor, being the parent with whom  M  normally  lives,  is  "not  the
    partner of the applicant".

23. Furthermore, I do not consider that it could be said that the appellant
    is not "eligible" to apply for entry clearance as a partner, given that
    that is exactly  what  she  has  done,  albeit  that  she  failed  with
    reference to the English language requirement.

24. Although not raised in the grounds of appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  I
    consider that the judge was in  error  in  taking  into  account  under
    Article 8 the fact that  the  appellant  had  now  passed  the  English
    language qualification.  Just as under the Immigration Rules the  judge
    was  constrained  to  consider  only  evidence  of  the   circumstances
    obtaining at the date of the decision to refuse  entry  clearance,  the
    same applies in a consideration  of  Article  8  (see  AS  (Somalia)  &
    Another v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009]  UKHL  32).
    However, it does not seem to me that that was a major  feature  of  the
    judge's assessment of the proportionality issue, and alone it would not
    be a sufficient basis from which to conclude that the judge's  decision
    should be set aside.

25. Assuming I have interpreted the respondent's grounds correctly,  it  is
    the case that the First-tier Judge did not take into account the  Rules
    for entry clearance as a parent.  However, those Rules are not directly
    on  point  so  far  as  this  appellant  is  concerned.   The   judge's
    consideration was the issue of family life amongst them all as a family
    unit.  Whilst the Rules for entry clearance as a parent  plainly  cater
    for circumstances in which a parent is separated from a child, they are
    remote from  the  circumstances  which  the  First-tier  Judge  had  to
    consider.

26. The difficulty however, is that virtually  everything  that  the  judge
    took  into  account  in  the  proportionality  assessment  arose  post-
    decision, and was therefore not legitimately taken into  account  under
    Article 8, for the reasons given above with reference to AS  (Somalia).
    The judge was plainly heavily influenced by the  fact  that  after  the
    refusal the sponsor and the appellant were given certain advice by  the
    ECO.  The judge took into account the "significant delay to date"  (see
    [28]); but again, that delay has arisen post-decision.  The judge  said
    at [23] that she accepted that the incorrect or lack of advice from the
    ECO led directly to a further delay of six  months  after  the  English
    language test was passed as the appellant and her family waited for the
    appeal.

27. Although the judge's taking into account of post-decision  evidence  is
    not a matter raised in the respondent's grounds, it is nevertheless not
    a matter that can be ignored in the assessment of  whether  the  First-
    tier Judge erred in law in her conclusions with reference to Article 8.

28. I have considered whether it could be said  that  events  post-decision
    were evidence of the circumstances "appertaining" at the  time  of  the
    decision, for example in terms of whether the future course  of  events
    were foreseeable  or  in  reasonable  contemplation.   However,  it  is
    impossible to conclude that they were.  Furthermore, I do not  consider
    that the judge was entitled to conclude that there  were  circumstances
    which  merited  consideration  outside   the   Rules,   because   those
    circumstances arose post-decision.

29. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  law
    in taking into account evidence which postdated the decision, including
    the fact that the appellant had after the decision established that she
    met the English language requirement of the  Rules.   Accordingly,  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside. I proceed to  re-make
    the decision.

30. In doing so it is plainly illegitimate for me to take into account  the
    matters that the judge found in favour of the appellant,  in  terms  of
    delay and the passing of the English language qualification.  As at the
    date of the decision it was the case that the appellant was not able to
    meet the English language requirement of the Rules.

31. The application for entry clearance was made on 19  May  2014  and  was
    decided just short of three months later. Taking  out  of  account  the
    post-decision delay  and  the  appellant's  obtaining  of  the  English
    language qualification, I cannot see that there are  circumstances  not
    catered for within the Rules meriting  a  consideration  of  Article  8
    outside the Rules.

32. Even if I did consider that there  was  a  case  for  consideration  of
    Article 8, simply perhaps by reason of the fact that there is  a  child
    of the family who has been separated from her mother, I cannot see that
    the respondent's decision on the facts could be said  to  amount  to  a
    disproportionate  interference  with  the  family  life   between   the
    appellant and her husband and daughter.

33. The best interests of the child as a primary consideration need  to  be
    taken into account.  However, in my judgement those best interests  are
    not significantly  compromised  by  reason  of  the  refusal  of  entry
    clearance to the appellant.  It is evident that their daughter is cared
    for by the sponsor with whom  she  lives.   She  is  able  to  maintain
    contact with the appellant, albeit that that contact is  no  substitute
    for the complete family life involved in the family living together.

34. Nevertheless, the appellant is able to make a further  application  for
    entry clearance.

    Decision

35. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  The First-tier Tribunal's decision is set aside.  I
    re-make the decision, dismissing the appeal under the Immigration Rules
    and under Article 8 of the ECHR.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek      23/12/15

