
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/10211/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Promulgated                          |
|on 14 October 2015                   |on 19 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

                        MR SAHIDAR MIR MOHAMED HASAN
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

            HASSAN THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr S Salam, Solicitor
For the respondent:    Mr A Holmes, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is the Secretary of State for the Home Department and the
    respondent is  a  citizen  of  Afghanistan  born  on  1  January  1949.
    However, for convenience, I refer below to Mr Mohamad as the  appellant
    and to the  Secretary  of  State  as  the  respondent,  which  are  the
    designations  they  had  before  the  proceedings  at  the   First-tier
    Tribunal.

 2. The Secretary of State appeals with permission to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    against  the  determination  of  First-tier   Tribunal   Judge   Talbot
    promulgated on 5 May 2015, allowing the appellant's appeal pursuant  to
    the Immigration Rules as  the  dependent  relative  under  Appendix  FM
    paragraph EC DR. 1. 1. against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    made on 17 July 2014, in which  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the
    appellant's application for leave to enter the United Kingdom.

    The First-tier Tribunal Judge's findings

 3. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Talbot  gave  the  following  reasons  for
    allowing the appellant's appeal pursuant to the Immigration Rules.

      i. [19] The primary issue in this  appeal  is  whether  the  appellant
         meets the criteria in Appendix FM E-ECDR 2.4. and  E-ECDR.2.5.  Sub
         paragraph 2.4 requires that the applicant "must as a result of age,
         illness or disability require long-term personal  care  to  perform
         everyday tasks". Paragraph 2.5 states that the applicant  "must  be
         unable even with the practical and financial help of  the  sponsor,
         to obtain the required level of care in the country where they  are
         living because (a) it is not available and there is  no  person  in
         that country who can  reasonably  provide  it  or  (b)  it  is  not
         affordable.

     ii. [20] the most relevant  evidence  in  support  of  the  appellant's
         appeal is the  appellant's  own  statement,  the  evidence  of  her
         daughter (oral  and  written),  and  the  hospital  medical  report
         (summarised above). I  was  impressed  with  the  evidence  of  the
         appellant's daughter and found her to be a  credible  and  reliable
         witness. The sponsor is the person who  has  direct  experience  of
         caring for her mother during her frequent visits and  is  therefore
         in the best position to describe her caring needs on a daily basis.
         The hospital reports provides further corroboration from a  medical
         standpoint for the problems described by the  sponsor  and  by  the
         appellant herself.

    iii. [21] with regard to paragraph 2.4, the  question  is  "whether  she
         requires long-term personal care to perform  everyday  tasks".  The
         term "personal care" is not defined in the Immigration  Rules,  but
         commonly means care of an  intimate  nature  such  as  in  washing,
         toileting,  dressing  et  cetera.  The  respondent's  own  internal
         guidance explains it in terms of the applicant being "incapable  of
         performing everyday tasks for themselves e.g. washing, dressing and
         cooking". The evidence of the sponsor  combined  with  the  medical
         report clearly indicates that she  needs  help  in  tasks  such  as
         washing, dressing, toileting and taking prescribed medication,  and
         cooking and getting around can be  hazardous  for  her.  These  are
         activities that come within the ambit of personal care and this  is
         clearly required on a long-term basis and given her age she  is  no
         doubt  liable  to  deteriorate.  I  am  therefore  satisfied   that
         paragraph 2.4 is met.

     iv. [22] I turn to 2.5. I am satisfied from the  detailed  evidence  of
         the sponsor that her mother lives alone. I am also  satisfied  that
         there are no close relatives in the country available to help  with
         care. The immediate family are either deceased or  abroad  and  the
         aunt who was previously able to provide at least emotional  support
         and company for the  appellant  has  died.  The  question  is  then
         whether the necessary caring  could  be  provided  by  paid  carers
         outside the family. There does not seem to  be  a  specific  issues
         with regard to affordability, as the sponsor has a reasonable level
         of income. The issue is that of availability of care.  The  sponsor
         (corroborated by the medical report)  has  credibly  explained  the
         absence of a proper carer's  profession  in  Afghanistan.  She  has
         therefore attempted to resolve the matter by hiring a succession of
         mates. She has explained the  difficulties  that  she  has  had  in
         finding reliable and honest ladies to perform these duties. She has
         had some limited success in finding ladies to  do  duties  such  as
         shopping and housework but not the intimate personal care that  her
         mother needs for example cleaning her after performing  her  toilet
         or night-time care. The use of maids has therefore not resolved the
         issue satisfactorily and it is for this reason  and  the  resultant
         anxiety that the sponsor or her husband have had to  make  frequent
         visits to Afghanistan. On the evidence before  me  I  am  satisfied
         that the required level of care is in practice unavailable  to  the
         appellant despite attempts made by the sponsor  over  a  period  of
         time to try and resolve this problem.

      v. [23] In reaching the determination, I have taken  full  account  of
         the points raised by the respondent in her refusal letter  and  the
         ECM Review. One particular point mentioned, namely  the  fact  that
         the appellant had recently travelled to the UAE, has been explained
         in the appellant's witness statement, namely that she travelled  to
         the UAE with her son-in-law as a  matter  of  necessity  purely  in
         order to lodge her entry clearance application. I am satisfied that
         the other points of concern have now been adequately  addressed  by
         the evidence submitted. I conclude that the appellant's  case  does
         meet the relevant criteria of Appendix FM.

    Grounds of appeal

 4. The respondent in her grounds of appeal state  the  following  which  I
    summarise. The Judge allowed the appeal under appendix  FM  as  he  was
    satisfied, based on the detailed oral evidence of the sponsor  and  the
    appellant's own evidence and a  medical  report  that  the  Immigration
    Rules were met. It is submitted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  has
    failed to lawfully engage with section 12A (g), 33-37 of  Appendix  FM-
    SE, which details the evidence  necessary  to  support  an  application
    under the adult dependent relative route of Appendix FM.

 5.  The  Judge  gives  no  reason  for  departing  from   the   evidential
    requirements which were deemed a necessary prerequisite as set  out  in
    SSHD v SS Congo [2015] EWCA Civ 387 at paragraph 51  which  states  "In
    our judgment, the approach to Article 8 in the light of  the  Rules  in
    Appendix FM-SE should be the same as in respect of the substantive  LTE
    and LTR Rules in Appendix FM. In other words, the same general position
    applies, that compelling circumstances would have to apply to justify a
    grant of LTE or LTR where the evidence Rules are not complied with.".

 6. The court considered the requirements necessary because  "the  evidence
    rules have the same general objective as the substantive rules,  namely
    to limit the risk that someone is admitted into the United Kingdom  and
    then becomes a burden on public resources, and the Secretary  of  State
    has the same primary function in relation to them to  assess  the  risk
    and put in place measures which  are  Judged  suitable  to  contain  it
    within acceptable  bounds.  Similar  weight  should  be  given  to  her
    assessment of what the public interest requires in both contexts".

 7. The respondent submits that, whilst there is a medical report  from  Dr
    Sayed of the hospital in Kabul, the medical report does  not  establish
    that  necessary  provision  is  unavailable  across   Afghanistan.   It
    establishes that Dr Sayed hospital does not provide outreach services.

 8. It was for the sponsor's evidence with satisfied the Judge  as  to  the
    general lack of care available to  the  appellant  but  the  respondent
    submits that such evidence is not independent, as is  required  by  the
    Rules, and therefore does not assist the Tribunal in assessing  E-ECDE.
    2. 5. The  respondent  further  submits  that  the  evidence  does  not
    sufficiently establish an unavailability, or inadequacy, of care; it is
    open to the appellant to relocate  to  Kabul  and  employ  maids/carers
    there.

    The hearing

 9. At the hearing I heard submissions as to whether there  is  a  material
    error of  law  in  the  determination.  Mr  Holmes  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent submitted that the Judge made  his  findings  based  on  the
    appellant's daughter's evidence that medical  care  is  not  available.
    This does not answer the question dependent evidence is required  under
    the Rules. In respect of the appellant's travel to the UAE someone must
    have been looking after her.

10. Mr Salam on behalf of the appellant submitted that the letter from  the
    hospital clearly states that care is not available. There are  no  care
    services in  Afghanistan  as  it  is  an  underdeveloped  country.  The
    appellant lives in a rented house in Herat.  The  Judge  took  all  the
    evidence into account and has not made a material error of law.

    Findings as to whether there is an error of law

11. The complaint made by the respondent is that the  Judge  did  not  take
    into account that the appellant had not met the evidential requirements
    of the Immigration Rules and that the oral evidence  of  the  appellant
    and her sponsor, even  if  they  were  found  to  be  totally  credible
    witnesses, could not remedy that lack.

12. The Judge should have been required to look  for  independent  evidence
    that there was a lack of available paid care to  meet  the  appellant's
    needs  in  Afghanistan.   The   Judge   completely   disregarded   this
    requirement. This was fatal to the determination.

13. The Judge did not take into account that enforcement  of  the  evidence
    rules ensures that everyone applying for leave to remain  or  leave  to
    enter is treated equally and  fairly  in  relation  to  the  evidential
    requirements that must be satisfied in order to retain  uniformity  and
    equality throughout the system.

14. The Judge did not take into account the evidence that when the  sponsor
    was in the  United  Kingdom,  care  must  have  been  provided  to  the
    appellant by others in Afghanistan. Therefore the appellant  must  have
    someone in Afghanistan caring for her when the sponsor was not visiting
    her. The Judge found that the fact that the appellant went to the  UAE,
    even if it was to make her application for entry  clearance,  suggested
    to the Judge that the appellant was not someone  who  was  so  ill  and
    requiring of daily care that she was able travel to the UAE. This is  a
    logical inference drawn from the facts. The Judge was entitled to  find
    that the  appellant's  sponsor's  evidence  about  the  care  that  the
    appellant receives and needs is at odds with the appellant's ability to
    travel to Afghanistan.

15. I am satisfied that there is a material error in the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge because the Judge did not take  into  account
    the case of SS Congo and relied solely on the evidence of the appellant
    and her sponsor without seeking independent evidence as required  under
    the evidential part of the Immigration Rules.

16. Consequential to my finding that there is a material error  of  law,  I
    set aside the determination of the first-tier Tribunal Judge preserving
    none of the findings.




  17. Both parties agreed in such an event, the appeal ought to be sent back
      to the First tier- Tribunal so that findings of fact can  be  made.  I
      agreed that this was the proper course  of  action  to  take  in  this
      appeal in accordance with section 7. 2 (b) (i) the Senior  President's
      Practice Statement of 25 September 2012 as I was of the view that  the
      appeal requires judicial fact-finding and should to be  considered  by
      the First-tier Tribunal.

18. The re-making of the decision on appeal will be undertaken by a  First-
    tier Judge in the First-tier Tribunal other than by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Talbot on a date to be notified.

    Decision

19. The appeal by the Secretary of State is allowed and  the  determination
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge is set aside.  The case is remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal for re-determination.


Signed by

Mrs S Chana Date 15th day of November 2015
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Judge
