
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/10050/2012
     OA/10052/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 22 May 2013                                |On 4 June 2013               |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                       AMARJIT SINGH (first appellant)
                      SUKHWANT KAUR (second appellant)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Z Nasim of Counsel instructed by ZSN Immigration
Services
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellants are citizens of India and are  husband  and  wife.   The
    appellants were born respectively on 5 November 1938  and  5  September
    1940.  The appellants' sponsors are their daughter and her husband  who
    reside in this  country.   The  appellants  applied  to  join  them  as
    dependants under paragraph  317  of  HC  395.   The  applications  were
    refused on 26 April 2012.

2.   There were  two  bases  for  refusal  but  only  one  of  them  remains
    relevant.  This was because on appeal the First-tier Judge resolved  in
    the appellants' favour an issue that had been raised by the  respondent
    under paragraph 320(7A) and I say no more about it.

3.   The appeal came before the First-tier Judge on 23  January  2013.   The
    issue that proved the  stumbling  block  for  the  appellants  was  the
    question of financial support and dependency.

4.   The judge heard oral evidence from the sponsors and noted that  it  was
    clear that the absence of evidence had been a  crucial  factor  in  the
    decision to refuse the application.   The  respondent  had  noted  that
    there was only evidence of money transfers  from  the  sponsor  on  one
    occasion and that was still the  case.   The  judge  comments  that  he
    received "somewhat unclear evidence as to  how  money  was  transferred
    from the United Kingdom to the appellants by the daughter."   He  found
    that the sponsors had given inconsistent evidence as to  the  frequency
    of the transfers and the amount  transferred  and  that  there  was  no
    documentary evidence to show that money had  been  transferred.   There
    was no  statement  from  the  relatives  who  were  purported  to  have
    transferred the money to the appellants and there was no evidence  from
    the appellants' own bank accounts that the money had been  received  or
    deposited there.  The determination continues:

         "16. The amount of money that has been transferred in the  past  is
             relatively little.  There  is  also  an  inconsistency  as  to
             whether money is sent by the sons who live  outside  India  or
             not.  Two of the sons who live in the United States have  sent
             an  affidavit  that  appears  at  pages  69  and  71  of   the
             appellant's bundle.  These affidavits are of little  value  as
             regards whether or not they have sent money to the  appellants
             for their support.


         17.  There is a letter from the village head man  that  appears  at
             page 68  of  the  same  bundle.   This  letter  is  of  little
             evidential value as well.  He says that the couple are  living
             alone and  are  helpless  and  they  do  not  have  any  close
             relatives "here".  That is obviously inaccurate as  the  first
             appellant does have siblings who live in the immediate area.


         18.  It is claimed that the first appellant was confused  when  the
             entry clearance officers telephoned him.  He has not  provided
             an affidavit or statements to support that.


         19.  Both appellants were fully aware that the issue in  this  case
             was whether or not they were being mainly maintained by  their
             daughter in the United Kingdom.  From the  evidence  that  has
             been provided I can only conclude that  they  are  not.   They
             have an income of approximately Rs.10,000  a  month  from  the
             first appellant's  pension.   They  have  help  towards  their
             maintenance and accommodation through the food and money  they
             receive from the rent of  their  land.   They  have  an  above
             average income.  The medical conditions do not mean that their
             costs are excessive.  There is no evidence to show  that  they
             are incapacitated or in need of care  on  a  full-time  basis.
             Although they are in advanced years there is nothing  to  show
             that they cannot look after themselves at the present  moment.
             There do not appear to be any compassionate circumstances.


         20.  The appellant's daughter only visits every year  or  so.   She
             says she takes money with her  at  that  time.   There  is  no
             evidence to show that that money has been transferred  or  any
             other money has been transferred by  her  to  the  appellants.
             There is no evidence to show that the  appellants  are  mainly
             dependent upon the daughter who lives in the United Kingdom."


5.   Because the appellants had failed to discharge the burden of  proof  to
    show that they were mainly dependent upon relatives settled in  the  UK
    the judge dismissed the appeal under the Rules.  Where  a  case  failed
    under the Immigration Rules in an application for settlement made  from
    abroad the judge considered that in the majority of cases the  decision
    under the Rules would be regarded as being proportionate and would  not
    give rise to a breach of the appellants' rights under  Article  8.   He
    considered there was no family life at  present  given  the  infrequent
    number of visits to the appellants by the  sponsor.   The  parties  had
    lived apart for many years and were obviously  leading  separate  lives
    and there was no evidence of dependency.  The appellants had not  shown
    that  the  respondent's  decision  breached  their  protected   rights.
    Accordingly the appeals were dismissed under the Rules and  in  respect
    of Article 8.

6.   There was an application for permission to appeal.  It was pointed  out
    that the Rules referred to "wholly or mainly" in relation to dependency
    and the judge had not had this in his mind.  It  was  pure  speculation
    for the judge to find that the income from the  pension  and  the  land
    income had been sufficient.  He had  needed  to  consider  whether  the
    financial support was of  "necessity"  or  "choice"  as  the  case  law
    required.  The fact that the appellants had their own  income  was  not
    conclusive since the next question was whether the  income  from  India
    was sufficient for their needs and it was submitted that  the  evidence
    showed that that was not the case.  The judge had  decided  matters  by
    reference to Indian rather than UK standards.  He  had  been  wrong  to
    seek documentary evidence of remittances.  The money had been taken  by
    relatives.  It was further argued that it was  not  necessary  for  the
    appellants to demonstrate exceptional compassionate circumstances since
    they were both  aged  over  65.   While  there  may  have  been  little
    documentary evidence there was oral evidence from the sponsors.

7.   In relation to Article 8 it was said  that  the  judge's  decision  was
    perverse and there was clearly family life  established.   The  sponsor
    had visited her parents every year or so and left the money  for  their
    expenses.

8.   In relation to the sons in the USA they were not  allowed  to  take  on
    responsibility for their parents.

9.   The judge had not given weight to the  evidence  of  the  village  head
    man.  Although the first appellant had siblings they were very old  and
    were not willing to offer any support.

10.  The grounds noted that the judge had referred to the evidence given  by
    the first appellant at interview in paragraph 18 of the  determination.
    The judge should have considered whether the appellant was  nervous  in
    view of his age.

11.  In relation to Article 8 reference was made to Quila v  Home  Secretary
    [2011] 3 WLR 836 at paragraph 43, declining to follow Abdulaziz  [1985]
    7 EHRR 471.   The  judge  had  not  given  the  evidence  the  required
    scrutiny.

12.  Permission to appeal was granted on 15 April 2013.

13.  Responses from the respondent were lodged on  29  April  2013.  It  was
    pointed out that the issue was whether the appellants were being mainly
    maintained by their daughter in the United Kingdom.  Following Kugathas
    [2003] EWCA Civ 31 the appellants and sponsor needed to show more  than
    merely emotional ties.  Given that the visits were infrequent  and  the
    sponsor had lived apart from the appellants for many years the  grounds
    had no merit.

14.  Mr Nasim submitted that the  judge  had  not  properly  considered  the
    issue of whether the appellants were mainly dependent.   The  reference
    to mainly in paragraph 19 was insufficient.  There was clearly  a  need
    for medical treatment.  The daughter in her witness statement  referred
    to the first appellant's diabetes, for example.  The rental income  was
    only just enough.  The income from the pension was  only  just  enough.
    The judge had erred in paragraph 19 in focusing on the issue  of  above
    average income and  had  not  considered  the  issues  of  whether  the
    dependency was of necessity  or  choice.   The  judge  had  taken  into
    account irrelevant matters in paragraph 19  and  had  speculated  about
    matters such as costs not being excessive.  The issue of  compassionate
    circumstances was irrelevant.  The only issue was financial dependency.
     Compassionate circumstances might be relevant to Article 8 but not  to
    issues under the Rules.  Concerning the lack  of  documentary  evidence
    about remittances there had been a letter at page  87  of  the  bundle.
    Some further evidence had been submitted but it was  acknowledged  this
    had not been before the First-tier Tribunal.

15.  Article 8 was clearly engaged and the judge  had  erred  in  not  going
    through the Razgar steps.   The  appellants  had  been  maintained  and
    supported by the sponsor.  Family life  had  clearly  been  established
    The sons could not take on the responsibility for the appellants.

16.  Mr Tarlow relied on the responses that had been filed.  He referred  me
    to the interview that had been held with the first appellant.   He  had
    said that he owned his property and that he had a pension and that  his
    pension and income from land was sufficient.   Medicine  was  not  very
    expensive.  The  judge's  findings  had  been  properly  based  on  the
    evidence before him.   There  was  no  evidence  of  regular  financial
    transfers.  The judge's conclusion was  open  to  him.   There  was  no
    material error in the judge's brief decision in respect of  Article  8.
    Even if he had gone through the Razgar steps the result would have been
    the same.

17.  In reply Counsel pointed out that the appellant had  been  nervous  and
    confused at his telephone  interview.   The  judge  had  placed  little
    weight on this aspect.  It should be treated with  caution.   If  there
    was a material  error  of  law  the  appellants  were  content  that  I
    determine this issue on the papers  as  they  had  trouble  getting  to
    London and taking time off work.

18.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my  decision.   I  have
    carefully  considered  the  evidence  before  me,   the   grounds   and
    submissions and the responses that have been filed.

19.  I remind myself that I can only interfere with a  decision  if  it  was
    flawed by an error of law.  I also remind myself that the judge had the
    benefit of hearing from the  sponsors  and  that  the  appellants  were
    represented by Mr Nasim at the hearing before the First-tier Judge.

20.  It does appear to me quite clear that the judge was well aware  of  the
    issue as to dependency and the question was whether the appellants were
    mainly dependent on the sponsor.  He uses the word mainly maintained or
    mainly dependent in paragraphs 19, 20 and 21 of the determination.

21.  It is said that the judge gave little weight  to  the  interview  which
    had been conducted by the respondent with the first appellant.  It  was
    represented in the initial grounds of appeal that the  appellant  could
    as a 73 year old get very confused and nervous on the  telephone.   The
    judge was indeed alive  to  this  claim  and  the  evidence  about  the
    interview since he refers to it in paragraph 18  of  the  determination
    which I have reproduced above.

22.  The appellant was asked whether he was fit and well and  not  tired  or
    confused at the beginning of the  telephone  conversation  and  replied
    that he was fit.  He talks of having two sons in the USA and a daughter
    in the UK.  He lived with his wife and owned his property.   He  got  a
    pension and in answer to question 14 he said  "My  pension  and  income
    from land is sufficient for us, some times son send us money only if we
    need."  The property where they lived had all necessary facilities.  He
    was asked about his brothers and  sisters  and  replied  "We  are  four
    brothers, two live in my neighbourhood and do farming  and  one  is  in
    Chandigarh - he is army pensioner.  We all meet regularly.  My wife has
    two brothers and one sister, they  all  live  in  Uttar  Pradesh."   He
    repeats that they all  met  regularly.   He  and  his  wife  share  the
    shopping, his wife cooked.  He took three tablets a  day  for  diabetes
    and states that the medicine was not very expensive and that he  bought
    it from the chemist.  His wife was not  under  medical  care.   He  had
    understood all the questions and answered them  all  honestly  and  was
    happy with the way the interview had been conducted and was not nervous
    or confused during the interview.

23.  The judge made the necessary findings  of  fact  in  this  matter.   He
    noted the absence of evidence of financial support - this was a crucial
    factor in the decision under challenge.  The evidence  before  him  was
    unclear about money transfers.   The  judge's  decision  is  more  than
    adequately reasoned in my view in this respect.   He  was  entitled  to
    find a confusion on the evidence about remittances from  the  sons  who
    lived outside India.  The judge took into account the letter  from  the
    village  head  man.   In  my  view  the  grounds  of   appeal   express
    disagreement with the judge's findings on this and indeed other matters
    and do not establish that the judge  was  not  entitled  to  reach  the
    conclusion he did.  He considered the submission about the confusion of
    the first appellant and was plainly not satisfied about that.

24.  It was open to the judge to conclude from the evidence before him  that
    the appellants were not being mainly maintained by  the  sponsor.   His
    comments about their income being above average and the  medical  costs
    not being excessive were plainly open to him  on  the  evidence  before
    him.

25.  It is said the issue of  exceptional  compassionate  circumstances  was
    irrelevant. However the grounds of appeal  before  the  judge  asserted
    that the respondent made the decision without any proper thought  about
    the appellants' exceptional compassionate circumstances: see  paragraph
    10 of  the  initial  grounds.   Counsel  concedes  that  the  issue  of
    compassionate circumstances would be relevant  to  Article  8.  In  the
    premises the judge was right to consider the  matter  of  compassionate
    circumstances.

26.  The findings made by  the  judge  in  paragraph  19  and  20  were  not
    irrelevant to the issues arising under Article 8.  He found there  were
    no compassionate circumstances  and  that  the  sponsor's  visits  were
    infrequent, that transfers  of  money  had  been  small  and  that  the
    appellants were living in reasonable circumstances with  above  average
    income and so on.  They were in advanced years but able to  look  after
    themselves at present.  These were all findings open to the judge.

27.  In the light of the  infrequency  of  visits  and  the  fact  that  the
    appellants had lived apart from the sponsor for  many  years  and  were
    obviously leading separate lives and in  the  absence  of  evidence  of
    dependency it was open to the judge to find that the decision  did  not
    breach the appellants' protected rights.

28.  In Kugathas at paragraph 14 Sedley LJ accepted what was set out in S  v
    United Kingdom [1984] 40 DR 196 at page 198 as a proper approach:

         "Generally, the protection of family life under Article 8  involves
         cohabiting dependants, such as parents and their  dependent,  minor
         children.  Whether it extends to other relationships depends on the
         circumstances  of  the  particular  case.   Relationships   between
         adults, a mother and her 33 year old son in the present case, would
         not  necessarily  acquire  the  protection  of  Article  8  of  the
         Convention without evidence  of  further  elements  of  dependency,
         involving more than the normal emotional ties".


29.  At paragraph 25 Arden LJ states as follows:

         "Because there is no presumption of family life, in my  judgment  a
         family life is not established  between  an  adult  child  and  his
         surviving parent or other siblings  unless  something  more  exists
         than normal emotional ties ..."


    It is acknowledged that such ties might exists "if the  appellant  were
    dependent on his family or vice versa."  The case of Quila was  dealing
    with rather different circumstances.  In that  case  the  Secretary  of
    State had refused to allow foreign spouses to reside in the UK with the
    British citizens whom they had recently married which must represent an
    interference - see paragraph 43 of the  judgment  of  Lord  Wilson.   A
    distinction between positive and negative obligations was  elusive  and
    should not generate a different outcome in such a context.


30.  I do not consider that  on  the  facts  of  this  case  the  judge  was
    required to go further than he did.   However,  in  the  light  of  his
    findings such family life  as  existed  was  exiguous.   As  Mr  Tarlow
    submits it is quite clear that any more extended treatment of Article 8
    would not and could not have yielded a positive outcome insofar as  the
    appellants are concerned.  Accordingly I find  that  the  determination
    does not involve a material error of law under the Rules or in  respect
    of Article 8.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Judge  shall  stand.









Signed                                  Date 3 June 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Warr
