

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/10126/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 7 May 2015                        |On 18 May 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MR MD CHOWDHURY
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Harrison (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr Islam (Maya Solicitors)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant ('the SSHD') appeals against  a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge D Dickinson dated 28 January 2015 in  which  he  allowed
    the respondent's (the claimant's) appeal.

 2. The issue before the First-tier Tribunal was whether or  not  the  SSHD
    displaced the burden upon her to establish that the  claimant  employed
    deception when he took an English test on 19 November 2013.

 3. In grounds of appeal the SSHD submitted that the  Judge  made  findings
    that are materially flawed and / or unreasoned.  At the hearing  before
    me Mr Harrison simply relied upon the grounds of appeal.  I  deal  with
    each in turn below.

 4. I do not accept that the  decision  is  insufficiently  reasoned.   The
    Judge has provided adequate reasoning for the SSHD  to  understand  why
    she has lost.  He did  not  regard  the  evidence  relied  upon  to  be
    sufficiently specific to this claimant for the reasons he provides.

 5. The Judge was  well  aware  of  the  straightforward  ETS  Lookup  Tool
    document that provided the claimant's details and showed his test to be
    invalidated.   The  Judge's  concern  was  however   that   there   was
    insufficient specified evidence as to why  this  particular  claimant's
    test was  invalidated  [16].   The  Judge  was  aware  of  the  witness
    statements relied upon by the SSHD but did not consider those  met  the
    concerns he outlined.  It is  submitted  that  the  witness  statements
    submitted on behalf of the SSHD provided the precise  reasons  why  the
    claimant's scores were invalidated i.e. he used  a  proxy  taker.   The
    Judge clearly took into account those statements [15] and was  entitled
    to conclude that there were other reasons for invalidation [16-17].

 6. The grounds amount to no more than  a  disagreement  with  the  Judge's
    findings and do not disclose any error of law.

Decision

 7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a
    material error of law.



Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date: 8 May 2014

