
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/10886/2013
     OA/10888/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 20 August 2014                             |On 27 August 2013            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL



                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ADHARSH GEORGE SHARMILA SHANTHI
                                jinoy george

                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant (Secretary of State):  Mr S Walker (Senior Home Office
Presenting
     Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr F Kodagoda (Counsel)



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   In this determination, I shall refer to the parties  as  they  were  in
    the First-tier Tribunal.  Mr Adharsh George Sharmila  Shanti,  and  his
    brother, Mr Jinoy George, will be referred to as the appellants and the
    Secretary of State as the respondent.

2.    The  appellants'  appeals  against  decisions  to  refuse  them  entry
    clearance, as dependent children of their sponsors here,  were  allowed
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant ("the  judge")  in  a  determination
    promulgated on  4  June  2014.   In  issue  were  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules.

3.   In refusing entry clearance, the Entry Clearance  Officer  ("ECO")  put
    in issue the claimed relationship  between  the  appellants  and  their
    sponsors here and the maintenance and accommodation requirements of the
    rules.  The judge made findings of fact in the  appellants'  favour  in
    relation to all the issues and allowed the appeals.

4.   The respondent, the Secretary  of  State,  applied  for  permission  to
    appeal. One challenge was made.  At paragraph 7 of  the  determination,
    the judge made findings  in  the  light  of  colour  photographs  which
    appeared in the appellants' bundle, showing the appellants  with  their
    sponsors at various stages of their  lives.   In  the  grounds,  it  is
    contended that the judge erred.  He made reference to only two  of  the
    photographs and failed to give adequate reasons for finding  that  this
    evidence showed that the sponsors  were  the  appellants'  parents,  as
    claimed.

5.   Permission to appeal was granted by a First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  who
    found that it was arguable that the judge had failed  to  give  anxious
    scrutiny to the evidence and arguably failed to give  adequate  reasons
    for his finding in this context.

Submissions on Error of Law

6.   Mr Walker said that the Secretary of State's grounds  focussed  on  one
    aspect, the photographs relied upon by  the  appellants.   No  adequate
    reasons were given showing that the appellants were indeed the children
    of their sponsors here.  In the last sentence at  paragraph  7  of  the
    determination, the judge found that the  evidence  would  have  made  a
    difference to the decision maker.  Mr Walker said that,  in  fact,  the
    evidence was clearly not before the ECO.   The  judge's  reasoning  was
    brief and it might be argued that paragraph 7 only  referred  expressly
    to photographs of one of the  children.

7.   Mr Kodagoda handed up a copy of part of Phipson On Evidence  (including
    paragraph 1-14).  He said that it would be wrong in law for  the  Upper
    Tribunal to substitute its own judgment for the First-tier  Judge,  who
    clearly set out at paragraph 7 his reasons for his finding of fact.  He
     saw the photographs and noted that they appeared to  show  significant
    matters in the lives of the appellants.  Findings were made  after  the
    evidence was considered.  At paragraph  6,  the  judge  summarised  the
    evidence  before  the  Tribunal.  There  was  no   challenge   to   the
    authenticity of the photographs and the determination  did  not  reveal
    that any submissions were made by the Presenting Officer on the  issue.
    The genuineness of the photographs was not in dispute.  The  notice  of
    decision  referred  to  the  absence  of  family  photographs  and  the
    appellants produced  evidence  meeting  this  point.   The  judge  made
    impeccable findings and was entitled to conclude as he did.

8.   Mr Walker had nothing to add to  his earlier submissions.

Conclusion on Error of Law

9.   The determination has been  prepared  with  characteristic  care  by  a
    very experienced judge.  At paragraph 6,  he  summarised  the  evidence
    before  him.  This  included  oral  evidence  from  the  sponsors,  and
    documents contained in the appellants' bundles and colour  photographs.
    At paragraph 7, the judge described two in particular.   One showed Mrs
    Shanthi with her oldest son at his baptism and another showed the  same
    son with his father, Mr Rose, on a motorbike outside their home.  It is
    readily apparent that the judge did not find that the  appellants  were
    indeed the children  relying  on  the  photographs  in  isolation.   He
    weighed those items with the sponsor's oral evidence and with the other
    evidence. This included passports showing visits made annually, so that
    parents and children were united, as claimed. The photographs  predated
    refusal of entry clearance.

10.  It is also apparent that the photographs  were  produced  as  a  direct
    response  to  the  ECO's  adverse   finding   regarding   the   claimed
    relationship.  The notice of decision expressly refers to  the  absence
    of family  photographs  and  this  deficiency  was  made  good  on  the
    appellants' behalves by their parents.

11.  The determination is  fully  reasoned  and  I  have  no  hesitation  in
    concluding that the judge was entitled to make  the  findings  of  fact
    that he did.  Again, he did not weigh  one  part  of  the  evidence  in
    isolation from the rest.  In  the  light  of  the  oral  evidence,  the
    photographs, the passports and the other evidence before him, the judge
    was entitled to conclude that the appellants and  their  sponsors  were
    related as claimed.  He did not err in law in so doing.

12.  No challenge has been made to the judge's other favourable findings  of
    fact, regarding maintenance and accommodation.  His  reasoning  appears
    at paragraphs 8 and 9 of the determination and is free from any error.

13.  In summary, the judge was entitled to make the findings of fact he  did
    in the light of the evidence before him. No material error of  law  has
    been shown.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.



DECISION

14.  No material error of law having been  shown, the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal in which the appeals were allowed shall stand.





Signed                                  Date: 21 August 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell



