

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: OA/10851/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At    Birmingham                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|on    21 August 2013                          |On 21 August 2014            |


                                   Before

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

                                   Between



                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Kashmir Kaur
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the appellant:  Mr Dinwycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent: Ms Rutherford, instructed by Maya & Co Solicitors

                                DETERMINATION

 1.  This  appeal  was  brought  by  the  appellant  against  the  decision
    promulgated on 8 May 2014 of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Snape  which
    allowed the appeal under Article 8 ECHR.

 2. For the purposes of this decision I refer to the Secretary of State  as
    the respondent and to Mrs  Kaur  as  the  appellant,  reflecting  their
    positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The respondent's challenge to the decision of Judge Snape was  that  it
    failed to  identify  why  the  public  interest  as  expressed  in  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules, here not met, was outweighed  by
    any  other  factors,  nothing  exceptional  or   unduly   harsh   being
    identified. The judge had not taken into account that  the  couple  had
    chosen to live apart for  many  years  and  that  the  appellant  could
    reapply for entry clearance.

 4. It was common ground before me that although  the appellant  could  not
    meet the financial requirements of the Immigration Rules as of the date
    of application, as required by Appendix FM, she had shown that she  met
    them by the date of the decision.

 5. It was also common ground that  the  correct  date  for  assessing  any
    breach of her Article 8 EHCR rights was date of decision. As above, the
    respondent accepted that as of the date of the decision  the  appellant
    met the Immigration Rules in full.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal found that where that was so, requiring her  to
    make a new application amounted to a disproportionate interference with
    her family life.

 7. My difficulty with that conclusion is that the determination  does  not
    show anywhere that the  First-tier  Tribunal  appreciated  the  correct
    approach to the Article 8 EHCR, specifically, and  as  conceded  by  Ms
    Rutherford, that the appellant had to show exceptional or unduly  harsh
    circumstances arising from the decision and that the  failure  to  meet
    the Immigration Rules was a starting  point  and  a  factor  attracting
    significant weight; see Haleemudeen v SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  558.  In
    addition, there was  no  consideration  given  to  the  choice  of  the
    appellant and the sponsor to live apart for 20 years which appeared  to
    me to be a factor capable of changing the balance in the Article 8 ECHR
    assessment.

 8. If I might paraphrase, what the judge said here was that  it  does  not
    matter if the Immigration Rules are not met at the time that they  have
    to be met according to Parliament if  an appellant can show  that  they
    were met later on.

 9. It is not that in some circumstances, such a conclusion could  be  lead
    to a sustainable  finding of disproportionate interference given  other
    particular facts of a case.

10. Here, with nothing in the determination to  show  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal took the correct approach to the weight to  be  given  to  the
    public interest in the Immigration Rules being met and the  failure  to
    weigh the fact of the couple choosing to live apart for many years  and
    a new entry clearance application taking a relatively short time to  be
    decided,  I found that a material error of  law  arose  such  that  the
    decision had to be set aside and re-made.

11. For essentially the same reasons, it did not  appear  to  me  that  the
    interference arising from the decision could be said to be  exceptional
    or unduly harsh given that the couple have chosen to be apart for  many
    years, the sponsor can visit as he has in the past  and  the  appellant
    can reapply for entry clearance. I weigh in the appellant's favour that
    she met the financial requirements as of the date of the  decision  but
    that was not sufficient to outweigh the failure to meet the full  terms
    of the Immigration Rules at the required time in  the  context  of  the
    facts of the case as a whole.

12. I did not find a breach of the appellant's Article 8 rights arose  from
    the decision to refuse entry clearance.

Decision

13. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an  error  on  a
    point of law and is set aside to be re-made.

14. I re-make the appeal as dismissed on all grounds.



Signed:  [pic]                                 Dated:
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt



