
[pic]

                                  UPPER TRIBUNAL

                          IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
Heard at: Field House
On: 12 June 2013
                                   Before

                                 Lord Burns

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

                                   Between

                                Navtej Singh


                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer - New Delhi
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Canter, instructed by Lester Dominic Solicitors
For the Respondent: Ms Martin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


The appellant is a national of India and he was born on 18 November 1978.

This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Morris,
promulgated on 11 February 2013,  which  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal
against the respondent's decision of 30 April 2012 refusing entry  clearance
as a spouse.

The background to this matter is that the appellant came  to  the  UK  as  a
visitor on 16 September 2003. He overstayed for over 7 years,  returning  to
India only on 15 September 2011.   The  appellant  maintained  that  he  had
overstayed in order to support his sister who was  in  an  abusive  marriage
and subsequently divorced. He had met the sponsor in July 2007 and  began  a
relationship with her in 2010. They began to cohabit in September  2010.  He
returned to India in August 2011 and  the  couple  married  on  9  September
2011. The appellant then applied  for  entry  clearance  in  February  2012,
leading to the refusal which is the subject of this appeal.

The respondent did not accept that the  appellant's  intentions  as  regards
the marriage were genuine, in essence, finding that he had only  entered  in
to the marriage in order to gain entry to the UK. As  he  did  not  have  an
intention to live together permanently with  the  sponsor,  the  application
was refused under paragraph 281 (iii) of HC  395  (the  Immigration  Rules).
The respondent did not accept the appellant's  explanation  for  overstaying
his visa by at least 7 years and considered that he had come to  the  UK  in
2003  with  the  express  intention  of  overstaying  and   remaining   here
illegally. As it was considered that the appellant had  acted  in  a  manner
that  significantly  frustrated  the  Immigration  Rules  and  there    were
aggravating circumstances, the application was also refused under  paragraph
320(11). First-tier Tribunal Judge Morris agreed with the respondent.

There were two main grounds of appeal, the first against the approach  taken
by the First-tier Tribunal Judge to various aspects of the evidence  on  the
relationship between the  appellant  and  sponsor  and  the  second  to  her
finding that the refusal under paragraph 320 (11) should stand.

It is convenient to take the second ground first. We  were  with  Mr  Canter
that at no point did the First-tier Tribunal  indicate  her  awareness  that
paragraph 320 (11) is a discretionary  ground  of  refusal,  rather  than  a
mandatory one. Ms Martin could not take us to any part of the  determination
which showed that such a discretion had been noted and exercised.  Secondly,
it was not our view that aggravating factors were shown, over and above  the
appellant's period of overstaying. Paragraph 320 (11) itself contains a non-
exclusive  list  of  what  might  amount   to   aggravating   circumstances.
Overstaying, even for extended periods, is  not  included.  The  Judge  also
made no reference to the guidance  on  paragraph  320  (11)  which  contains
another non-exhaustive list which again, contains no reference to  extensive
overstaying as an aggravating factor. She  also  does  not  appear  to  have
referred to the guidance in the  reported  case  of  PS  (paragraph  320(11)
discretion: care needed) India [2010] UKUT 440 (IAC) which states:

 "In exercising discretion under paragraph 320(11) of HC 395,  as  amended,
 to refuse an application for entry clearance in a case where the automatic
 prohibition on the grant  of  entry  clearance  in  paragraph  320(7B)  is
 disapplied by paragraph 320(7C), the decision maker  must  exercise  great
 care in assessing the aggravating circumstances said  to  justify  refusal
 and  must  have  regard  to  the  public  interest in encouraging  those
 unlawfully in the United Kingdom to leave and  seek  to  regularise  their
 status by an application for entry clearance."


For all of these reasons we found that the First-tier Tribunal erred in  its
assessment of the application of paragraph 320 (11).

However, it was also our view that the First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  a
material error when finding that the appellant had not  shown  an  intention
to  live  permanently  with  the  sponsor  and  that  he  had  not  met  the
requirements of paragraph 281 (iii). That meant that the  appeal  under  the
Immigration Rules had to fail despite the error as  to  paragraph  320  (11)
and that, even if we were with the appellant in that regard,  it  could  not
be material.

Mr Canter's admirably clear grounds maintained that the First-tier  Tribunal
 erred in its approach to the following:

    i) evidence of communication between the  appellant  and  sponsor  which
       included telephone bills and internet communication
   ii) the sponsor's explanation for the absence of  her  relatives  at  the
       wedding
  iii) evidence of the appellant's brother-in-law, Norman Harford
   iv) evidence showing that the couple had accessed fertility treatment  in
       India
    v) the undisputed fact of the couple having cohabited in the  UK  before
       the appellant returned to India
   vi) the standard of proof


Dealing with the last point first, we did not find  that  the  reference  at
[15] to "doubt" about the appellant's intentions could show that  the  wrong
standard of proof was applied. This is not reflected in the  approach  taken
by the Judge across  the  decision  as  a  whole.  The  correct  burden  and
standard of proof was set out at [7].

It was not our view that any of the  other  points  raised,  even  at  their
highest and in combination, were sufficient to show an error such  that  the
outcome of the appeal would have been different. In essence, the  First-tier
Tribunal  Judge  found  that  the  appellant's  extensive  overstaying,  the
unreliable  evidence  provided  by  him  and  his  sister  to  explain  that
overstaying and his failure to return to India, even  when  his  sister  met
and married Mr Harford in 2006, indicated that his intentions regarding  his
marriage were not genuine.  On  the  contrary,  as  stated  at  [15],  these
matters showed "his determination to remain in this country  by  any  means"
and showed that he did not have a  genuine  intention  to  live  permanently
with the sponsor.

It was clearly open to the First-tier Tribunal to find that the  appellant's
history and the unreliable evidence weighed heavily against him and were  an
accurate indication of his motivation in entering  into  the  marriage.  The
judge sets out her detailed reasons for reaching this conclusion at [12]  to
[14].  The appellant argues that insufficient or no  weight  was  placed  on
material parts of  the  evidence  such  as  the  telephone  bills,  internet
communication, the sponsor's explanation for the absence of  her  family  at
the wedding, and the evidence  of  the  brother-in-law.  This  evidence,  he
submits, was capable of showing that  his  marriage  was  genuine.   In  our
view, on a fair reading of  the  decision,  where  the  judge,  as  she  was
entitled  to,   considered  that  the  appellant's  history  and  unreliable
evidence fatally damaged his claim, this other evidence could not have  made
a difference to the outcome of the  claim.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  found
that the appellant did not  have  a  genuine  intention  to  live  with  the
sponsor but pretended that he did in order to gain entry to the UK  and  his
pretence extended to his keeping in contact with the  sponsor  by  telephone
and internet after he went back to India,  seeking  fertility  treatment  in
India and so on.

It did not appear to us that Mr Harford's evidence could take  matters  much
further. The judge  noted  it  at  [14(i)]  and  [14(iii)].  In  the  latter
paragraph, it was found that the evidence of the appellant's sister was  not
reliable because she was "complicit"  in  the  appellant's  overstaying  and
that conclusion is not challenged. The same can only apply  to  Mr  Harford,
however, who also knew of the appellant's illegal status for some years  but
appeared untroubled by it,  even  though  no  explanation  at  all  was  put
forward for the appellant needing to be here between 2006  when  his  sister
began her relationship with Mr Harford and 2010 when he met the sponsor.

The judge, was not, in any event, obliged  to  address  every  part  of  the
evidence before her. The reasons given are clear and  inform  the  appellant
adequately as to why  his  intentions  as  regards  his  marriage  were  not
accepted as genuine.

For these reasons we did not  find  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal  disclosed an error on a point of law such that it  should  be  set
aside.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal did not err and the decision of Judge  Morris  shall
stand.


Signed:     [pic]                            Date: 22 June 2013
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
