

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/10126/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On: 5th October 2016                      |On: 6th October 2016             |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                         MD Shafiul Bashar Chowdhury
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     -
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh date of birth  18th  February
    1989.


 2. This appeal concerns the Respondent's decision, dated 26th August 2014,
    to refuse to grant the Appellant leave to  remain  and  to  remove  him
    pursuant to s10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act  1999.    The  reason
    given for that  decision  was  the  Respondent's  conclusion  that  the
    Appellant  had  sought  to  obtain  leave   by   deception,   following
    information being supplied to the Respondent by the Educational Testing
    Service (ETS) that an  anomaly  had  been  identified,  indicating  the
    presence of a proxy test taker, in an English language test purportedly
    taken by the Appellant on the 19th November 2013.  The application  for
    further leave had also been refused because  the  Appellant's  CAS  had
    been invalidated.

 3. On appeal the Appellant objected to the deception  allegation.  He  put
    the Respondent to proof and pointed out that he  had  achieved  an  HND
    diploma and a BA degree both taught  in  the  English  language.  In  a
    decision  dated  28th  January  2015  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Dickinson) found for the Appellant.  Judge  Dickinson  found  that  the
    Respondent had not discharged the burden of proof and  the  appeal  was
    allowed.

 4.  The Respondent appealed and in a decision dated the 8th May 2014 Upper
    Tribunal Judge Plimmer found there  to  be  no  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  and  dismissed  the  Respondent's
    appeal.

 5. The Respondent pursued the matter to the Court of Appeal. In a decision
    dated 29th June 2016 and published as Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department v Muhammad Shehzad and MD Chowdhury [2016] EWCA Civ 615  the
    Court held that both First-tier and Upper Tribunal had erred  in  their
    interpretation of the applicable evidence and law. The  initial  burden
    that lay on  the  Secretary  of  State  was  an  evidential  one  only.
    Following the decisions  of  the  President  McCloskey  J  R  (Gazi)  v
    Secretary of State (ETS - Judicial Review) [2015] UKUT 00327 (IAC)  and
    SM and Ihsan Qadir v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2016]
    UKUT 229 (IAC) it had to be accepted that the evidence  that  had  been
    provided sufficed to surmount the "comparatively modest  threshold"  of
    the evidential burden. That evidence consisted of written statements by
    Mr Millington and Ms Collins. These statements  had  been  produced  in
    respect of this Appellant. The  burden  had  been  discharged  and  the
    Tribunals below had been wrong to find otherwise.

 6. The Court of Appeal directed that this burden having  been  discharged,
    it was for the Appellant to produce a plausible  innocent  explanation.
    If he could do so, the burden would shift  back  to  the  Secretary  of
    State, upon whom the final legal burden rests. It  was  on  that  basis
    that the matter has now been remitted to this Tribunal.

 7. The Appellant was not represented before me; he does not appear to have
    engaged with these proceedings since 2014.  Maya  Solicitors,  who  had
    formerly represented him, came off record  in  September  2016.   I  am
    satisfied that the Tribunal has served notice of this hearing  in  good
    time to the Appellant's last known address in Bangladesh such  that  if
    he wished to make any representations, he could have done.

 8. No evidence has been submitted by the  Appellant  since  December  2014
    when the bundle was lodged with the First-tier Tribunal.    As  I  note
    above the gist of his case was then that the Respondent had to  provide
    better evidence than she had; for the reasons set out in Gazi and Qadir
    this argument was misconceived.  The Appellant pointed out that he  had
    passed his degree and HND diploma. I am not satisfied that these  facts
    go to the question of whether or not he used a proxy test taker back in
    November 2013. He may be able to  speak  and  write  English  but  that
    cannot in itself provide even a partial  answer  to  the  Secretary  of
    State's allegations. The Appellant has elected, unlike  the  appellants
    in Qadir, not to provide any credible evidence that he did in fact take
    the test. He has not provided any plausible innocent explanation as  to
    why the results may have been as they were.  Taking the evidence  as  a
    whole I am satisfied that the Secretary of  State  has  discharged  the
    legal burden to show that the Appellant did exercise  deception.  There
    would appear to be no argument that his CAS was in fact invalidated and
    so he could not in any event be granted leave as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student Migrant. The appeal is accordingly dismissed.


      Decisions

 9. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law
    and it is set aside,


10. The decision in the  appeal  is  remade  as  follows:  "the  appeal  is
    dismissed".









                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                    5th
                                October 2016
