
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA101662014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 June 2016                                |On 14 June 2016               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     upper tribunal DEPUTY judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

                              FAIZEEN MOZAMMEL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Shafiul Tauhid (Friend)
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant a citizen of Bangladesh, appeals with permission  to  the
    Upper Tribunal against the decision of  a  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Hands) which in a decision promulgated on 13th October  2015  dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision to curtail his
    leave to enter or remain as a student.

 2. Before me, Mr Norton appeared  for  the  Respondent.   The  Appellant's
    friend Mr Tauhid attended on his behalf and sought permission to  speak
    for the Appellant.  Mr Norton raised no objection to this  request  and
    because this is an out-of-country appeal, I informed Mr Tauhid I  would
    give him permission to address me.  I find in any event, in view of  Mr
    Norton's submissions, this appeal can be dealt with quite briefly.

Background

 3. The Appellant's case is one of those which falls into  the  "relatively
    substantial cohort of so-called 'ETS/TOIEC' cases". The  Appellant  was
    granted entry clearance as a student with leave valid until 30th August
    2014.  His leave was curtailed on 25th July 2014 when  information  was
    received from ETS that a proxy test taker had been present at the  time
    of his TOIEC test.  The Appellant's leave was curtailed under paragraph
    323(1) with reference to paragraph 322(2)  of  the  Immigration  Rules,
    that is to say the Respondent was satisfied  that  deception  had  been
    used to gain entry to the UK.

 4. At the time the Appellant's leave was actually  curtailed,  he  was  in
    Bangladesh.  He had returned there on 28th July 2014 because his mother
    had died.  When he sought re-entry to the UK on 31st July 2014  he  was
    refused at Gatwick Airport, turned round, and sent back  to  Bangladesh
    on the next flight out.

 5. The Appellant appealed the  decision  to  refuse  him  entry  and  this
    encompasses the curtailment of his leave and the paragraph 323(2) issue
    of deception.

 6. The Appellant's appeal came before the  First-tier  Tribunal  at  North
    Shields on 22nd September 2015.  As the appeal  was  an  out-of-country
    one, it was heard on the papers. In a written decision  promulgated  on
    13th October 2015 the FtT dismissed the appeal.

UT Hearing/Error of Law

 7. When the matter came before me, Mr Norton accepted the FtT in coming to
    its decision has erred by applying the wrong  standard  and  burden  of
    proof when dealing with  the  matter  of  deception.  The  Respondent's
    refusal to allow the Appellant entry, is based  on  a  claim  that  the
    Appellant has used deception in gaining entry in the past. It  is  well
    accepted law that in cases such as these the burden of  proof  is  upon
    the Respondent.

 8. I am satisfied that the decision of the FtT contains a  material  error
    requiring it to be set aside. My reasons for so  finding  are  set  out
    below.

 9. In [5] of her decision the judge says the following:

         "I bear in mind that the Appellant has the burden  as  establishing
         on a balance of probabilities  that  she  (sic)  comes  within  the
         relevant Regulation at  the  time  of  the  decision  made  by  the
         Respondent.  In this case the Appellant has been granted  leave  to
         enter the United Kingdom in terms of the points-based system  as  a
         student.  This leave was  curtailed  under  paragraph  323(1)  with
         reference to 322(2) which  states  that  leave  to  remain  can  be
         curtailed where false representations have been made or  there  has
         been a failure to disclose any material facts for  the  purpose  of
         obtaining leave to enter or an order to  obtain  documents  from  a
         third party required in support of the  application  for  leave  to
         enter.

         The standard of proof is on the balance of probabilities.  This  is
         the  standard   of   proof   I   have   applied   throughout   this
         determination."

    Further at [13] and [14] the judge says this:

         "The only information available for the  Respondent  is  the  IS82A
         notice served on the Appellant.  The notice makes it clear the UKBA
         had received information from  the  ETS  that  an  anomaly  in  the
         Appellant's speaking test indicated the presence of  a  proxy  test
         taker.  I have no further information from the  Respondent  in  the
         file.

         There is no documentation in the file from either side as to how it
         came about ETS discovered a proxy  test  taker  had  been  used  in
         respect of the Appellant's speaking test."

10. It is clear that this decision cannot stand.  The judge has misdirected
    herself in law and this has led her into error in her approach  to  the
    evidence. It is quite clear from the  above  paragraph,  that  she  has
    failed to understand, that if  there  is  a  gap  in  the  Respondent's
    evidence then this is a factor which if properly addressed, may lead to
    the conclusion that the Respondent  has  not  made  out  the  case  for
    deception. The judge's reasoning renders the whole decision flawed.

11. Mr Norton accepted, that the Rule 24 response does  attempt  to  defend
    the FtT's decision  so  far  as  the  Article  8ECHR  private  life  is
    concerned. He did accept however if I were to  find  a  material  error
    concerning the deception issue, then it would be  appropriate  for  the
    whole case to be remitted for a fresh hearing.  He  accepted  that  the
    Article 8 ECHR issue effectively forms part of the  whole  appeal.   He
    also submitted that, in fairness, the  Appellant  should  be  given  an
    opportunity to place any further evidence that he wished to  do  so  on
    that aspect of the appeal.

12. The Appellant's friend, Mr Tauhid, agreed  that  a  rehearing  was  the
    appropriate course of action.  He did suggest that  the  Appellant  may
    wish to have his case heard now as an  oral  hearing,  with  Mr  Tauhid
    appearing as a witness  in  order  to  give  further  evidence  on  the
    Appellant's behalf.

13. If the Appellant wishes the matter to be set down for an  oral  hearing
    then he will of course have to arrange to pay the relevant upgrade fee.

Notice of Decision

I find that the making of the decision by the First-tier  Tribunal  contains
an error of law and I therefore set  aside  the  decision.   The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge Hands) for that  Tribunal  to
remake the decision.





No anonymity direction is made.

Direction

 1) The Appellant should pay the appropriate fee within 28  days  in  order
    for the matter to be relisted as an oral hearing.


 2) Once the fee is paid the matter should be relisted for an oral  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal in liaison with Mr Tauhid who appears as
    the Appellant's friend.  If the appropriate fee is not paid  within  28
    days then the matter should be relisted as a paper hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.






Signed   C E Roberts                    Dated         11 June 2016


Upper Tribunal Deputy Judge Roberts
