

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/10799/2013
                                                               OA/10798/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London                  |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28 November 2014                           |On 2 January 2015            |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ROBERTSON


                                   Between

                           MRS ASHO HAJI DINI (A1)
                        MISS HAJIYA AWES SHEIKH (A2)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                               KENYA (NAIROBI)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr E Nicholson, Counsel, instructed by Irving & Co,
                  Solicitors
For the Respondent:   Mr T Wilding, Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
Claim History


1. A1 and A2 are  nationals  of  Somalia  residing  in  Kenya.  A2  is  the
   granddaughter of A1. The latter, whose date of birth is 10  March  1949,
   applied for leave to enter the UK as an elderly  dependent  relative  of
   the Sponsor. She is his mother.  Her  application  was  made  under  the
   provisions of Appendix FM of HC 395, as amended (the Immigration Rules).
   A2, whose date of birth is 10 February 2001 and  who  resides  with  A1,
   applied for leave to enter as a dependent relative of the Sponsor. A2 is
   his niece. Her application was under paragraph 297  of  the  Immigration
   Rules.


2. Their applications were refused on 10 April 2013. This  was  because  A1
   was not able to establish that that she met the provisions of  paragraph
   EC-DR.1.1 (d) of Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules  because  (i)  she
   did not provide evidence that she required long term  personal  care  to
   perform day to day tasks due to her physical or mental health; and  (ii)
   under paragraph E-ECDR.3.1, she was not able to establish that she could
   be maintained and accommodated by the Sponsor without recourse to public
   funds. A2's application was refused because (i) it was  not  established
   that there were serious and compelling reasons family or  other  reasons
   which made her exclusion from the UK undesirable, pursuant to  paragraph
   297(i)(f) of the Immigration Rules; and (ii) there was  no  evidence  to
   establish that the Sponsor could maintain and accommodate the  Appellant
   without recourse to public funds, pursuant to  paragraph  297  (iv)  and
   (v).

3. The Appellants appealed against the decisions. Their appeals were  heard
   by First-tier Tribunal Judge Plumptre on 6 December 2013, who  dismissed
   the appeals on all grounds. The Appellants were  granted  permission  to
   appeal against her decision and their appeals were heard by Deputy Upper
   Tribunal Judge Mailer, who allowed the appeals, set aside  the  decision
   of Judge Plumptre and remitted the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for
   a rehearing of all the issues.

4. The rehearing took place before First-tier Tribunal Judge Hodgkinson  on
   23 July 2014. He dismissed the appeals, finding that A1 was not able  to
   meet the provisions of paragraphs E-CDR.2.4 and 2.5, and A2 was not able
   to meet the provisions of paragraph 297 (i)(f). Due to this, he did  not
   go on to consider whether the maintenance and accommodation requirements
   were met by either Appellant.


5. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge
   Macdonald on 21 October 2014.  Between  the  time  that  permission  was
   granted and the matter coming before me on 28 November 2014, the grounds
   of application had gone astray and neither Mr Wilding nor I had a  copy.
   A Rule 24 Response (the Response) was filed, a copy of  which  had  been
   sent to the Appellants' representatives the day before the  hearing  but
   it was apparent that neither Mr Nicholson nor  Mr  Wilding  had  seen  a
   copy. The Response was brief; it was stated therein that "The respondent
   does not oppose the appellant's  (sic)  application  for  permission  to
   appeal and invites the Tribunal to determine the  appeal  with  a  fresh
   oral (continuance) hearing to consider paragraph 297(i)(f)." Mr  Wilding
   was surprised at the contents of the Response, and indicated that he was
   likely to withdraw it but would like to reserve his decision until after
   he had read the grounds of application. I rose to enable Mr  Wilding  to
   read the grounds of application.


6. On resuming the hearing, Mr Wilding confirmed that  he  was  withdrawing
   the Rule 24 Response because, having read the grounds of application, he
   did not accept that the Judge had  not  properly  dealt  with  paragraph
   297(i)(f). He stated that he was not sure whether the person who drafted
   the Response had had sight of the grounds of application or only a  copy
   of the grant of permission, which was all that he had on  his  file.  He
   submitted that there was nothing within the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
   Tribunal) Rules 2008, as amended (the Procedure Rules), which  prevented
   him  from  withdrawing  the  response,  that  the  Appellants  were  not
   prejudiced by withdrawal of it because Mr  Nicholson  had  not,  in  any
   event, seen a copy of it and therefore had prepared for the  hearing  on
   the basis of the grounds of application and the grant of permission.


7. Mr Nicholson,  on  this  issue,  stated  that  there  was  no  provision
   permitting a withdrawal of a response (or for that matter, a reply filed
   to deal with a response) and therefore, once a Rule 24 response had been
   filed, it could not be withdrawn. The whole purpose of the procedure, Mr
   Nicholson submitted, was to ensure that there was  a  narrowing  of  the
   issues before the matter came before the Upper  Tribunal  and,  for  his
   part, the outcome suggested  in  the  Response  was  a  very  acceptable
   outcome as far as the Appellants were concerned and he  wanted  to  make
   clear his view that a Rule 24 Response could not be  withdrawn  once  it
   had been filed.


8. By way of background, against which the grounds of application are  set,
   Mr Nicholson submitted that the  Sponsor  fled  from  Somalia  initially
   going to Kenya and arriving in the UK when he was 13 years old.  He  was
   granted refugee status and became a naturalised British citizen in 2010.
   A1's mother, the Sponsor's sister, died in childbirth. A1's  mother  and
   A2 formed part of the Sponsor's pre-flight family. A1 has been cared for
   by A2 since her mother died. The Appellants went to  Kenya  in  2005  or
   2006, they re-established contact with the Sponsor in 2006 and they  had
   been financially dependent on him since they re-established contact. The
   Sponsor then attempted to pursue a 'family reunion' application at  some
   point in the past but  had  to  abandon  this  application  due  to  his
   circumstances in the UK.  There was no dispute before the  Judge  as  to
   the circumstances in which the Sponsor came to the  UK,  his  status  or
   that the Appellants  were  financially  dependent  on  the  Sponsor.  Mr
   Nicholson submitted that had the  Sponsor  pursued  the  family  reunion
   application when it was initially made, they would have been entitled to
   entry clearance on the basis of a policy which had since been withdrawn.
   The family had been fragmented by his fleeing Somalia to seek asylum  in
   the UK.


9. Mr Nicholson further submitted that the relevant provisions  within  the
   Immigration Rules under which the applications for entry clearance  were
   assessed are set out in full  in  the  determination  at  [6  -  7].  In
   relation to A2, the ECO stated that her position  was  no  different  to
   other children in Kenya and the Sponsor could relocate to Kenya to enjoy
   family life with her. These reasons were relevant to her  decision  that
   there were no serious and compelling family and other reasons which made
   her exclusion from the UK undesirable and that her right to family  life
   under Article 8 ECHR was not breached by  the  refusal  to  grant  entry
   clearance. As to A1's application, it was refused because there  was  an
   absence of evidence regarding her need for care under Appendix FM and FM-
   SE.

10.   As  to  the  grounds  of  application  submitted  on  behalf  of   the
   Appellants, taken together with Mr Nicholson's oral  submissions,  these
   fell under 3 heads as follows:

 The failure to determine issues central to the Respondent's decision  under
 subparagraph 297(i)(f) of the Immigration Rules (Ground 1)


11. The Respondent in the notice of decision relating to A2 stated  that  it
   was not established that there were serious and compelling  reasons  why
   it was undesirable for A2  to  be  excluded  from  the  UK  because  her
   circumstances were no different from other children in Kenya  and  there
   was nothing to prevent the Sponsor, upon whom she was  dependent,  going
   to live with her there. However, A2 was a child without status in Kenya;
   there is nothing within the determination to suggest that the Judge  did
   not accept that this was the case. The Respondent's reliance  on  family
   life continuing in Kenya was significant because the Court of Appeal  in
   Husna Begum v ECO (Dhaka) [2001] INLR 115 had accepted that the  ability
   of a sponsor to live with an applicant outside the UK was  relevant  for
   the purposes of determining the 'far more stringent'  "most  exceptional
   compassionate circumstances test" under paragraph 317 of the Immigration
   Rules. What A1 needed to establish  was  that  there  were  serious  and
   compelling 'family' or 'other' reasons which made her exclusion form the
   UK undesirable.


12. As the Court of Appeal in Husna Begum accepted that the ability  of  the
   sponsor to live with an applicant in the country in which the  applicant
   was  based  was  a  relevant  factor  for  the  purposes  of  the  'most
   exceptional compassionate circumstances' test  of  sub  rule  317(i)(f),
   that sub rule could therefore be met if the Sponsor was unable  to  live
   abroad. Therefore, if this was read across to paragraph 297(i)(f),  that
   sub rule could be met if the Sponsor in A2's case was not able  to  live
   in Kenya. The Respondent was aware that the issue of whether or not  the
   Sponsor  could  live  in  Kenya  fell  to  be  determined  and  it   was
   unsurprising that in the withdrawn Response the Respondent had  conceded
   that the issues under paragraph 297(i)(f) should be  re-determined.  The
   wording of the decision notice in respect of A2 was important;  the  ECO
   referred to the possibility of the Sponsor relocating  to  Kenya,  which
   would be reasonable if the Sponsor was a Kenyan national but  he  was  a
   British national and prior to that he had been a  national  of  Somalia.
   The inability of the  Sponsor  to  live  in  Kenya  was  a  serious  and
   compelling family reason which was why  the  Respondent  relied  on  her
   contention that the family could live together in Kenya. In the grounds,
   Mr Nicholson submitted that if the only country in which they could live
   together was  the  UK,  then  the  requirement  in  297(i)(f)  could  be
   satisfied.


13. A2 had no status in Kenya, the Sponsor could  not  make  an  application
   for settlement in Kenya; it was, as stated in  the  outline  submissions
   before the First-tier Tribunal, inconceivable that the Sponsor could  go
   and live in Kenya. The Sponsor must make an application to  enter  Kenya
   to join them and it must first be  established  that  he  had  relatives
   there. When asked what evidence there was  before  the  Judge  that  the
   Kenyan authorities would require the Sponsor to establish  that  he  had
   relatives in Kenya whom he was seeking to join, Mr Nicholson stated that
   it was the Respondent who had asserted that the Sponsor  could  live  in
   Kenya with the Appellants and it was therefore  for  the  Respondent  to
   prove that this was a route that was available to him. He submitted that
   the ECO must have thought that the Sponsor was previously Kenyan.

14. Mr Nicholson further submitted that in the  outline  submissions  before
   the First-tier Tribunal, at paragraph 14,  he  had  submitted  that  the
   Respondent had asserted that the Sponsor could join  the  Appellants  in
   Kenya, and had asserted that A2's circumstances were no  different  from
   other children in Kenya. As the assertions were made by the  Respondent,
   it was for the Respondent to prove. He submitted that you could not just
   walk into a country and live there.  The  Judge  had  to  find  why  the
   Sponsor could live in Kenya and by failing to do so, he  erred  in  law.
   This point was connected to the Husna Begum case and the application  of
   the principle in that case to paragraph 297(i)(f). The ECO was right  to
   raise it as an issue and findings should have been made on it.


15. Mr Nicholson stated that Mr Wilding would suggest that VW  (Uganda)  and
   AB (Somalia) v SSHD  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  5  would  meet  this  point.  At
   paragraph 45 of that case, in which the Court of Appeal was dealing with
   AB (Somalia) it was stated that there was no evidence that  the  sponsor
   or his family was entitled to reside in Ethiopia. However, the Court  of
   Appeal stated that case was not one of  enforced  family  break  up  and
   therefore the 'moral pressures were  different'.  In  the  case  of  the
   Appellants and the Sponsor, given  the  Sponsor's  immigration  history,
   there had been an enforced family break up; it was not  through  choice.
   As stated at paragraphs 17 - 19 of  VW  (Uganda)  the  decision  of  the
   Respondent frustrates family  life  and,  as  set  out  in  the  outline
   submissions to the First-tier Tribunal at paragraph 19,  Bean  J  citing
   from H (Somalia) [2004] UKAIT 27  in Yussuf v  SSHD  [2005]  EWHC  2847,
   stated "It cannot be right to approach the  disruption  to  family  life
   which is caused by someone having to flee persecution as a refugee as if
   it were of the same nature as someone  who  voluntarily  leaves  in  the
   normal course of the changes to family life  which  naturally  occur  as
   children grow up." The Sponsor had fled persecution. It was not open  to
   suggest that he could live in Kenya. Had he stayed in  Kenya,  he  would
   now be being rounded up and returned. He had no choice but  to  come  to
   the UK. The Judge did not deal with this point and his failure to do  so
   vitiated his determination.


16. The Judge also failed to determine whether or not the  circumstances  of
   A2  were  different  from  those  of  other  children  in   Kenya.   The
   Respondent's position on this point was untenable because it  cannot  be
   said that a child who has no status  in  Kenya  is  the  same  as  other
   children there, and the Judge failed to make findings on this issue.
   Therefore, one of the points on which the Respondent relied to establish
   that the requirements of paragraph 297(i)(f) were not met was untenable.




17. The second point on which the Respondent relied,  that  being  that  the
   Sponsor could live in Kenya, was  also  untenable.  The  Judge  made  no
   findings on these issues, which were pivotal to the Respondent's refusal
   of A2's application and he erred in law in failing to make  findings  on
   them.


 Material  misdirection  as  to  the  appropriate  standard  of   proof   in
 establishing the  existence  of  serious  and  compelling  "other"  reasons
 (Ground 2)


18. The main thrust of the grounds of application under this head  was  that
   as  the  Appellants  had  no  status  in  Kenya,  and  the  Respondent's
   Operational Guidance Note on Kenya dated December 2013 (OGN) set out the
   action taken by the Kenyan authorities against Somali nationals who  had
   no status in Kenya, the standard of proof  that  should  be  applied  in
   determining whether serious and  compelling  "other  reasons"  had  been
   established was not the balance of probabilities but  that  of  a  'real
   risk' that the Appellants would be rounded up. The Judge considered  the
   contents of the OGN and decided that this "(fell)  materially  short  of
   establishing that the appellants themselves ware more likely than not to
   be the subject of such treatment" because he did  not  accept  that  the
   risk was at such a level that it was more likely than not  that  A2  and
   her grandmother would suffer the actualisation of the risk.


19. Mr Nicholson submitted that A2 was  now  13  years  of  age.  The  Judge
   stated at [36] that he did not accept that she  was  infirm  as  is  now
   claimed. However, it was never suggested that A2 was infirm. It  was  A1
   who was infirm. The Judge referred to the OGN at [39] and he  was  aware
   that A2 had no leave to remain in Kenya. Mr Nicholson made it clear that
   he appreciated that the test for establishing that  there  were  serious
   and compelling family and other reasons which made it undesirable for A2
   to be excluded from the UK was a high test, but submitted that the Judge
   was wrong to state that the material before him, that is  the  OGN,  did
   not  "...reach  the  threshold  of  establishing  that  the   Appellants
   themselves are likely to be so treated..."  He  submitted  that  it  was
   tempting to consider  the  OGN  only  against  the  high  threshold  for
   establishing that there were serious and compelling other  circumstances
   under the Immigration Rules  but  the  serious  and  compelling  "other"
   circumstances must be set against the background of risk. The  only  way
   in which the Appellants could escape their circumstances was  by  making
   this application; they would remain at risk if they returned to  Somalia
   notwithstanding the Upper Tribunal country guidance decision on Somalia.
    The Judge found that the OGN did not establish that it was more  likely
   than not that the Appellants  will  be  ill-treated  in  Kenya  and  his
   findings would not survive an appeal under an asylum  application.  What
   the Judge should have said was that he recognised that  what  he  should
   consider was whether the real risk of being rounded up  and  ill-treated
   amounted  to  serious  and  compelling  other  reasons  which  made  the
   exclusion of A2 from the UK undesirable. The test was not whether it was
   more likely than not that the Appellants would be rounded up but whether
   there was a 'real risk' that  they  would.  He  submitted  that  it  was
   incompatible with the  UK's  obligations  under  Article  3  of  the  UN
   Convention on the Rights of the Child to permit  A2  to  be  exposed  to
   continuing risk (Ground 2).


20. It is stated in the grounds of application that it is  absurd  that  the
   Immigration Rules contemplate "...its being  consistent  with  the  UK's
   obligations under Article 3 of the UN Convention on the  Rights  of  the
   Child to allow a child to continue to  be  exposed  to  a  risk  of  ill
   treatment at the level of 'real risk' or 'a serious  possibility'  or  a
   'reasonable degree of likelihood' but where such ill treatment was  more
   likely than not to occur."


 Misdirection as to applicability  of  Appendix  FM  to  A2's  appeal  under
 Article 8 ECHR (Ground 3).


21.  Appendix FM makes no provision for the  consideration  of  A2's  appeal
   under Article 8 ECHR. The Judge recognised this at paragraph 30  of  the
   determination but then stated that he had  considered  both  Appellants'
   cases in accordance with Gulshan (Article 8 -  new  Rules)  [2013]  UKUT
   00640. This meant that the Judge had first considered whether the  Rules
   applied and then went on to decide if there were arguable grounds for  a
   grant of leave outside the  Rules  and  he  found  there  were  no  such
   arguable  grounds.  However,  Gulshan  was  predicated  on  Appendix  FM
   providing a 'complete code' for the determination of  appeals  based  on
   Article  8.  Gulshan  therefore  could  not  apply  when  there  is   no
   consideration at all under Appendix FM, as was the case for A2, and  the
   Judge erred in law in failing to consider the appeal of A2 under Article
   8 ECHR. In view of this, the Judge's consideration of A1's appeal  under
   Article 8 was  also  erroneous  in  law  because  "the  ability  of  the
   Judge....to decide whether there was any arguable basis for  her  appeal
   to succeed notwithstanding  her  not  having  met  the  requirements  of
   Appendix FM is stymied by his failure properly to determine  the  second
   Appellant's appeal" (see grounds of application).


22. Mr Nicholson submitted that what  the  Judge  stated  was  that  he  had
   considered the Appellants' appeals pursuant to Gulshan and he  was  "...
   satisfied that there are no arguable grounds for the issue for the grant
   of leave outside the Immigration Rules..." He submitted that  the  Judge
   was aware that it was only A1 whose appeal  could  be  considered  under
   Appendix FM. A2's appeal was considered under  paragraph  297.  However,
   the  Judge  suggested  that  he  had  considered  the  appeals  of  both
   Appellants  under  Appendix  FM.  In  the  grant  of  permission,  Judge
   Macdonald stated  that  Gulshan  was  predicated  on  the  premise  that
   Appendix FM provides a complete code but this could only be for cases in
   which the appeal of an Appellant  is  capable  of  being  decided  under
   Appendix FM. However,  paragraph  297  falls  outside  Appendix  FM,  as
   preserved by paragraph A280. Appendix FM had no application in the  case
   of A2 and the Judge stating  that  he  considered  that  there  were  no
   arguable grounds was a clear error of law.


23. Mr Nicholson also submitted that Gulshan had not survived the  Court  of
   Appeal decision MM (Lebanon) EWCA Civ 985, at paragraph 132 in which  it
   was held that there was no practical utility in applying  the  'arguable
   grounds' test. He submitted  that  the  Judge  should,  therefore,  have
   proceeded to apply the step by step approach in Razgar [2004]  UKHL  27;
   he should have asked if Article 8 was engaged, then if interference  was
   justified. The Respondent provided no evidence.  It  was  impossible  to
   reconcile the analysis of the Judge with the two stage test envisaged by
   MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 and which continued to apply under  MM
   (Lebanon). The problem with the determination, Mr  Nicholson  submitted,
   was that if A1's appeal could not succeed under the Immigration Rules or
   under Article 8, then it became a factor to be  taken  into  account  in
   determining the appeal of A2. However, the appeal of A2 should have been
   considered first, taking into account the duty of the UK under Article 3
   of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child and  the  duty  to  take
   into account the best interests of the child under s 55 of the  Borders,
   Citizenship and  Immigration  Act  2009.  Otherwise  the  appeal  of  A2
   amounted to little more than saying that the grandmother  was  with  her
   and therefore there are no serious or compelling reasons  for  admitting
   the niece. He submitted that A2's appeal  should  have  been  determined
   first.

24. In response, Mr Wilding submitted that:

25. Grounds 1 and 2 were inextricably intertwined. As to the  way  in  which
   the case was put on behalf of the Appellants, much of it was an  attempt
   to re-argue the issues. However,  permission  was  granted  because  the
   grounds were arguable; the grant of permission did  not  establish  that
   the Judge was wrong in law.


26. At paragraph 16 of the grounds, it is stated that it  is  'inconceivable
   that the Sponsor can live in Kenya.' However, it was not  inconceivable.
   In AB (Somalia) (the second appeal before the  Court  of  Appeal  in  VW
   (Uganda)), it was not accepted that it was inconceivable for the sponsor
   to live in Ethiopia, even though neither he nor  his  family  (who  were
   residing there) had  permission  to  reside  there  from  the  Ethiopian
   authorities. Otherwise, in all such cases it would not matter  what  the
   test was; in all such cases an applicant would be entitled to succeed on
   the basis of the nationality of the sponsor and that must be wrong.


27. As to the facts of AB (Somalia), these were set out at  paragraph  9  of
   VW (Uganda). The sponsor was not British. He was a Somalia national. The
   appellants in that case were the sponsor's wife and 6 children. They had
   lived in Ethiopia for many years without permission. In the case  before
   us, the Appellants had lived in Kenya for many years (from 2005 -  2014)
   without permission. The only difference between the cases was  that  the
   sponsor in AB (Somalia) had indefinite leave to remain in the UK and the
   Sponsor in the case before us was British. In AB  (Somalia),  Sedley  LJ
   stated that "It was in my judgement open to  the  immigration  judge  to
   infer that if the sponsor's family  could  reside  in  Ethiopia  without
   entitlement or leave, he could do so too...." Mr Wilding submitted  that
   the case before us was not of enforced family break up;  but  of  family
   reunion. It was not  the  only  option  for  the  Sponsor  to  join  the
   Appellants in Kenya. The current state of affairs could continue. It was
   also not inconceivable for the Sponsor to join the Appellants in  Kenya;
   as with AB (Somalia) it was open for the Judge to infer that he could go
   to Kenya. The Judge dealt with the issues that  he  needed  to  address;
   that is whether there were  serious  and  compelling  family  and  other
   reasons why exclusion from the UK was undesirable. He considered all the
   issues raised and these went against A2.


28. With regard to the standard of proof to be applied for the  serious  and
   compelling reasons test, Mr  Wilding  submitted  that  it  was  not,  as
   submitted by Mr Nicholson, no greater than  the  'reasonable  degree  of
   likelihood'  test.  That  applied  to  applications   for   asylum   and
   humanitarian protection. The test was the balance  of  probabilities  as
   provided in E-A (Article 8 - best interests  of  child)  Nigeria  [2011]
   UKUT 00315 (IAC). At para 30 of E-A, Mr Justice Blake  made  clear  that
   the burden of proof was on the appellant and the standard of  proof  was
   the balance of probabilities and this was confirmed in  Naz  (subsisting
   marriage - standard of  proof)  Pakistan  [2012]  UKUT  00040(IAC).   As
   stated in the headnote (i)to Naz:

                "...It is for a claimant to establish that the  requirements
                of the Immigration Rules are  met  or  that  an  immigration
                decision would be an interference  with  established  family
                life. In both cases, the relevant standard for  establishing
                the facts is the balance of probabilities."

29. The only time where the lower standard of proof applies is  where  there
   has been a claim to Article 3 protection, it has  not  been  established
   that an applicant is at risk and historical ill-treatment 'morphs'  into
   the Article 8 assessment.


30. Mr Wilding submitted that the Judge had  considered  the  test  at  head
   note (iv) of Mundeba (s.55 and paragraph 297(i)(f))  [2013]  UKUT  00088
   (IAC). At paragraphs 44 - 45 of Mundeba, the Tribunal  stated  that  the
   threshold was not reached. The Tribunal in Mundeba then  looked  at  the
   circumstances of the appellant's case and decided that, even taking  the
   circumstances at their highest, it could not be said that he could  meet
   the test. The Judge, as far as A2 was concerned,  had  clearly  set  out
   that the 'serious and compelling reasons'  test  was  a  high  test,  as
   provided by Mundeba. He then fully considered all the points  raised  in
   favour of A2's appeal under paragraph 297(i)(f)  and  found  that  these
   could not meet the high test for  establishing  serious  and  compelling
   family and other circumstances.


31. With regard to Article 8, Mr Nicholson had submitted  that  Gulshan  had
   not survived MM (Lebanon). However, it was wrong to say that Gulshan was
   not good law; it dealt with the interplay between the Immigration  Rules
   and Article 8. Mundeba was promulgated before Gulshan and  the  Tribunal
   in Mundeba concluded that "where Article 8 is relied on  to  secure  the
   admission of a child to reside with a relative who has never  previously
   cared for him, whether the case is examined from the perspective of  the
   positive obligation to respect family life or the negative  one  not  to
   interfere with it save for justified and proportionate reasons of public
   interest, we doubt that  Article  8  adds  significantly  to  the  basic
   criteria of the family admissions rules."


32. Mr Wilding submitted that what Mr Nicholson seemed to be suggesting  was
   that in relation to A2, because her case fell under paragraph 297(i)(f),
   it was not considered under Appendix FM and  therefore  the  Immigration
   Rules could not be a complete code for a consideration of A2's Article 8
   rights. Mr Nicholson stated that that was not  what  he  had  submitted.
   Although this is in fact what Mr Nicholson submitted in the  grounds  of
   application, his stance before me had  shifted  so  as  to  include  the
   submission that the provisions of paragraph  297  were  insufficient  to
   take into account all factors which would need to  be  considered  under
   Article 8. Mr Wilding submitted that  paragraph  297  and  the  need  to
   consider serious and compelling family and other reasons was  sufficient
   to encompass all relevant factors. The Judge directed himself  properly,
   his conclusions were properly open to him and he did  not  need  to  set
   them all out again in the context of an Article 8 assessment outside the
   Rules. Mr Wilding submitted that the Judge confirmed that he  had  taken
   into account the factors relevant to A2's case at [47] and his reasoning
   follows that of Mundeba closely. The Judge was aware that  the  solution
   to the issues of Article 8 was not that the Sponsor should go  and  live
   with the Appellants. He noted at [48] that there was no reason  why  the
   Sponsor could not maintain contact.


33. Mr Wilding also submitted that in fact, the Judge did go on to  consider
   Article 8 in the alternative. He identified the public interest at  [49]
   and  referred  to  having  taken  it  into  account  in  the  'balancing
   exercise'. However,  he  would  only  need  to  consider  the  balancing
   exercise if he was considering proportionality. He either  did  consider
   proportionality or he did not.  Mr Wilding further  submitted  that,  as
   provided in FK and BK (Botswana) [2013] EWCA Civ 238 and AAO [2011] EWCA
   Civ 840, the public interest in immigration control was  underpinned  by
   sound economic reasons, which is why the  Tribunal  in  Mundeba  doubted
   that consideration of Article 8  issues  outside  the  Rules  would  add
   significantly to the family admissions rules.

34. Mr Nicholson, in reply, submitted that although it was submitted  by  Mr
   Wilding that there was no difference between the Sponsor and the sponsor
   in AB (Somalia), the sponsor in that case was not a refugee.  There  was
   no recognition that he had  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution.  The
   Sponsor in this case  was  trying  to  return  to  the  situation  which
   prevailed before he fled; the split in the family was due to persecution
   not choice.

35. As to Mr Wilding's submission that he was simply trying to re-argue  the
   merits of the case, Mr Nicholson submitted that he was simply attempting
   to get the decision properly made. In AB (Somalia)  the  Respondent  did
   not rely on an assertion that the sponsor there could live in Kenya. The
   Respondent did in the case of this Sponsor and it was no answer  to  say
   that the Appellants would have to prove that the Sponsor could not  live
   with them in Kenya. The standard of proof in  relation  to  establishing
   risk was the same as in an asylum application; if A2 was left  alone  in
   Somalia, she would face real risk  and  the  reference  to  Mundeba  was
   therefore misleading; the decision in this case would be lifesaving.  If
   A2 was sent back to Somalia she would be killed  by  Al-Shabab,  without
   even considering the risk of being rounded up in Kenya, detained,  raped
   and returned to Somalia, as recognised by the Respondent's own  OGN.  It
   was misleading to say that the stringent  test  was  not  met  when  her
   situation in Kenya was life threatening. She was not like other children
   in Kenya; other children were not at risk of being rounded  up.  She  is
   not attempting to enter the UK because education  here  is  better.  The
   Judge had to decide if there were  serious  and  compelling  family  and
   other reasons. He failed to ask the right question. It was  not  whether
   A2 fell materially short of the 'more likely than not test'.   This test
   was not right in the absence of clear authority.


36. With regard to Ground 3,  Mr  Nicholson  asked  whether  the  Judge  had
   complied with the law in Gulshan and Nagre. He submitted  that  whatever
   Mr Wilding submitted the Judge had done between paragraphs 47 and 49  he
   did not carry out a second  stage  test.  He  now  also  submitted  that
   paragraph 297 was not in Appendix FM and the question  the  Judge  asked
   himself was whether they had met the provisions of Appendix FM.  If  the
   Judge found that there were no arguable grounds, he would have  to  find
   that paragraph 297 was a complete code. If it was not, he should  follow
   the proper approach to determining  the  Article  8  claim  outside  the
   Rules. Mr Nicholson finally submitted  that  the  decision  of  the  ECO
   clearly frustrates family life under Article 8. It  was  not  enough  to
   state that the status quo could be preserved. If the  parties  were  not
   reunited, there was still a breach of Article 8.


Analysis and reasons

Withdrawal of the Rule 24 Response


37. The procedure set down within the Procedure Rules for the  filing  of  a
   Response and a Reply may in some circumstances result in  the  narrowing
   of issues prior to the Upper Tribunal hearing. However, as stated by  Mr
   Wilding, due to the procedural failures which resulted  in  neither  him
   nor me receiving the grounds of application prior  to  the  hearing  and
   neither him nor Mr Nicholson having had sight of the Rule  24  response,
   it was not in fact the case that the issues before me had been  narrowed
   before the hearing.


38. Whilst there is no provision for the withdrawal of a  Rule  24  response
   once it has been filed, this  does  not  mean,  in  my  view,  that  the
   Respondent cannot withdraw it. The contents of the Rule 24 response  are
   analogous to a concession from the Respondent that the Judge  had  erred
   in law in his assessment under paragraph 297(i)(f)  of  the  Immigration
   Rules. Pursuant to NR (Jamaica) v SSHD [2009] EWCA  Civ  856,  there  is
   nothing before me which suggests that withdrawal of the concession would
   result  in  prejudice  to  the  Appellants;  the  concession  would  not
   necessarily mean that a redetermination of A2's appeal would result in a
   successful outcome. There was also nothing before  me  to  suggest  that
   there was bad faith on the part of Mr Wilding in his withdrawal  of  the
   concession. In the absence of the grounds of application, which were not
   before me or on the Respondent's file, the basis on which the writer  of
   the Response accepted that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law  was
   not clear. Furthermore, having read the grounds of  application,  it  is
   clear to me that the grounds were arguable,  permission was  granted  on
   the basis that the grounds were  arguable  and  Mr  Nicholson  had  come
   prepared to argue the grounds. This was not a case in which the contents
   of the Response had been communicated to the  Appellants  and  therefore
   they had been disadvantaged by the failure to prepare adequately for the
   hearing. Withdrawal of the concession would result in a  fair  and  just
   outcome, with both parties able to fully  argue  the  grounds.   In  the
   circumstances, I find that it was open to Mr  Wilding  to  withdraw  the
   Response and I accept the withdrawal of it.


Grounds of application


39. The main thrust  of  Mr  Nicholson's  submissions  was  that  the  Judge
   materially erred in law because he should have made specific findings in
   relation to the particular reasons given by the ECO for refusal of  A2's
   application; that the fact that the Sponsor was not able to join  A2  in
   Kenya was a sufficient reason, following the principle set out in  Husna
   Begum, for finding  that  there  were  serious  and  compelling  'family
   reasons' why exclusion of A2 from the UK was undesirable; that the Judge
   applied the wrong standard of proof  in  assessing  whether  there  were
   serious and compelling 'other reasons' why excluding her from the UK was
   undesirable because of the instability of country  conditions  in  Kenya
   and this factor alone meant that the lower standard of proof relevant in
   asylum applications should have been applied by him in deciding  whether
   the threshold was met; that A2's  appeal  should  have  been  considered
   first by the Judge because if she were to  be  granted  leave  to  enter
   either under paragraph 287 or under Article 8,  this  would  necessarily
   impact on the outcome of A1's appeal because A2 had always resided  with
   A1; and that the Judge was wrong to find that there was no arguable case
   for considering A2's Article 8 ECHR application outside the  Immigration
   Rules either because it could not be considered under the provisions  of
   Appendix FM or because the criteria set out in  paragraph  297  did  not
   permit a full consideration of all the factors that were relevant to  an
   assessment of proportionality under Article 8 (2).

40. The appeals of each Appellant must be decided on the  basis  of  whether
   or not they met the criteria set out in the particular Immigration  Rule
   under which they applied;  the  Judge  was  well  aware  that  different
   considerations applied to the determination of their appeals because  he
   clearly set out the relevant provisions within the Immigration Rules  at
   [22]. However, A2's circumstances in Kenya cannot be considered  without
   reference to those  of  A1;  she  has  always  lived  with  A1  and  the
   circumstances in which she  is  residing  are  relevant  to  considering
   whether or not there are serious and compelling family or other  reasons
   why her exclusion from the  UK  is  undesirable.  It  is  therefore  not
   arguable that the Judge should have considered the appeal of  A2  before
   he considered that of A1.


41. The standard of proof in relation to  entry  clearance  appeals  is  the
   balance of probabilities. This is clear  from  E-A  (Article  8  -  best
   interests of child) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00315 (IAC) and Naz  (subsisting
   marriage - standard of proof) Pakistan [2012] UKUT 00040(IAC). The  task
   of a judge is to consider the evidence presented  and  find  whether  it
   establishes that there  are  serious  and  compelling  family  or  other
   reasons why exclusion of A2 from the UK is undesirable. It  is  not  the
   case that the mere possibility of risk, in the absence of  any  evidence
   of persecution directed at the Appellants, was sufficient for a judge to
   apply the  lower  standard  of  proof  applicable  in  asylum  cases  to
   determining whether there were serious and compelling other reasons  why
   exclusion of A2 from the UK was undesirable. Mr Nicholson submitted  the
   OGN to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  establish  the  unstable  country
   conditions in Kenya to show  that  there  were  serious  and  compelling
   'other reasons' why A2 should not be excluded and that  what  the  Judge
   should have considered was whether  there  was  a  real  risk  that  the
   Appellants would be subjected to such treatment, not whether  they  were
   more likely than not to be subjected to such treatment.


42. The Judge directed himself properly to the burden and standard of  proof
   at [27]. There is nothing within  the  outline  submissions  before  the
   First-tier Tribunal to suggest that it was submitted to him that a lower
   standard of proof  applied  under  the  serious  and  compelling  'other
   factors' head and there is nothing within the determination  to  suggest
   that this was raised by Mr Nicholson  at  the  hearing.  There  is  also
   nothing to suggest that the Judge was asked to consider  the  background
   circumstances should be evaluated on the basis  of  real  risk  but  the
   threshold test of serious and compelling 'other circumstances' test  was
   to be evaluated against the more likely than not  test.  In  any  event,
   there is no evidence before me that A2 made an application under Article
   3 and, despite Mr Nicholson's submission that the Judge's application of
   the  civil  standard  of  proof  would  not  have  survived  an   asylum
   application, there was no evidence that the case was pleaded  on  behalf
   of A2 on the basis that she was at risk of ill-treatment under Article 2
   or 3 of the ECHR. This would have raised separate and distinct issues as
   to whether or not an out of country application can be made  for  asylum
   or protection under Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR. The correct test to be
   applied, and which was in fact applied by the  Judge  at  [42]  is  that
   which is set out in Mundeba. In reaching  his  decision,  he  took  into
   account the best interest of A2 at [47].


43. The Judge found, and he was entitled to find,  that  the  evidence  fell
   materially short of reaching the  threshold  of  establishing  that  the
   Appellants are likely to be ill-treated. A1 and A2 had resided in  Kenya
   since 2005 - 2006 and there was no evidence before the Judge that A1  or
   A2 had been harassed let alone ill-treated. The Judge set out  the  full
   extent  of  the  evidence  presented  by  Mr  Nicholson  as  to  country
   conditions in Kenya for Somali nationals  residing  there  at  [39].  At
   [40],  the  Judge  found  that  the  limited  material  before  him  was
   insufficient to establish  that  the  Appellants  themselves  were  more
   likely than not to  suffer  such  treatment.  This  is  the  balance  of
   probabilities standard as provided by E - A and Naz. There are therefore
   no material errors of law in the determination of the Judge in  relation
   to the burden or standard of proof; Ground 2 is therefore not made out.

44. For completeness, I would note that Mr Nicholson's submissions  included
   the assertion that, in the context of his submissions as to the relevant
   burden of proof, the reference by the ECO (and by extension  the  Judge)
   to Mundeba was misleading.  This  submission,  in  the  context  of  the
   standard of proof as stated in E - A and Naz, is without merit.

45. The Judge considered A1's appeal under the Immigration Rules.  No  issue
   is taken as to the findings of the Judge in relation to the inability of
   A1 to meet the Immigration Rules. Mr Nicholson submits that  the  Judge,
   at [41] referred to the health of A2 when considering her  appeal  under
   297(i)(f) and it had never been alleged that  A2  was  in  poor  health.
   However, it is clear from the determination read as  a  whole  that  the
   Judge, when considering the circumstances of A2 refers to her as Hajiya,
   when he refers to A1, he refers to the 'appellant' and when referring to
   both of them he refers to them as the 'appellants'. Therefore,  at  [38]
   when the Judge  states  that  he  has  "...already  indicated  that  the
   evidence before me does not establish  that  the  appellant  herself  is
   infirm, as is now claimed on her behalf", he is referring  back  to  his
   findings in relation to A1. At [41], the  Judge  states,  "With  further
   reference to Hajiya and paragraph 297(f) (sic),  I  reiterate  my  above
   findings  and  observations  regarding  the  appellant's   health,   the
   financial provisions provided by the sponsor to the appellants, and  the
   fact that Hajiya is clearly able to attend school, she having all of the
   necessaries of life." In so doing, when he refers  to  the  'appellant's
   health' he is only stating that it is not established that the appellant
   (ie A1) is in poor health and therefore not able to care for A2.


46. Mr Nicholson submits that the ECO had clearly  stated  that  A2  was  no
   different to other children in Kenya, and in fact she is not the same as
   other children in Kenya because she had no status. He submits  that  the
   Judge should have made findings  on  this  issue,  that  the  Respondent
   recognised that this was something that needed to be considered  in  the
   context of 297(i)(f), which is why the Response was  submitted.  In  the
   Notice of decision sent to A2, the ECO referred to part of the  headnote
   to Mundeba which set out the focus of the enquiry under  297(i)(f),  and
   he states:


         "...Looking at your personal circumstances, it is  noted  that  you
         live with your grandmother in  Kenya  who  has  applied  for  entry
         clearance and has been refused today. You attend  school  and  your
         accommodation, food and medical bills are paid by your  sponsor.  I
         do not therefore consider your circumstances in Kenya are different
         to those of other children living there..."


47. The fact that A1 has no status in  Kenya  had  not  prevented  her  from
   living there, being properly maintained and accommodated  and  accessing
   education, the latter being something that the appellant in Mundeba  was
   not able to do. The test in Rule 297(i)(f) is whether her circumstances,
   viewed as whole, establish that there are serious and compelling reasons
   why her exclusion from the UK is undesirable. The  Judge  found,  taking
   into account A1's circumstances viewed as whole, and this  included  the
   evidence within the OGN, that  there  were  no  serious  and  compelling
   circumstances why her  exclusion  from  the  UK  was  undesirable.  This
   finding was open to him on the facts before him. There was no  need  for
   the Judge to make a specific finding on whether A2 had status in  Kenya;
   it is implicit from his consideration of the facts that he accepted that
   she did not have status.

48. Mr Nicholson's detailed submissions on the Husna  Begum  point  are  set
   out in paragraphs -11 - 14 above. He submitted that the  Respondent  had
   specifically raised the fact that 297(i)(f) could  be  met  because  the
   Sponsor could travel to Kenya and this was an issue on which  the  Judge
   needed to make a specific finding. Mr  Nicholson  stated  that  the  ECO
   clearly thought that the Sponsor's ability to live abroad was a relevant
   factor,  and  that  the  Respondent  maintained  this  position  in  the
   withdrawn Response. He supported his submission by  analogy  with  Husna
   Begum. I disagree with Mr Nicholson that the  principle  established  by
   Husna Begum is that if the sponsor  in  that  case  could  not  live  in
   Bangladesh this satisfied the sub rule in 317(i)(f) and that this can be
   read across to Rule 297(i)(f) to confirm that if the Sponsor cannot live
   in Kenya, then it is established that that sub rule  is  met.  All  that
   Husna Begum establishes is that the ability of a sponsor to live with an
   applicant abroad is  one  factor  which  must  be  considered,  and  not
   necessarily the 'crucial or overwhelming factor' in deciding whether the
   applicant  is  'living  alone  in  the  most  exceptional  compassionate
   circumstances' (my emphasis), because the ability of a sponsor  to  live
   with the applicant abroad may mean that the applicant will not be living
   alone.

49. It is to be remembered that the test in 317(i)(f) is  not  the  same  as
   the test in 297(i)(f); the Judge was not considering if  A2  is  'living
   alone in the  most  exceptional  compassionate  circumstances';  he  was
   considering whether there were 'serious and compelling family  or  other
   reasons' why exclusion of A2 from the UK was undesirable. A2  had  never
   lived alone and she would not be living  alone  in  consequence  of  the
   ECO's decision. The  ability  of  the  Sponsor  to  live  in  Kenya  was
   therefore not a relevant consideration for  the  purposes  of  paragraph
   297(i)(f), whatever the ECO may have stated in the Notice  of  decision.
   It is also difficult to see why the Judge should  have  considered  A2's
   appeal before he considered that of A1; the outcome of A1's appeal would
   necessarily affect the assessment of the circumstances of  A2's  appeal.
   The Judge therefore did not err in law in determining A1's appeal  under
   the Immigration Rules before deciding that of A2.

50. There was no need for the Judge to make express findings on  whether  or
   not the Sponsor could live  in  Kenya  for  the  purposes  of  assessing
   whether or not there were serious  and  compelling  family  reasons  why
   exclusion of A2 from the UK was undesirable. This assessment  could  not
   be affected materially by a consideration of whether the  Sponsor  could
   continue family life with her in Kenya, particularly  when  it  was  not
   established that they had ever  lived  together;  that  was  a  separate
   question under Article 8 if the decision  of  the  ECO  interfered  with
   family life between them.

51. Mr Nicholson made various submissions as to the factors that  the  Judge
   should have taken into account when deciding whether there were  serious
   and compelling 'family reasons' which made the exclusion of A2 from  the
   UK undesirable. Seeking to draw on Yussuf and H (Somalia)  he  submitted
   that the circumstances  in  which  family  life  was  disrupted  were  a
   relevant factor; therefore, where  family  life  was  disrupted  due  to
   persecution, that was  a  relevant  'family'  consideration  which  made
   exclusion undesirable. He stated that although Mr Wilding would seek  to
   submit that the Court of Appeal in AB (Somalia)  recognised  that  in  a
   removal case the moral pressures were different from a case in which the
   parties had chosen to live  apart,  that  case  could  be  distinguished
   because the sponsor in AB (Somalia) had not been able to establish  that
   he had  fled  Somalia  due  to  persecution  and  he  himself  only  had
   indefinite leave to remain whereas the Sponsor had been recognised as  a
   refugee and was now a British national.


52. However, When the Court of Appeal  referred  to  the  'moral  pressures'
   being different in that case, it was a  reference  to  it  not  being  a
   removal case but a family reunion case. The appellants in that case were
   a mother and six children living illegally in Ethiopia. They applied for
   leave to enter the UK to join the husband and father,  who  had  entered
   the UK and had failed to secure a grant of asylum,  but  had  indefinite
   leave to remain. The appellants' applications had been  refused  by  the
   ECO.  The distinction in that case was not between disruption to  family
   life caused by persecution and disruption due  to  choice;  it  was  the
   difference between the disruption  to  family  life  by  removal  of  an
   appellant who was residing in the UK with his family and the  disruption
   to family life in an entry clearance case where the appellants  are  not
   currently  residing  with  the  Sponsor.  The  CA  reference  to  'moral
   pressures' being different in removal cases from  family  reunion  cases
   was in that context.

53. Mr Nicholson submitted that H (Somalia) and Yussuf were cases  in  which
   the family life of applicants and those they were  seeking  to  join  (H
   (Somalia)) or remain with (Yussuf) was disrupted due to persecution  and
   the fact that their circumstances were different was recognised  by  the
   Courts. The person the applicants were seeking to join  in  H  (Somalia)
   was a recognised refugee in the UK. H (Somalia) is directly relevant, as
   the applications made for entry clearance by the appellants  were  under
   paragraph 297. However, despite it being accepted  by  the  Tribunal  in
   that case that family life had been disrupted due to  persecution,  this
   was  insufficient  to  satisfy  the  test  under  Rule  297(i)(f).   The
   applicants' appeal in H (Somalia) was allowed to the limited extent that
   the Respondent had failed to consider the  position  of  the  appellants
   under the family reunion policy. This policy was not  available  to  the
   Appellants, even if it had at some time in the past  been  available  to
   them. Reliance on H (Somalia) on the basis that separation  between  the
   Appellants and the Sponsor took  place  due  to  persecution  is  not  a
   relevant factor for the purposes of the serious and compelling family or
   other reasons test. Neither  can  it  strengthen  their  position  under
   Article 8 in an entry clearance case, particularly where the  obligation
   of the UK to admit those whose family life has  been  disrupted  due  to
   persecution is contained with  the  family  reunion  provisions  of  the
   Immigration Rules. Yussuf is not directly relevant to a consideration of
   paragraph 297(i)(f).

54.  On the basis of the above, I find there are no material errors  of  law
   in the determination of the Judge in relation to  his  handling  of  the
   appeal of A2 under the Immigration Rules and Ground 1 is not made out.


55. Finally, in relation to  Article  8,  Mr  Nicholson  made  a  number  of
   submissions but none of them are capable of establishing that the  Judge
   materially erred in law. He submitted that the Judge erred  because  (i)
   he referred to being guided by Gulshan, which firstly did not survive MM
   (Lebanon), and secondly was predicated on the fact that  an  applicant's
   rights under Article 8 ECHR were adequately considered under Appendix FM
   but A2's appeal could not be considered under Appendix FM; (ii) he found
   that all the circumstances of A2 could properly be considered under Rule
   297(i)(f) and they could not; and (iii) there was no separate assessment
   of A2's appeal under Article 8 ECHR.

56. Does the approach in Gulshan survive MM (Lebanon)?  The  case  of  Aliyu
   [2014] EWHC 3919 (Admin), not referred to by either party,  is  directly
   relevant to the submissions made by Mr Nicholson as set out above, as is
   R (on the application of Esther Ebun Oludoyi & Ors) v Secretary of State
   for the Home Department (Article 8 - MM (Lebanon) (2014) and Nagre)  IJR
   [2014] UKUT 00539 (IAC) (Oludoyi) (which was not available at  the  date
   of hearing). In relation  to  the  question  of  whether  it  is  always
   necessary to conduct an Article 8  assessment  outside  the  Immigration
   Rules, Judge Grubb, sitting as Deputy Judge of the High Court,  after  a
   review of the relevant authorities, states, at paragraph 59,

         "In my judgment, the Secretary of State (apart from 'complete code'
         situations) always has a discretion  to  grant  leave  outside  the
         Rules.  That discretion must be exercised on the basis of Article 8
         considerations, in particular assessing  all  relevant  factors  in
         determining whether a decision is proportionate under Article  8.2.
         There is, in principle, no "threshold" criterion of  "arguability".
         I respectfully agree with what Aikens LJ said in this regard in  MM
         (at [128]).  However that factor, taken together with other factors
         such as the extent to which the Rules have taken  into  account  an
         individual's circumstances relevant to Article  8,  will  condition
         the nature and extent of the consideration required as a matter  of
         law by the Secretary  of  State  of  an  individual's  claim  under
         Article 8 outside the Rules.  If there is no arguable case, it will
         suffice for the Secretary of State simply briefly to say so  giving
         adequate reasons for that conclusion.  At the other extreme,  where
         there are arguable good grounds that the Rules  do  not  adequately
         deal with  an  individual's  circumstances  relevant  in  assessing
         Article 8, the Secretary of State must consider those circumstances
         and identifiably carry  out  the  balancing  exercise  required  by
         proportionality  in  determining  whether  there  are  "exceptional
         circumstances" requiring the grant of leave outside the Rules under
         Article 8.

57. Oludoyi provides, in the headnote:

         "There is nothing in R (Nagre) v  SSHD  [2013]  EWHC  720  (Admin),
         Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) Pakistan  [2013]
         UKUT 640 (IAC) or Shahzad (Art 8: legitimate aim) [2014] UKUT 00085
         (IAC) that suggests that a threshold test was  being  suggested  as
         opposed to making it clear that there was a need  to  look  at  the
         evidence to see if there was anything which has  not  already  been
         adequately considered in the context of the Immigration  Rules  and
         which could lead to a successful Article 8 claim. These authorities
         must not be read as seeking to qualify or fetter the assessment  of
         Article 8. This is consistent with para 128 of R (MM  &  Others)  v
         SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 985, that there is no utility  in  imposing  a
         further intermediate test as a preliminary to a consideration of an
         Article 8 claim beyond the relevant  criterion-based  Rule.  As  is
         held in R (Ganesabalan) v SSHD [2014] EWHC 2712 (Admin),  there  is
         no  prior  threshold  which  dictates  whether  the   exercise   of
         discretion  should  be  considered;  rather  the  nature   of   the
         assessment and the reasoning which are called for are  informed  by
         threshold considerations."

58. In the present case, what the Judge stated was  that  he  had  borne  in
   mind the reasoning in Gulshan when considering the appeal under  Article
   8 and that he was "...satisfied that there are no arguable  grounds  for
   the issue of the grant of leave to remain outside the Rules..."  This is
   because in his view there are  no  circumstances  which  have  not  been
   considered under Rule 297(i)(f) which, if they were considered, would be
   capable of establishing  a  right  to  a  grant  of  leave  outside  the
   Immigration Rules. The Judge's approach is consistent, in the  297(i)(f)
   context, with Mundeba at paragraph 49. It is also consistent  Aliyu  and
   Oludoyi and with the higher Courts, where it has consistently been  held
   that it is only in a small minority of cases that a grant of leave under
   Article 8 ECHR could be founded where an applicant has  failed  to  meet
   the Immigration Rules and that each case is fact specific.


59. The further difficulty that Mr Nicholson  has  is  that  the  Judge,  in
   fact, went on to support his view that there was no  arguable  case  for
   granting leave outside the Rules by considering the particular facts  of
   the case in the context of an Article 8 ECHR assessment, as set  out  at
   [47 - 50]. He starts by assessing the circumstances of the Appellants at
   [47]. He finds that contact can be maintained between  the  Sponsor  and
   the Appellants as it has been in the past at [48]. He takes into account
   that the Sponsor and the Appellants have not in  fact  resided  together
   for in excess of 10 years at [49]. He clearly refers to the decision  of
   the Respondent being in accordance with the law and sets out the need to
   balance  the  rights  of  the  Appellants  with  the  need  to  maintain
   immigration control, a legitimate public interest under Article 8(2). It
   is clear that the Judge had in mind  the  guidance  in  Razgar  when  he
   undertook this exercise even if it is not specifically referred  to.  It
   is not, of course, an error of law for a judge not to cite case  law  if
   it is clear that his decision was guided  by  the  relevant  principles.
   Ground 3 is therefore not made out.


60. I  find  that  Mr  Nicholson's  submissions  were  creative  but  lacked
   substance when properly analysed. There are no material errors of law in
   the determination of the Judge in relation to the appeals under  Article
   8 and I agree with Mr Wilding that Mr Nicholson was simply attempting to
   re-argue the merits of the case.

Decision


61. The determination of Judge Hodgkinson contains no  material  errors  of
    law and his decision therefore must stand.


62. The Appellants' appeals are dismissed.


63. There was no application for an anonymity order before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal or before us. In the circumstances of  this  case,  I  see  no
    reason to direct anonymity.
















Signed                                  Date

M Robertson
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


     In light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a fee award
(Rule 9(1) (costs) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules
2014 and section 12(4) (a) of the Tribunals Courts and Enforcement Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance Note: Fee Awards in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011). As the Respondent's appeal has been
dismissed, Judge Hodgkinson's fee award is confirmed.



Signed                          Dated

M Robertson
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
