
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: oa/10002/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                                |Determination promulgated  |
|on 3rd June 2013                                |on 6th June 2013           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                               SHARIQ MAHMOOD
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, Pakistan
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr A Caskie, Advocate, instructed by Latta & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who gives his date of  birth  as
    1st January 1970.  He sought entry clearance with a view to  settlement
    as the spouse of a person present and settled in the UK.

 2. By notice dated 4th May 2012 the Respondent refused the application for
    the following reasons.  The Appellant said that he married the  Sponsor
    on 23rd April 2000, but  he  did  not  produce  the  original  marriage
    certificate, and the Sponsor had four children by another father.   The
    ECO did not accept the Appellant's statement that the Sponsor  had  not
    been married or in a previous similar relationship.  The  ECO  was  not
    satisfied that the Appellant  had  any  significant  contact  with  the
    Sponsor and that  he  intended  to  live  permanently  with  her  in  a
    subsisting relationship.  The Sponsor was dependent on public funds and
    the Appellant had failed to show that he would be adequately maintained
    and accommodated in the UK without additional recourse to public funds.

 3. The refusal makes no mention of Article 8 of the ECHR.

 4. The Respondent appealed to the First-tier Tribunal, on generic  grounds
    which did not raise any specific  issues.   The  grounds  included  the
    statement, "The decision is unlawful because it  is  incompatible  with
    [the Appellant's] rights under the ECHR", without elaboration.

 5. First-tier Tribunal Judge Dennis dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal  by
    determination promulgated on 1st February 2013.  The  judge  found  the
    Sponsor a wholly unreliable witness (paragraph 24).  He found  it  more
    than likely that the Appellant if granted entry  clearance  would  also
    avail himself of State benefits.  "On this  basis,  alone,  the  appeal
    would fail" (paragraph 23).    However, the judge went on at  paragraph
    25 to accept that the Appellant and Sponsor were married in  2000,  and
    that the Appellant was, more likely than not, the father of her  oldest
    child.

 6. At paragraph 26 the judge considered Article 8, although observing that
    the matter had not been well developed either in the grounds of  appeal
    or in submissions.  The child had seen the Appellant once since he  was
    3 months old and the Sponsor had seen the  Appellant  only  twice,  and
    that recently, in nine years.  The judge was not satisfied that  family
    life existed:

         This is not to challenge the biological relationship, but merely to
         conclude that they do not share that particular  intimacy  born  of
         mutual interdependence which  characterises  a  functioning  family
         unit such as  is  protected  under  Article  8.   A  smattering  of
         greeting cards and letters in the last few months do not create the
         reality of a family life...  There is simply no  factual  basis  to
         conclude there is a family life experience between the Sponsor, the
         boy and the Appellant...  I  fully  recognise  that  in  the  usual
         circumstance the best interests of a child  would  require  regular
         involvement with both parents, but here it must  be  recognised  it
         was nine years before he  ever  met  his  father  or  had  anything
         whatever to do with him.  There is no bar to  him  developing  some
         contact in future.

 7. The Grounds of Appeal, both as presented to the First-tier Tribunal and
    to the Upper Tribunal, are rather prolix and do not disclose much  more
    than disagreement.  Assertions are made that the judge  speculated  and
    made perverse or irrational findings, and that he applied  too  high  a
    standard of proof, none of which are even properly arguable.  Mr Caskie
    (who was not, I think, the author of the grounds) did not pursue  those
    assertions.

 8. The grant of permission to appeal to the UT,  dated  11th  April  2013,
    says:

         The FtT Judge... drew attention to  irreconcilable  differences  in
         the Sponsor's evidence.  His findings as regards the subsistence of
         the marriage and the parties' intention to live  together  and  the
         Appellant's  future  employment   prospects   were   sustainable...
         Insofar as Article 8 is concerned the judge finds... that there was
         no effective family life.  It is, just  about,  arguable  that  the
         judge has  not  properly  considered  the  proportionality  of  the
         decision given that he has accepted that the child is probably  the
         Appellant's child and that there has been some contact.  Permission
         to appeal is therefore granted on the limited grounds of Article  8
         only.

 9. The grant of permission simply opens the door to  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    and should not be scrutinised as if it were  a  crucial  passage  of  a
    judgment; but it might be better  read  as  pointing  to  the  question
    whether the judge was entitled to hold that family life did not  exist.



10. In a reply to the grant of  permission,  dated  29th  April  2013,  the
    Respondent said:

         ...It is difficult to see on the facts, which are that the marriage
         is not subsisting, the lack of support or contact since 2008,  that
         an Article 8 case can be made out.

         ...As at the date of decision... the circumstances do not reveal  a
         situation, outside the biological relationship, that Article  8  of
         the ECHR could be engaged.

11. Mr Caskie referred at the outset to the Immigration  Rules  Schedule  B
    Section R-LTRPT 1.1 on the requirements for limited leave to remain "as
    a partner" and "as a parent or partner".  He accepted that these  Rules
    apply to those seeking leave to remain in the UK, not to those  seeking
    entry clearance, but he said that was irrelevant.  In an Article 8 case
    it made no difference if the person concerned was overseas  or  in  the
    UK.  The Secretary of State set out her view of proportionality for the
    purposes of these two Rules, and the balance must be the same in or out
    of country.  Apart from the in-country requirement, the Appellant could
    "tick all the boxes" of the Rules for leave to remain, and it  was  not
    open to the Secretary of State to argue that refusal of entry clearance
    was a proportionate step.

12. Mr Matthews submitted that this was an  argument  very  different  from
    anything to be found in either set of grounds.  The grounds, so far  as
    relevant, attack the judge's finding that there was no family life.  If
    so, that was the end of any case on Article  8.   Whether  family  life
    existed was essentially a question of fact for the  judge  to  resolve,
    under the broad principles summarised in  Macdonald's  Immigration  Law
    and Practice 8th ed. at paragraph 8.81.  The  Appellant  might  be  the
    natural father of  the  child,  but  he  had  been  found  to  have  no
    relationship as claimed with the Sponsor, and the level of contact with
    the child since the Sponsor left Pakistan in 2002-2003, when the  child
    was only months old, was minimal.  At best,  the  child  had  seen  his
    father for six weeks in 2011.  The findings on the existence of  family
    life were properly open to the judge and did not disclose error of law.
     The Rules both for entry clearance and for leave to remain required  a
    subsisting relationship,  and  that  had  not  been  established.   The
    Appellant had failed to show that he could meet the requirements of the
    entry clearance Rules as to maintenance.  Mr Matthews  did  not  accept
    that the Rules had to be overwritten by a requirement that there was no
    difference between an in-country and an out-of-country application.  It
    was valid to include different requirements in  the  respective  Rules.
    The argument to the contrary  would  make  large  parts  of  the  entry
    clearance Rules redundant.

13. Mr Caskie argued further that Article 8 had to pertain in the same  way
    to in-country and out-of-country cases, irrespective of any  difference
    the Rules might seek to impose.  As to the judge's decision that family
    life did not exist, he applied the incorrect test.  He should have held
    that a  natural  relationship  existed,  and  then  asked  whether  the
    circumstances  were  so  exceptional  as  to  break  that.   From   the
    Appellant's point of view,  there  had  been  a  lengthy  and  enforced
    separation during which he could not exercise contact with  his  child.
    The question of whether leave to enter should be granted  went  to  the
    best interests of the  child.   Even  if  the  judge  was  entitled  to
    conclude that family life did  not  exist,  this  then  collapsed  into
    private life issues.  The Presenting Officer had referred to  the  poor
    credibility of the Sponsor and of another witness,  but  that  did  not
    have any part to play in the Article 8 assessment.  It should have been
    found that there was  family  life,  that  there  were  no  exceptional
    circumstances to  break  the  link,  and  the  case  should  then  have
    succeeded under Article 8, taking account of the best interests of  the
    child.  So far as the child is concerned this  is  a  "domestic  case",
    with a threshold significantly lower than in a  "foreign  case".   This
    was another element with which the judge failed to deal.

14. I queried whether the matters now canvassed had effectively been raised
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  Mr Caskie submitted that the grant  of
    permission was sufficiently wide to enable any argument to be  run,  so
    long as it was related to the interests of the child, which was part of
    the Article 8 issue.  In short, Mr Caskie finally submitted, "Article 8
    is Article 8; the Appellant 'ticks all the  boxes';  focussing  on  the
    interests of the child and not of anyone else, proportionality requires
    the Appellant to be admitted, even if the maintenance  requirements  of
    the Rules could not be met".

15. I reserved my determination.

16. The submissions to the Upper Tribunal are far removed from any case put
    to the FtT, or even in the grounds of appeal to the UT.

17. The FtT Judge's decision under the Immigration Rules, the main issue to
    which he was directed, is impeccable.

18. The Respondent's reply to the grant of permission overstates that  side
    of the case, as there was at  least  some  evidence  beyond  biological
    relationship.

19. There is a presumption in  favour  of  the  existence  of  family  life
    between parent and child.  However, the continuing existence of  family
    life depends  upon  the  level  of  contact  and  the  quality  of  the
    relationship between them.  There is no error of  law  in  the  judge's
    approach to this issue  at  paragraph  26,  and  no  imposition  of  an
    incorrect legal test.  The question was primarily one of fact  for  the
    judge to determine on the evidence.  He was entitled to conclude as  he
    did.  The reasons given are more  than  adequate.   As  the  Presenting
    Officer submitted, if that conclusion is sustained that is decisive  of
    this further appeal.

20. I would not have upheld the submission that there can be no distinction
    for Article 8 purposes between in-country and out-of-country cases, and
    that  any  differential  requirements  such  as  the  maintenance   and
    accommodation  provisions  of  the  Rules  must  be  excised  from  the
    proportionality balance.  In most  cases,  an  in-country  appeal  will
    involve potential disruption of  an  existing  relationship.   In  many
    cases, an out-of-country appeal will raise  the  question  whether  the
    State should stand in the  way  of  further  development  of  a  family
    relationship.  While the State has positive duties to help  development
    of  family  life,  there  are  general  differences  between  the   two
    situations.  The State is entitled to consider the economic  impact  of
    decisions.  However, these considerations are not decisive for  present
    purposes.

21. It has not been shown that the determination of the First-tier Tribunal
    erred on any point of law, such as to require it to be set aside.  That
    determination shall stand.

22. No anonymity order has been requested or made.



[pic]

5 June 2013
Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
