
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/10237/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 31 July 2014                               |On 7 November 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                           Entry Clearance Officer
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         MR ANTONY JERAD VISHNUKUMAR
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant  (Entry Clearance Officer): Mr P Nath, Home Office
Presenting Officer
For the Respondent  (Mr Vishnukumar): Mr P Turner, Counsel instructed by
A P Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Entry Clearance Officer's appeal against a determination of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Onoufriou, who had allowed  Mr  Vishnukumar's
    appeal against the Entry  Clearance  Officer's  decision  refusing  his
    application for entry clearance.  For  ease  of  reference,  throughout
    this determination I shall refer to the Entry  Clearance  Officer,  who
    was the original respondent as "the Entry Clearance Officer" and to  Mr
    Vishnukumar, who was the original appellant, as "the claimant".

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Sri Lanka whose claimed date of birth is 2
    May 1995.  He applied for entry clearance to join his parents, who  are
    settled in the United Kingdom, under paragraph 297 of  the  Immigration
    Rules, but this application was refused by the Entry Clearance  Officer
    on 7 March 2013 (just after the claimant's 18th birthday).   The  Entry
    Clearance Officer was not satisfied that the  maintenance  requirements
    under paragraph 297(v) were satisfied.

 3. The claimant appealed against this decision, and following a review  by
    an Entry Clearance Manager (in which the  decision  was  affirmed)  his
    appeal was, as already noted above, heard  before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Onoufriou, sitting at Hatton Cross on 5 March 2014.

 4. At this hearing, it was conceded on behalf of  the  claimant  that  the
    Entry  Clearance  Officer's  decision  "was  in  accordance  with   the
    Immigration Rules" (this is apparent from paragraph 6  of  the  judge's
    determination).  The sponsor's income was not sufficient to satisfy the
    maintenance requirements under paragraph 297 (v), and thus  the  appeal
    had to be dismissed under the Rules.

 5. However, the judge allowed the appeal under Article 8.

 6. Having stated at paragraph 14 of his  determination  that  "it  is  ...
    clear that, as at the date of the [claimant's] application, his sponsor
    was not earning sufficient funds to be able to adequately maintain  him
    in accordance with the Immigration Rules to a minimum level  of  income
    support for a family of this nature" and that "it has been conceded  by
    [the claimant's Counsel] that [the Entry Clearance Officer's]  decision
    to refuse entry  clearance  was  in  accordance  with  the  Immigration
    Rules", the judge's reasons for allowing the appeal under Article 8 are
    set out in one  paragraph,  paragraph  15.   The  Judge  sets  out  the
    positive factors in favour of the claimant before finding as follows:

         "Taking all these factors into account and taking into account  the
         best interests of the child, bearing in  mind  the  [claimant]  was
         under 18 at the  time  of  his  application,  I  find  that  it  is
         disproportionate to keep [the  claimant]  apart  from  his  family,
         taking into account the  circumstances  which  caused  them  to  be
         separated  in  the  first  place  and   the   circumstances   which
         exacerbated that situation.  After taking  into  account  the  fact
         that his family have not sought to rely upon public funds,  I  find
         it disproportionate that the need to maintain effective immigration
         control should keep this family apart."

Grounds of Appeal

 7. Essentially, the grounds complain that the judge made no  reference  to
    the new Immigration Rules which had been introduced from 9  July  2012,
    and which, it is submitted, are now "a  complete  code  that  form  the
    starting point for the decision-maker", as confirmed by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192.  It is submitted that "any
    Article 8 assessment should only  be  made  after  consideration  under
    these Rules" which "was not done in this case".

 8. It is submitted that the failure to consider this appeal in the context
    of the new Rules was a material error,  because  in  light  of  current
    jurisprudence (in  particular  MF  (Nigeria),  Nagre  [2013]  EWHC  720
    (Admin) and Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640) it was incumbent on the Tribunal
    to consider whether there were compelling circumstances not  recognised
    by the Rules such  that  refusal  of  the  application  would  lead  to
    "unjustifiably harsh"  consequences  to  the  claimant.   The  Tribunal
    failed to follow this approach.

The Hearing

 9. This appeal first came before this Tribunal on 17 June 2014.   On  that
    occasion, Mr Turner submitted  that  the  effect  of  the  transitional
    provisions, which are to be found at A277-A280 of the Rules is that  no
    additional Appendix FM requirements  were  introduced  with  regard  to
    applications under paragraph 297; accordingly  there  was  no  need  to
    consider the recent jurisprudence relied upon by  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer in this appeal, which was only relevant in the context  of  the
    new Rules which did not apply here.

10. As this argument had not previously been canvassed, it  was  agreed  by
    both parties that this point would have to be properly  argued  and  it
    was apparent there was insufficient court time available on that date.

11. The hearing was  accordingly  adjourned  until  31  July  2014,  but  I
    directed that Mr Turner was to set out his submissions on this point in
    a skeleton argument prior to that hearing, which he did.

12. Regrettably, this skeleton argument is  not  wholly  relevant  to  this
    appeal, but appears to have been adapted from another document prepared
    in respect  of  another  applicant.   When  setting  out  the  "factual
    background" at paragraphs 4 and 5 of this skeleton argument,  reference
    is made to the claimant  being  a  national  of  Pakistan,  born  on  1
    November 1981 whose application for leave to remain as  the  spouse  of
    her husband had been refused.  As the claimant in this case is a  young
    man who was born some 14 years later, and is a national  of  Sri  Lanka
    who was applying to join his parents, this factual  background  clearly
    does not relate to him.  Also, there is reference within  the  document
    to judicial review proceedings which  had  been  brought,  which  again
    cannot relate to this case.

13. Notwithstanding that the skeleton argument is not  wholly  specific  to
    this case, Mr Turner's submissions nonetheless have generic  relevance.
    If and to the extent that they are found to be sound, they would  apply
    in this case as well.

14. Mr Turner's submissions were developed in argument before me and I also
    heard submissions from  Mr  Nath  on  behalf  of  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer.  These were recorded contemporaneously and  are  contained  in
    the Record of Proceedings.  Accordingly, I  shall  not  set  out  below
    everything which was said to me in oral argument, but shall refer  only
    to such of the submissions as are necessary for the  purposes  of  this
    determination.  I have, however, taken full account of everything which
    was said to me during the  course  of  the  hearing,  and  to  all  the
    documents  contained  within  the  file,  whether  or   not   this   is
    specifically set out below.

15. Mr Turner's essential argument  was  that  because  the  provisions  of
    paragraph 297 were retained after 9 July 2012 (because  this  paragraph
    was  not  amended  to   include   any   Appendix   FM   considerations)
    consideration  of  whether  or  not  an  applicant  who  applies  under
    paragraph 297 should in the alternative succeed under  Article  8  must
    accordingly also be unaffected by the changes in the Rules.  This  will
    be discussed below.

16. Although Mr  Turner  asserted  that  even  if  the  judge  should  have
    considered the position under the  new  Rules,  the  claimant's  appeal
    could still succeed because it was  in  his  best  interests  that  the
    family "stay together", this argument was not fully  developed  at  the
    hearing, which was confined to consideration of whether  or  not  there
    was an error of law in the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  determination.
    Mr Turner submitted that if an error  of  law  was  found,  the  proper
    course would be to remit this appeal back to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for reconsideration.  This will also be discussed below.

Discussion

17. The transitional provisions were set out within the  skeleton  argument
    submitted  by  Mr  Turner,  and  they  are  now  set  out  within  this
    determination  (although  some  of  these  provisions,  which  are  not
    relevant to this appeal, have been excluded):


         "Transitional provisions and interaction between Part 8, Appendix
         FM and Appendix FM-SE


         A277 From 9 July 2012 Appendix FM will apply to all applications to
         which Part 8 of these rules applied on or before 8 July 2012 except
         where the provisions of Part 8 are preserved and continue to apply,
         as set out in paragraph A280.


         A277A Where the Secretary of State is considering an application
         for indefinite leave to remain to which Part 8 of these rules
         continues to apply (excluding an application from a family member
         of a Relevant Points Based System Migrant), and where the
         applicant:


             (a)  does not meet the requirements of Part 8 for indefinite
                  leave to remain, and


             (b)  continues to meet the requirements for limited leave to
                  remain on which the applicant's last grant of limited
                  leave to remain under Part 8 was based, further limited
                  leave to remain under Part 8 may be granted of such a
                  period and subject to such conditions as the Secretary of
                  State deems appropriate. For the purposes of this sub-
                  paragraph an applicant last granted limited leave to enter
                  under Part 8 will be considered as if they had last been
                  granted limited leave to remain under Part 8; or


             (c)  if the applicant does not meet the requirements of Part 8
                  for indefinite leave to remain as a bereaved partner only
                  because paragraph 322(1C)(iii) or 322(1C)(iv) of these
                  rules applies, the applicant will be granted limited leave
                  to remain under Part 8 for a period not exceeding 30
                  months and subject to such conditions as the Secretary of
                  State deems appropriate.


         A277B Where the Secretary of State is considering an application
         for indefinite leave to remain to which Part 8 of these rules
         continues to apply (excluding an application from a family member
         of a Relevant Points Based System Migrant) and where the
         application does not meet the requirements of Part 8 for indefinite
         leave to remain or limited leave to remain:


             (a)  the application will also be considered under paragraphs
                  R-LTRP.1.1.(a), (b) and (d), R-LTRPT.1.1.(a), (b) and (d)
                  and EX.1. of Appendix FM (family life) and paragraphs
                  276ADE to 276DH (private life) of these rules;


             (b)  if the applicant meets the requirements for leave under
                  those paragraphs of Appendix FM or paragraphs 276ADE to
                  276DH (except the requirement for a valid application
                  under that route), the applicant will be granted leave
                  under those provisions; and


             (c)  if the applicant is granted leave under those provisions,
                  the period of the applicant's continuous leave under Part
                  8 at the date of application will be counted towards the
                  period of continuous leave which must be completed before
                  the applicant can apply for indefinite leave to remain
                  under those provisions.


             (d)  Except sub-paragraph (c) does not apply to a person last
                  granted leave as the family member of a Relevant Points
                  Based System Migrant.


         A277C Subject to paragraphs A277 to A280, paragraph 276A0 and
         paragraph GEN.1.9. of Appendix FM of these rules, where the
         Secretary of State deems it appropriate, the Secretary of State
         will consider any application to which the provisions of Appendix
         FM (family life) and paragraphs 276ADE to 276DH (private life) of
         these rules do not already apply, under paragraphs R-LTRP.1.1.(a),
         (b) and (d), R-LTRPT.1.1.(a), (b) and (d) and EX.1. of Appendix FM
         (family life) and paragraph 276ADE (private life) of these rules.
         If the applicant meets the requirements for leave under those
         provisions (except the requirement for a valid application),


         the applicant will be granted leave under paragraph D-LTRP.1.2. or
         D-LTRPT.1.2. of Appendix FM or under paragraph 276BE(1) of these
         rules.


         A278 The requirements to be met under Part 8 after 9 July 2012 may
         be modified or supplemented by the requirements in Appendix FM and
         Appendix FM-SE.


         A279 Paragraphs 398-399D apply to all immigration decisions made
         further to applications under Part 8 and paragraphs 276A-276D where
         a decision is made on or after 28 July 2014, irrespective of the
         date the application was made.


         A280 The following provisions of Part 8 apply in the manner and
         circumstances specified:
|                                                                   |
|(a)  The following paragraphs apply in respect of all applications |
|made under Part 8 and Appendix FM, irrespective of the date of     |
|application or decision:                                           |
|277-280                                                            |
|289AA                                                              |
|295AA                                                              |
|296                                                                |
|                                                                   |
|(b)  The following paragraphs of Part 8 continue to apply to all   |
|applications made on or after 9 July 2012. The paragraphs apply in |
|their current form unless an additional requirement by reference to|
|Appendix FM is specified:                                          |
|Paragraph number                 |Additional requirement           |
|295J                             |None                             |
|297-300                          |None                             |
|304-309                          |None ..."                        |


18.  Mr  Turner's  submission,  which  can  be   summarised   briefly,   is
    superficially attractive.  It is provided by A277 that from 9 July 2012
    Appendix FM will apply "to all applications to which  Part  8"  applied
    prior to that date "except where the provisions of Part 8 are preserved
    and continue to apply, as set out in paragraph A280".

19. By A280, Part 8 (that is the old  Rules)  will  continue  to  apply  to
    applications  brought  under  paragraph  297  without  any   additional
    requirements.  As this is an application brought under  paragraph  297,
    the new Rules will accordingly not have effect.

20. The flaw in this submission is that Mr Turner has completely overlooked
    the  effect  of  paragraphs  A277B  and  A277C  of   the   transitional
    provisions, from which it is clear that the new  Rules  do  apply  when
    consideration is given to Article 8 in respect  of  applications  which
    continue to be made under the old Rules but which fail.  The wording of
    A277B is clear on this, and bears repeating:

         "Where the Secretary of State is  considering  an  application  for
         indefinite leave to remain to which Part 8 of these Rules continues
         to  apply...  and  where  the  application  does   not   meet   the
         requirements of Part 8 for indefinite leave to  remain  or  limited
         leave to remain... (a) the  application  will  also  be  considered
         under paragraphs LTRP.1.1.(a), (b) and  (d),  R-LTRPT.1.1.(a),  (b)
         and (d) and EX.1. of  Appendix  FM  (family  life)  and  paragraphs
         276ADE to 276DH (private life) of these Rules; (b) if the applicant
         meets the requirements for leave under those paragraphs of Appendix
         FM or paragraphs 276ADE to 276DH... the applicant will  be  granted
         leave under those provisions."

21. In other words, the new Rules relating to Article  8  are  specifically
    said to apply in cases such as  the  present,  which  is  precisely  an
    application where the claimant has not met the requirements of  Part  8
    (in this case the maintenance requirements under paragraph 297).

22. The Secretary of State has given guidance as to how she  will  consider
    applications outside the Rules in these circumstances and  the  courts,
    from  Nagre  onwards,  have  made  clear  the  basis  upon  which   the
    consideration of an applicant's Article 8 rights in these circumstances
    should now be undertaken. Before allowing an appeal under article 8, in
    circumstances where an applicant cannot  succeed  under  the  rules  as
    contained within the new provisions referred to in  A277B,  a  decision
    maker (in this case  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge)  is  obliged  to
    consider  whether  or  not  there  are  compelling  reasons   why   the
    consequences of the decision in question (in this case the  refusal  of
    entry clearance) would be "unjustifiably harsh".

23. It is clear in this  case  that  the  judge  did  not  carry  out  this
    balancing exercise.  While he  set  out  those  factors  which  in  his
    judgment favoured the claimant, it is not apparent that he  appreciated
    the very great weight which must be given to  the  public  interest  in
    securing the economic well-being of  the  UK  by  sensible  immigration
    control, considered on the macro as well as the  micro  level  (see  in
    particular the decision of the Court of Appeal in FK  &  OK  (Botswana)
    [2013] EWCA Civ 238, and  of  this  Tribunal  in  Shahzad  (Article  8:
    legitimate aim: Pakistan)  [2014]  UKUT  85)  and  he  failed  to  give
    adequate (or even any) reasons for concluding that  the  factors  which
    favoured allowing this appeal were so compelling as  to  outweigh  this
    public  interest.  The  judge  does  not  appear  to  have  given   any
    consideration to the effect of the new Rules, which he was  obliged  to
    do.  Even had I accepted Mr Turner's submissions as to  the  effect  of
    the transitional provisions, I would still have found  that  there  had
    been a failure to consider what weight needed to  be  attached  to  the
    public interest in not generally allowing leave to enter to persons who
    cannot otherwise succeed under the Rules.  A balancing exercise  cannot
    properly be conducted without proper consideration of  the  factors  on
    both sides.

24. It follows that this decision will have to be set  aside  and  re-made.
    When considering whether or not this appeal should  be  remitted  I  am
    very conscious of the guidance given by the President of this  Tribunal
    in the recently reported Tribunal decision in MM  (unfairness;  E  &  R
    Sudan) [2014] UKUT 00105, in which it is  stated  at  paragraph  26  as
    follows:

         "By section 12 of the 2007 Act, where the Upper Tribunal  concludes
         that the decision of the First-Tier Tribunal involved the making of
         an error on a point of law and decides to set the  decision  aside,
         it must either remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal or  remake
         the decision itself. We consider that, as a fairly  strong  general
         rule, where a first instance decision is set aside on the basis  of
         an error of law involving the deprivation of the Appellant's  right
         to a fair hearing, the appropriate course will be  to  remit  to  a
         newly constituted First-Tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing. This  is
         so because the common law right to  a  fair  hearing  is  generally
         considered to rank as a right of constitutional importance  and  it
         is preferable that the litigant's statutory right of appeal to  the
         Upper Tribunal should be triggered only where the former right  has
         been fully enjoyed."

25. In this case the effect of the error of  law  is  that  the  claimant's
    appeal was not considered properly because the Tribunal did  not  carry
    out a proper balancing exercise which was necessary in  order  for  the
    decision to be made properly.  Accordingly, although on  the  facts  of
    this case the claimant might find it difficult to persuade  a  Tribunal
    that  there  are   compelling   reasons   why   it   should   consider,
    exceptionally, that even though the requirements of the Rules  are  not
    satisfied, it would nonetheless be unjustifiably harsh not to grant him
    entry clearance,  nonetheless  as  a  matter  of  fairness  and  proper
    procedure, he ought to be allowed this opportunity.  As I consider that
    there is no reason in this case to depart from what is said in MM to be
    the "fairly strong general rule" that  the  appropriate  course  is  to
    remit back to the First-tier Tribunal so that a differently constituted
    Tribunal can now reconsider the appeal, I will so order.  This Tribunal
    will also have to have in  mind  the  provisions  of  part  5A  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum act 2002,  which  was  inserted  by
    section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014, but that is not a matter  which
    it is necessary for me to consider now.



Decision

I set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Onoufriou  as  containing  a
material error of law and direct that the appeal be remitted to  the  First-
tier Tribunal to be heard by any First-tier Tribunal Judge other than  Judge
Onoufriou.


Signed:                                 Date: 31 October 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Craig

