
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/10902/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15th January 2016                 |On 24th February 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                       mrs Oluyemisi Basirat Akinlade
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Adesina, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 20th  August  1965.   The
    Appellant applied for entry clearance as a partner under Appendix FM of
    the Immigration Rules.  Her application was  considered  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer under  paragraph  EC-P.1.1  of  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration  Rules  and  under  paragraph  320(11).   The   Appellant's
    application was refused by the Entry Clearance Officer on  12th  August
    2014.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before a Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Wylie sitting at Hatton Cross on 12th June  2015.   In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated on  27th  July  2015  the  Appellant's
    appeal was allowed on human rights grounds and  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.

 3. On 5th August 2015 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds of  Appeal  to
    the Upper  Tribunal.   Those  grounds  contended  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge failed to consider the quotations set out in the refusal
    letter  and  that  that  undermined  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    reasoning and findings that the Appellant  met  paragraph  S-EC.2.2(b).
    Further it was contended that  in  relation  to  Rule  320(11)  it  was
    submitted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge's findings at paragraph 42
    were based on a mistake of fact and a misapplication of law.

 4. On 9th November 2015 Judge P J M  Hollingworth  granted  permission  to
    appeal.  In the very briefest  of  grants  of  permission  the  judge's
    reasons were:
         "An  arguable  error  of  law  has  occurred  in  relation  to  the
         construction placed upon the  available  evidence  appertaining  to
         disclosure."

 5. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  No Rule 24 response appears  to  have  been
    lodged by the  Appellant's  solicitors.   This  is  an  appeal  by  the
    Secretary of State.  However in  order  to  ensure  continuity  in  the
    appeal process Mrs Akinlade is referred to herein as the Appellant  and
    the Secretary of State is the Respondent.  The Appellant appears by her
    instructed solicitor Mr Adesina.  The Secretary of State appears by her
    Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Tufan.  I note that when  the  matter
    came  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  there  were  no   legal
    representatives.  However the appeal was not dealt with on  the  papers
    and that  the  Appellant's  husband  and  Sponsor  Mr  Martin  Akinlade
    attended and gave oral testimony.

Submissions/Discussion

 6. Mr Tufan notes the Grounds  of  Appeal.   He  notes  that  the  grounds
    raised, purely recite an appeal pursuant to the Immigration Rules.   He
    would seek to vary those grounds to appeal against the  decision  under
    Article 8, this being a ground  that  was  allowed  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  It is clear that nowhere within the Grounds of  Appeal
    has the finding under the Human Rights Act been challenged.  Mr Adesina
    understandably strongly opposes any such application.   It  is  not  Mr
    Tufan's fault that he is placed in the position that he is.   There  is
    no documentary evidence nor basis set out in  writing  upon  which  the
    Secretary of State seeks to challenge the finding under Article 8.  His
    application  is  consequently  refused.   On  that  basis  both   legal
    representatives acknowledge that there is no extant appeal pursuant  to
    Article 8 and consequently, irrespective of any other outcome  on  this
    appeal, the basis upon which the  Appellant's  appeal  was  allowed  on
    human rights grounds must stand.

 7. In the light of this finding Mr Tufan indicates that he  does  no  more
    than rely on an appeal under the Immigration Rules.  He relies  on  the
    Grounds of Appeal as set out and raises the issue of the number of wage
    slips that were produced before the First-tier Tribunal.  Again this is
    not an issue that is raised in the Grounds of Appeal.

 8. Mr Adesina queries the  point  as  to  whether  or  not  disclosure  of
    criminal issues are material and points out that the judge has  made  a
    considerable number of findings.  He takes me to paragraph  37  of  her
    determination where she has concluded that the Sponsor was  genuine  in
    his evidence and that he had encouraged  the  Appellant  to  return  to
    Nigeria to regularise her immigration status by seeking legal entry and
    that he was determined that full disclosure be  made  of  all  relevant
    factors, namely her conviction and previous  immigration  history.   He
    consequently submits that the judge has made clear findings within  her
    determination and that it is not reasonable of the Secretary  of  State
    to submit that she has failed to  properly  construe  and  analyse  the
    criminal convictions.  He does ask me not  to  go  behind  the  judge's
    findings and to find that there is no material  error  of  law  and  to
    dismiss the appeal.

The Law

 9.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

10. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

11. The Secretary of State has not helped herself in this matter.   Firstly
    no Home Office Presenting Officer was instructed to attend  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Secondly the Grounds of Appeal make no  reference
    to a challenge to the finding allowing the appeal pursuant  to  Article
    8.  The judge in her decision considered Article 8 in  some  detail  at
    paragraphs 44 to 51 of her determination.  Had it been the intention of
    the Secretary of State to consider that  they  contained  any  material
    errors of law, they should have been raised in the Grounds  of  Appeal.
    Not only that, when the matter  thereafter  reaches  the  hands  of  Mr
    Tufan, there is no evidence  put  to  me  to  suggest  that  there  are
    material errors of law, merely that the Secretary of State  would  seek
    to appeal.  Despite the valiant effort of Mr  Tufan,  that  application
    could not possibly succeed and consequently the  only  issue  that  was
    extant before me was whether or not there was a material error  of  law
    in the decision of the judge so far  as  it  relates  to  allowing  the
    appeal under the Immigration Rules.  Mr  Tufan  merely  relies  on  the
    Grounds of Appeal.  He makes a brief reference to the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  In fairness to him, that is all he can  do.
    The judge has produced a  well-presented  and  well-reasoned  decision.
    Reference is made to the previous conviction of the Appellant  and  the
    judge has noted that it was unfortunate that the solicitors did not set
    out the details of the criminal conviction.  She  has  noted  that  the
    Sponsor indicated that the Appellant's criminal conviction was prior to
    his meeting her and that the Sponsor was  instrumental  in  encouraging
    the Appellant to  return  to  Nigeria  to  regularise  her  immigration
    status.  The  judge  thereafter  noted  that  in  the  absence  of  any
    information from the Respondent what the terms of the question relating
    to criminal convictions actually were, that  the  Appellant  failed  to
    disclose a criminal conviction and accordingly she did not accept  that
    the Appellant failed under the provisions of Rule S-EC.2.2(b).  Further
    the judge went on to address the references  to  paragraph  320(11)  at
    paragraphs 41 to 43 of her decision and made findings  upon  which  she
    was entitled to but in the absence  of  aggravating  circumstances  she
    concluded that refusal under paragraph 320(11) should not be made.

12. All in all the determination is well-constructed, well-reasoned and the
    judge has made findings which  she  was  perfectly  entitled  to.   The
    decision discloses no material error of  law  and  the  appeal  of  the
    Secretary of State is consequently dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses no material error  of  law
and the appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed and  the  decision  of
the First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

