
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/10984/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On the 4th November 2015             |On 23rd November 2015                 |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before:

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL MCGINTY


                                  Between:

                     MISS OLUWADAMILOLA BLESSING ADENIJI
                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Omolola Arogundade (sponsor)
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Wright dismissing the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's decision to refuse the Appellant entry clearance  pursuant
    to paragraph 297(i)(e) and (f) of the Immigration Rules and  dismissing
    her appeal on human rights grounds under Article 8.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria who was born on the  16th  April
    1996 and who is therefore now aged 19 years old, but who  was  aged  17
    years old as at the date of the application on the 2nd April 2014.

 3. On the 2nd April 2014 the Appellant had applied for entry clearance  to
    join her mother in the  United  Kingdom  under  paragraph  297  of  the
    Immigration Rules. That application was refused by  the  Respondent  on
    the 6th August 2014, and the Appellant appealed by means  of  a  notice
    appeal dated the 12th September 2014.

 4. Within the original refusal it was found that  the  Appellant  had  not
    provided a birth certificate or other evidence to demonstrate that  she
    was related to her Sponsor as claimed. It was found that the  Appellant
    lived with Margaret Lyunade, who was said to  be  her  grandmother  and
    that she was studying at the Reliance Secondary School, but it was said
    that there was no evidence of her personal situation in Nigeria and she
    had not provided evidence of contact with the Sponsor or proof that her
    Sponsor provided all of her emotional, financial and  other  needs,  or
    exercised any control of the major aspects of the Appellant's life such
    as schooling, religion, medical care etc. such to show that the Sponsor
    had sole  responsibility  for  her  upbringing  pursuant  to  paragraph
    297(i)(e) of the Immigration Rules.

 5. It further had  not  been  established  that  there  were  serious  and
    compelling family or other circumstances which would make her exclusion
    undesirable for the purpose of  paragraph  297(i)(f).  It  was  further
    found that it was being suggested that the Appellant would reside  with
    her Sponsor at 45 [ - ], which was a one-bedroom property that had  one
    other room, but that the Respondent was not satisfied that the property
    would not be overcrowded and that the Appellant could  be  accommodated
    without recourse to public funds, given that the Sponsor resided  there
    with her spouse and their 3-year-old son. The application was therefore
    refused under paragraph 297(i)(e) - (f) and under paragraph 297(iv).

 6. The Appellant sought to appeal against the  Respondent's  decision  and
    that appeal came before Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Wright  at
    Hatton Cross on the 5th June 2015. However, when the case  came  to  be
    called on in the afternoon, there was no appearance by or on behalf  of
    the Appellant, and equally with no appearance  from  anyone  by  or  on
    behalf of the Appellant in the morning, such that  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Wright, after satisfying himself  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    notified of the hearing or reasonable steps had been  taken  to  notify
    her of the hearing and that it  was  in  the  interest  of  justice  to
    proceed with the hearing, he proceeded to deal with  the  case  in  the
    Appellant's absence and Rule 28 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014.

 7. The Appellant sought to appeal that decision to the Upper Tribunal  and
    within the Grounds  of  Appeal  it  is  argued  that  the  Sponsor  Mrs
    Arogundade did not receive the notice to attend the  hearing  and  that
    she had made attempts to find out about the delay of the hearing  date,
    but to no avail and that she was then shocked  to  receive  a  decision
    letter in the case and that she  wished  she  had  the  opportunity  to
    present her case and provide evidence such as DNA evidence to prove the
    relationship between her  and  her  daughter,  bank  statements,  birth
    certificates and accommodation arrangements etc.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson
    on the 29th September 2015, he indicating that the  Notice  of  Hearing
    and decision was sent to the address given of the Sponsor's address and
    there was nothing to say that the notice of hearing had  been  returned
    as "undelivered", nor was there anything to suggest  that  the  Sponsor
    had contacted the Tribunal because of the delay in  being  notified  as
    claimed. But given the importance  of  the  appeal  to  the  Appellant,
    permission to appeal was granted but it was stated that it was for  the
    Sponsor to provide evidence to establish that she did not  receive  the
    Notice of Hearing before a material error of law could be found.

 9. At the appeal  hearing  Mrs  Arogundade,  the  Sponsor,  told  me  that
    although she had received the Notice of Pending Appeal  dated  the  5th
    November 2014, which simply indicated that the  Tribunal  had  received
    her notice of appeal and that the Tribunal had asked for the Respondent
    to prepare the relevant documentation for the appeal which was expected
    to take about 15 weeks, the Tribunal would write to her after the  18th
    February 2015 with further details of how and  when  the  appeal  would
    proceed and at that stage she did not need to take any action. She told
    me that she had not then received the Notice of Hearing which was  said
    to have been sent out by the Tribunal on the 7th January 2015. Although
    this was sent to the same address as the Notice of Pending Appeal at 45
    [ - ], she told me that she did not understand why she did not  receive
    the Notice of Hearing.

10. She said that sometimes her mail does get lost in  the  post  and  that
    sometimes post for other people comes to her house and she produced  at
    the hearing, an envelope, not related to this appeal, but from the post
    office, indicating for  that  piece  of  correspondence,  it  had  been
    damaged within the post, but this was not related  to  the  appeal  and
    dated October 2015. Therefore I have not considered  that  document  in
    reaching my decision, as it is not actually relevant to the question as
    to whether or not she did receive the Notice of Appeal.

11. However, Mrs Arogundade did tell me that  she  had  received  also  the
    notice of judgement sent to her at 45  Kirkham  Street,  and  that  she
    phoned in January to the number given on the application form. She  was
    told that it might take a while to get a  hearing  date.  She  had  not
    chased the matter after that. She further told  me  that  she  had  now
    provided DNA evidence to show that she and her daughter were related as
    claimed, which she had sought after the decision of First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Wright, together with a letter from her sister-in-law  indicating
    that her sister-in-law could provide accommodation for the Appellant at
    her property. However, that letter from the sister-in-law  again  post-
    dated the decision.

12. Mr Walker on behalf of the Respondent,  having  heard  the  explanation
    provided by Mrs Arogundade on behalf of the Appellant,  did  accept  on
    the Respondent's behalf that having heard from her she did not in  fact
    receive the Notice of Hearing listing the hearing for Friday  5th  June
    2015 at 10 a.m. at Hatton Cross, which he  accepted  was  a  procedural
    irregularity which may have had an adverse effect on  the  fairness  of
    the hearing, such that he conceded  that  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Wright did contain a material error of law and should be
    set aside and the case  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
    reheard before a different First-tier Tribunal Judge. He conceded that,
    had the notice of hearing been sent out, then the sponsor may well have
    obtained the DNA evidence prior to the hearing, and also that she could
    have given evidence regarding matters such  as  the  accommodation  and
    sole responsibility to the Tribunal at the hearing, had she be notified
    of the same, such that it could not be said that the  procedural  error
    in her not receiving notification of the hearing would not have  had  a
    material effect on the outcome.

13. In light of these concessions made  by  Mr  Walker  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent, I do find that the Sponsor did  not  in  fact  receive  the
    Notice of Hearing listing the hearing for the 5th June  2015,  although
    she did receive the other documents  sent  to  her.  I  do  accept  her
    explanation that post does go missing on occasion to her property,  and
    that she does also receive post wrongly addressed to other people. I do
    accept given the concession made that she did not receive the notice of
    the hearing  and  that  this  therefore  did  amount  to  a  procedural
    irregularity, in that had she received notification, the Sponsor  could
    have attended to give evidence at the hearing, which may well have  had
    an effect on the outcome of the case and that it  would  be  unjust  in
    such circumstances to allow the First-tier Tribunal decision to  stand.
    I therefore do set aside the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Wright, given that the Sponsor did not  receive  notification  of  that
    hearing. However, I place no criticism on Judge Wright  in  respect  of
    his decision to proceed in the absence of the Appellant, as he was  not
    to know that in fact she had not received the notification.

14. Having set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Wright,  I
    remit the case back to the First-tier Tribunal to be decided before any
    Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Wright, given that the  case
    needs to be reheard de novo.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Wright  does  contain  a  material
error of law and is set aside;

The case is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for  rehearing,  to  be
reheard by any Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Wright.

No anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal, and  no  such  order
was sought before me. No order was made in respect of anonymity.


Signed      Dated 4th November 2015
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty
