
[pic]

Upper Tribunal                                                   Appeal
                                             Number: OA/10419/2013
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           OA/10424/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard                   at                    Field                    House
                                             Determination promulgated
On 9 July 2014         On 10 July 2014


                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                          Entry Clearance Officer,
                                  New Delhi
                                                              Appellant
                                     and

                             1) Rishi Ram Thapa
                            2) Hum Bahadur Thapa
                          (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                   Respondents
Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms. J. Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the  Respondents:    Mr.  C.  Howells  of  Counsel  instructed  by  N.C.
                       Brothers & Co..

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

             DIRECTIONS IN RELATION TO AN APPLICATION FOR COSTS


   1. These are linked appeals against the decisions of First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Charlton-Brown promulgated on 14 April 2014, allowing the appeal
      of  Mr  Rishi  Thapa  and  his  brother  Mr  Hum  Thapa  against   the
      Respondent's decisions dated 19 April 2013 to refuse  to  grant  entry
      clearance as the adult dependants of their father Mr Tika  Ram  Thapa,
      who served as a Gurkha in the British Army from 1975 until 1989.

   2. Although in the proceedings before  me  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
      ('ECO') is the appellant, and the Thapas are the respondents, for  the
      sake  of  consistency  with  the  proceedings  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal I shall hereafter refer to the Thapas as the  Appellants  and
      the ECO as the Respondent.


Background

   3. The Appellants are nationals of Nepal born on 26  August  1983  and  8
      November 1980 respectively. They made applications for entry clearance
      as the dependent sons of their ex-Gurkha father on 22  December  2011.
      The applications were initially refused on 7 March 2012 with reference
      to paragraph 317 of the Immigration Rules and policy relating  to  ex-
      Gurkha servicemen and their families,  and  Article  8  of  the  ECHR.
      Following appeal, pursuant to the determination of  Immigration  Judge
      Dineen  promulgated  on  10  October  2012  (ref:  OA/06864/2012   and
      OA/06890/2012),  the  cases  were  remitted  to  the  Respondent   for
      consideration in accordance with the law. New decisions were  made  on
      19 April 2013, which are the subject of the current  proceedings:  the
      Respondent again refused the applications with reference to  paragraph
      317 of the Rules, policy, and Article 8.


   4. The Appellants appealed to the IAC. Their  appeals  were  allowed  for
      reasons set out in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's determination  with
      reference to Article 8.


   5. The Respondent sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal which
      was granted on 19 May 2014 by First-tier Tribunal Judge McDade.


   6. No Rule 24 reply has been filed on behalf of the Appellants.


Consideration

   7.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  records  in  her  determination  at
      paragraph 3 that the Appellants conceded that they could not meet  the
      requirements of the Immigration Rules. In context, this is  clearly  a
      reference to paragraph 317 of the  Rules:  the  Judge  identifies  the
      relevant Immigration Rule as being paragraph 317  of  HC  395  in  the
      immediately preceding paragraph, and reference is  also  made  to  the
      similar concession made in the earlier appeal.


   8. The Judge identified that the Appellants relied upon Article 8 of  the
      ECHR (paragraphs 3 and 7); she then directed herself as to burden  and
      standard of proof, and to the five Razgar questions (paragraphs 8  and
      9). After analysing the evidence and the case law - and in  particular
      case law in respect of  Gurkha  families  with  reference  to  Ghising
      (Family life - adults - Gurkha policy) Nepal [2012] UKUT 160 (IAC), UG
      (Nepal) [2012] EWCA Civ 58, and Gurung [2013] EWCA Civ 8, as  well  as
      Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31, and MM [2013] EWHC 1900 - the Judge found
      that the Appellants had established family life with  their  UK  based
      father, and that there would be interference with this family life  by
      reason of the Respondent's decisions (paragraphs 11-16).


   9. The Judge identified the "real issue" to be proportionality (paragraph
      17), and noted that the Respondent relied upon the public interest  of
      "exercise[ing] legitimate immigration  control"  (paragraph  17).  She
      considered the particular position of the Appellants and their family:
      she found that the Appellants' father would have preferred to come  to
      the UK upon completion of his  service  had  that  been  an  available
      option. In this  regard  (paragraph  17).  The  Judge  observed,  with
      reference to Gurung "Lord Dyson MR  makes  it  clear  that  the  adult
      dependant child of a Gurkha veteran, who can establish an Article 8(1)
      right,  has  a  strong  claim   to   have   that   right   vindicated,
      notwithstanding the power of the legitimate aim argument, if they  can
      show they would have settled in the UK  years  before  had  that  been
      possible" (paragraph  18).  The  Judge  also  had  regard  to  Ghising
      (Gurkhas/BOCs - historic wrong: weight) [2013] UKUT 00567  (IAC):  "it
      was held  that  the  historic  wrong  will  ordinarily  determine  the
      proportionality assessment where the Respondent only  relies  on  fair
      immigration policy as the legitimate aim" (paragraph 19).


  10. The Judge then concluded that the "historic wrong in  respect  of  the
      sponsor... carried more weight in the  proportionality  argument  than
      the maintenance  of  fair  immigration  policy"  (paragraph  20),  and
      allowed the appeal on Article 8 grounds (paragraph 21).


  11. The Respondent's grounds of challenge upon which permission to  appeal
      has been granted rely upon the decision in Gulshan (Article  8  -  new
      Rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC). Criticism is made  of
      the First-tier Tribunal Judge for undertaking a "free standing Article
      8 assessment... without making findings as to  arguably  good  grounds
      and compelling circumstances not  sufficiently  recognised  under  the
      Rules".


  12. In my judgement the Grounds of challenge are misconceived.

(i) The grounds are wrongly premised on the suggestion that  the  Appellants
      had conceded that they could not satisfy the requirements of  Appendix
      FM. No such concession had been made. The concession in respect of the
      Rules was with regard to the Rules  that  predated  Appendix  FM,  the
      applications in these cases having been made in December 2011.

(ii) The Appellants' cases had not been decided by the  ECO  under  the  new
      Rules, and to that extent the guidance in  Gulshan  was  not  directly
      applicable.

(iii) In any event,  the  criticism  made  in  the  Grounds  was  largely  a
      procedural criticism, and did not engage with the substantive decision
      made in respect of proportionality. It is said, in  effect,  that  the
      Judge should not have considered Article 8 without  first  considering
      if there were 'arguably good grounds' for doing so; however, there  is
      no specific  criticism  of  the  assessment  itself  and  no  specific
      criticism of the conclusion reached. In particular there is no attempt
      in the Grounds  to  engage  with  the  possibility  that  the  Judge's
      conclusion in respect of Article 8 in effect answered the  'procedural
      question' identified in the Grounds.

(iv) There is no challenge to the jurisprudence in respect of Gurkha  cases,
      and  no  challenge  to  the  way  in  which  the  Judge  applied  that
      jurisprudence to the facts of the Appellants' cases.


  13. In this latter regard I observed to Ms Isherwood that  unless  it  was
      being  suggested  that  the  effect  of  Gulshan  was  to  'undo'  the
      established jurisprudence in respect of Gurkha cases, then on the face
      of it the very particular circumstances of those cases - including the
      aspect of 'historic wrong' - provided the compelling circumstances not
      sufficiently recognised under the  Rules.  Ms  Isherwood  acknowledged
      that the grounds did not seek to impugn the Gurkha  jurisprudence  and
      indicated that she did not wish to pursue any such argument before me.




  14. In the circumstances I considered it unnecessary to  hear  submissions
      from Mr Howells.
  15. I dismiss the Respondent's challenge as being misconceived. The  Judge
      properly directed herself to, and in accordance with, applicable  case
      law and reached  a  conclusion  consistent  with  that  case  law  and
      consistent with the notion that the  circumstances  were  sufficiently
      compelling to justify favourable decisions under  Article  8.  I  find
      that there was no material error of law and that the decisions of  the
      First-tier Tribunal are to stand.


  16. After I indicated at the hearing today that I would be dismissing  the
      Respondent's challenge, Mr Howells indicated that he wished to  pursue
      an application for 'wasted'  costs  under  rule  10  of  the  Tribunal
      Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008. Ms Isherwood indicated that she
      was not in a position to deal with such an application  without  prior
      notice. In the circumstances after a brief discussion  I  agreed  with
      the parties that the matter should be dealt with  in  accordance  with
      the Directions set out below.


Decisions

  17. The decisions of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contained no errors  of
      law and stand.


Directions in respect of application for costs

(i) The Appellants are to file and  serve  written  applications  for  costs
      with all supporting submissions and evidence upon which they  wish  to
      rely within 9 days of the date of the sending of this Determination.

(ii) The Respondent  is  to  file  and  serve  a  written  response  to  the
      application within 7 days thereafter.

(iii) The Appellants may file and serve any Reply within a  further  7  days
      thereafter. (If the Appellants do not wish to make a reply this should
      be communicated to the Tribunal.)

(iv) Following the expiry of 23 days from the sending of this  Determination
      the Tribunal will consider the Appellants' costs application  'on  the
      papers'. The application is reserved to me.




Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     9 July 2014

