
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/10553/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 9th September 2014                           |On 15th September 2014     |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER tribunal JUDGE KELLY

                                   Between

                         the entry clearance officer
                         (Post reference: SHEFO/367)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and



                           MR osayuwamen osagiede

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Tettey, Counsel instructed by Halliday Reeves
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1. This appeal comes before the Upper Tribunal as the result  of  permission
   granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Kimnell in the following terms -


         Permission is sought [by the Entry  Clearance  Officer]  to  appeal
         against the determination of First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Shimmin,
         promulgated 4th April 2014, allowing an appeal against the  refusal
         of entry clearance as a partner, or spouse.


         The determination was not served on the  respondent,  and  came  to
         attention only on the day of the  application  for  permission  was
         made on 12th June 2014. I therefore  extend  the  time  for  giving
         notice so as to place the application "in time".


         Paragraph 18 of the determination records the fact that the  issues
         in the case were identified at the commencement of the hearing. The
         issues included the adequacy  of  the  proposed  accommodation  and
         whether or not the documents provided by the appellant were in  the
         specified form. The judge  makes  no  specific  finding  on  either
         matter,  and  provides  no  reason  for  the  conclusion  that  the
         appellant satisfies the Immigration Rules.


2. The terms of the grant reflect the  assertions  that  were  made  by  the
   Entry Clearance Officer in the application for permission to appeal -


         While it is not possible to prove a negative in this  case,  it  is
         clear from the attached document that this is the appellant's  copy
         of the determination. This was provided to me today.  The  attached
         email exchange corroborates this. It is  clear  that  for  whatever
         reason, the determination  was  not  served  on  the  SSHD  or  ECO
         correctly.


         Given that this only came to my attention today,  an  extension  of
         time is sought to cover the period from 4 April to now.  There  was
         no way that the application could have been made sooner.


         It is respectfully submitted that the Tribunal erred in law in  the
         following way.


         Making a material error of law.


         At paragraph 34 of the Tribunal found that the appellant  satisfies
         the Immigration Rules. However, there is no  explanation  of  this.
         For example, there are no findings on the level  of  the  sponsor's
         income and whether this complies with  the  threshold  set  out  in
         Appendix FM or the specified evidence requirements of Appendix  FM-
         SE. That being so it is uncertain how the Tribunal  can  find  that
         the Rules are satisfied.


3. Neither the application for nor the grant of permission to  appeal  makes
   the slightest reference to  paragraphs  22  and  23  of  Judge  Shimmin's
   determination, which read as follows -


    22. After hearing and considering all the  evidence,  and  particularly
    after a detailed consideration of the documentation, Mr  Sobowale  [the
    Home Office Presenting Officer  at  the  hearing]  indicated  that  the
    documentation of the sponsor's income provided  by  the  appellant  was
    sufficient  to   meet   the   Immigration   Rules.   Furthermore,   the
    documentation confirmed that the sponsor  had  more  than  the  minimum
    required under the Rules.


    23. With regard to the accommodation, there was no property  inspection
    report before me. However, the sponsor gave oral  evidence  as  to  the
    details of the property. The documents included the  tenancy  agreement
    and photographs of the interior of the property. Mr  Sobowale  accepted
    that nothing undermined the evidence in respect of  the  accommodation.
    On the basis of  the  evidence  before  me  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    appellant will be adequately accommodated without  recourse  to  public
    funds and that the Immigration Rules are met in this regard.


4. The Tribunal is entitled to presume that  any  representative,  but  more
   especially an employee of the Home Office, has the authority  to  concede
   that a particular issue in the appeal has been  proved  as  a  matter  of
   fact. Thus, whilst the Tribunal will always retain the right to determine
   a question of law, it is entitled  to  treat  a  concession  of  fact  as
   sufficient reason for concluding that the matter  in  question  has  been
   proved. In such circumstances, it is nonsensical for the party making the
   concession later to claim that he or she does not understand  the  reason
   for the finding to  which  the  concession  related.   Moreover,  in  the
   circumstances of this case, it would have been procedurally unfair to the
   appellant if the Tribunal had gone  behind  the  concession  in  question
   without first giving notice to his representative. The reason for this is
   that once the Presenting Officer  had  made  the  concession  during  his
   closing submissions, the sponsor (who made  closing  submissions  on  the
   appellant's behalf: see paragraph 16) was entitled to assume that she  no
   longer needed to address the  Tribunal  in  relation  to  the  issues  of
   maintenance and accommodation  and  was  required  only  to  address  the
   Tribunal concerning the outstanding issue of whether discretion under the
   Immigration Rules ought to have been exercised differently [see paragraph
   24].


5. In the absence of any reference to it in the grounds  of  appeal,  it  is
   reasonable to assume that the respondent does not  challenge  the  First-
   tier Tribunal's record of the concession that had  been  made  concerning
   the issue of maintenance. That concession provided sufficient reason  for
   finding that the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  concerning  the
   level of maintenance and submission of specified  documents  in  relation
   thereto had been satisfied. In relation to the  issue  of  accommodation,
   the  Tribunal  clearly  explained  that  it  was   satisfied   that   the
   requirements of the Immigration Rules were met by reference to  the  oral
   testimony of the sponsor, photographs of the interior of the property  in
   question,  and  the  relevant  tenancy  agreement,  none  of  which  were
   suggested by the Presenting Officer to be either lacking  in  credibility
   or unreliable. That provided a sufficient explanation for the  Tribunal's
   very clear finding that the appellant had  proved  that  there  would  be
   adequate accommodation available to him in the United Kingdom.


6. Before leaving this appeal, I wish to express a degree of  concern  about
   the terms in which permission was granted. Permission  to  appeal  should
   only ever be granted on the basis that it is arguable that the First-tier
   Tribunal made an error of law. It is  then  for  the  Upper  Tribunal  to
   decide whether that argument is made  out.  If  it  was  appropriate  for
   permission to have been granted at  all,  then  it  ought  to  have  been
   expressed along the lines that it was arguable that the  concession  made
   by the respondent was an insufficient reason for the Tribunal to make the
   finding of fact in question. To state that the Tribunal's  determination,
   "... provides no reason for the conclusion that the  appellant  satisfied
   the Immigration Rules" [emphasis added]  was  not  only  to  pre-judge  a
   matter that fell to be determined by the Upper Tribunal, but was also  to
   accept without question a statement that had been made in the application
   and which was plainly contrary to  the  facts.  As  a  result,  both  the
   sponsor and the appellant have suffered very nearly six months of further
   uncertainty as to whether they would be permitted to reside  together  in
   the United Kingdom.


Decision


7. The appeal is dismissed.


Anonymity not directed.



Signed                                  Date



Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

