
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/10547/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 12 November 2013                        |On 29 November 2013        |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN


                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISLAMABAD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MRS SAMIA OSAMANKHIL
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:

                            For the Appellant: Mr P Nath a Senior
           Home Office Presenting Officer
          For the Respondent: Mr Z Malik of counsel instructed by Malik Law
Chambers

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is the Entry Clearance  Officer  in  Islamabad.  I  will
      refer to him or her as the Entry Clearance Officer. The respondent  is
      a citizen of Afghanistan who was born on 10 April 1975. I  will  refer
      to her as the claimant. Her husband is  her  sponsor  and  their  five
      children are her dependants for the purpose of  this  application  and
      appeal. The claimant and the children are living in Pakistan.


   2. The Entry Clearance Officer has been given permission  to  appeal  the
      determination of First-Tier Tribunal Judge  Morgan  ("the  FTTJ")  who
      allowed, on human rights grounds, the claimant's  appeal  against  the
      decision of 16 April 2012 to refuse her  leave  to  enter  the  United
      Kingdom with her children for settlement as the spouse and children of
      the sponsor under the provisions of paragraph 281 of  the  Immigration
      Rules. The Entry Clearance Officer  was  not  satisfied  or  that  the
      couple were in a subsisting relationship or that the family  could  be
      adequately maintained by the sponsor. The application was also refused
      under the provisions of paragraph 320 (7A) of  the  Immigration  Rules
      because it was concluded that the appellant had submitted  and  relied
      on a false  document  namely  an  English-language  test  certificate.
      Subsequently, the Entry Clearance Manager reviewed  the  decision  and
      conceded the issue of maintenance.


   3. The claimant appealed and the FTTJ heard her  appeal  on  5  September
      2013. Both parties were represented and the sponsor gave evidence. The
      FTTJ found him to be a credible witness, the claimant and the  sponsor
      were in a  subsisting  relationship  and  the  claimant  met  all  the
      requirements of paragraph 281 apart from the lack of a genuine English-
      language test  certificate  either  at  the  date  of  application  or
      decision. However, in relation to the allegation that the claimant had
      made a false statement or a false representation in  relation  to  the
      English-language test certificate the FTTJ found that the claimant had
      been an innocent victim of a scam perpetrated in Pakistan and was  not
      aware that the test certificate was not genuine.  She  had  taken  the
      test and obtained what she thought was a genuine qualification in good
      faith.


   4. The  FTTJ  found  that  the  claimant  could  not  succeed  under  the
      Immigration Rules for the lack  of  a  genuine  English-language  test
      certificate at the relevant date. However, soon  after  she  took  and
      passed another and genuine  English-language  test  which,  he  found,
      showed that she had the required ability. Taking  into  account  these
      factors, the best interests of the children, the  delay  of  nearly  a
      year on the part of the Entry Clearance Officer, the need to  maintain
      immigration control and the prolonged separation between  the  sponsor
      his wife and children, the FTTJ concluded that the  refusal  of  entry
      clearance was a disproportionate interference  with  their  Article  8
      human rights. He allowed the appeal on human rights grounds.


   5. The Entry Clearance Officer applied for and was granted permission  to
      appeal by a  judge  in  the  First-Tier  Tribunal.  The  claimant  has
      submitted a Rule 24 response.


   6. I suggested to Mr Nath that in more than one respect the grounds  were
      misconceived. The grounds submit that the FTTJ erred in law by failing
      to apply the Immigration Rules relating to Article 8  grounds.  It  is
      clear that this is a reference to the  Immigration  Rules  which  came
      into force in July 2012. The decision in this  case  was  made  on  16
      April 2012 and as a result the Article 8 grounds had to be assessed in
      the light of the jurisprudence before the new Rules came  into  force.
      Mr Nath accepted that this was correct. Secondly, the  grounds  submit
      that the FTTJ failed to consider  the  income  threshold  requirements
      under the Immigration  Rules.  This  is  a  reference  to  the  income
      threshold requirements under the new Immigration Rules which were  not
      in force at the date of the decision and do not apply in this case. Mr
      Nath accepted that this was correct. In the circumstances he said that
      he relied on what was left of the grounds of appeal and did  not  wish
      to make any further submissions. I heard  brief  submissions  from  Mr
      Malik.


   7. I find that the first ground of appeal  is  misconceived.  The  ground
      submits that the FTTJ erred in law by failing to apply the Immigration
      Rules relating to Article 8 grounds.  It  is  clear  that  this  is  a
      reference to the Immigration Rules which came into force in July 2012.
      The decision in this case was made on 16 April 2012 and  as  a  result
      the Article 8  grounds  had  to  be  assessed  in  the  light  of  the
      jurisprudence which applied before the  new  Rules  came  into  force.
      There was no income threshold requirement in the  previous  Article  8
      jurisprudence. Furthermore, in relation to the submission  that  those
      who choose to establish a family  life  in  the  UK  should  have  the
      required financial ability to support themselves it is  relevant  that
      the FTTJ found that the claimant met the maintenance  requirements  of
      paragraph 281 of the Immigration Rules. The whole of the first  ground
      of appeal is flawed by inappropriate  reliance  on  Immigration  Rules
      which were not in force.


   8. As to the second  ground  of  appeal  this  is  substantially  if  not
      entirely flawed by the same reliance on Immigration Rules  which  were
      not in force. Insofar as it is alleged that the FTTJ erred in  law  by
      relying on a finding that the claimant's case was "exceptional" I  can
      find   no   reference   in   the   determination   to   "exceptional",
      "exceptionality" or anything to indicate that the FTTJ applied such  a
      test. This part of the ground of appeal is based on a false premise. I
      cannot see that any further explanation is required for the conclusion
      that it would be in the children's best interests to live  with  their
      father and mother. The ground is also flawed by continued reliance  on
      the  incorrect  statement  that  the  claimant  failed  to  meet   the
      maintenance requirements of the new Immigration Rules.  The  FTTJ  set
      out the appropriate jurisprudence and reached conclusions open to  him
      on all the evidence.


   9. There is no error of law and I uphold the FTTJ's determination.












      .............................................
            Signed                                    Date 13 November 2013
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

