
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/10885/2013
     OA/10887/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 23rd May 2014                                |On 5th June 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE

                                   Between

                   MR JONATHAN MUNZEMBA (FIRST APPELLANT)
                 MISS BENEDICTE MUNZEMBA (SECOND APPELLANT)
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                      Entry Clearance Officer - NAIROBI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr McIndoe of Latitude Law
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants, Mr Jonathan Munzemba, date of birth 7th April 1995  and
    Miss Benedicte Munzemba date of birth 6th May 1999, are citizens of the
    Democratic Republic of Congo.

 2. I have considered  whether  any  of  the  parties  to  the  proceedings
    requires the protection of an anonymity direction.  Taking  account  of
    all the circumstances and even taking account  of  the  fact  that  the
    Appellants are minors, I do  not  consider  it  necessary  to  make  an
    anonymity direction.

 3. This is an appeal by the Appellants against the determination of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge McGinty promulgated on 28th November 2013  after  a
    hearing on 12th November 2013.  The judge  dismissed  the  Appellants'
    appeals against the decision of the Respondent to refuse each  of  them
    entry clearance/leave to enter the United  Kingdom  as  children  of  a
    person present and settled in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  matter  was
    considered both under paragraph 297 of HC 395 and under  Article  8  of
    the ECHR.

 4. By leave granted on 10th January 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge  Ievins
    gave the Appellants permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.   Thus
    the matter now appears before me as an appeal in the Upper Tribunal  to
    determine in the first instance whether there is a  material  error  of
    law within the original determination by the judge.

 5. In the Grounds of Appeal submitted  the  grounds  raise  the  following
    matters:-

      i) The  Sponsor's  evidence  was  not  properly  interpreted  and  was
         misrepresented.  That only  came  to  light  upon  receipt  of  the
         determination and on the  Sponsor  having  an  opportunity  of  the
         determination being read back to her.

     ii) The Sponsor submits that some of the answers given did not  reflect
         properly what she had said.  As the judge found that  some  of  her
         answers were inadequate and inconsistent with documentary  evidence
         the Sponsor maintains that her answers were fuller than that  given
         by the interpreter and that this has led to  the  misinterpretation
         and misunderstanding.

    iii) As an instance of this at paragraph 14 the  interpreter  failed  to
         put questions to the Sponsor.  There it is alleged that the Sponsor
         was asked more than once to explain the meaning of the  Appellant's
         school documents but failed to do so.  The Respondent  asked  about
         discrepancies between the documents and her oral evidence but it is
         suggested by the judge that the sponsor  only  gave  an  inadequate
         reply.  It is asserted that this is reflective  of  the  inadequate
         and incomplete interpretation.

     iv) It  is  submitted  that  the  misrepresentation  of  the  Sponsor's
         evidence contributed to the  judge's  finding  that  the  Sponsor's
         evidence was not  credible.   The  Appellants  have  been  unfairly
         disadvantaged by the interpreter.

      v) The judge also applied westernised standards to his  assessment  of
         the documentary  evidence.   The  judge  expected  the  format  and
         appearance of two death certificates to be the same.  He found that
         they  were  substantially  different.   The  fact  that  the  death
         certificates  were  in  different  form  is  explainable   in   the
         circumstances and no adverse inference should or  could  have  been
         drawn therefrom.

 6. In paragraph 25 of the determination the judge deals with the two death
    certificates and does  note  that  they  are  in  completely  different
    formats.  However the judge's assessment of the death certificates does
    not end there.  The judge notes that in respect of  one  of  the  death
    certificates there is reference to the fact that the Sponsor's  husband
    had allegedly died from  a  medical  condition.   The  Sponsor  had  in
    evidence alleged  that  her  husband  had  been  poisoned.   No  proper
    explanation was given for  those  two  inconsistencies  causes  of  her
    husband's death.  That is not an issue of misinterpretation or applying
    westernised standards but a direct  conflict  between  the  Appellant's
    evidence and the document.

 7. The judge having considered the  evidence  presented  was  entitled  to
    conclude that the evidence was contradictory. The  medical  certificate
    was evidence submitted and relied upon by the Appellant. The judge  was
    entitled to consider that a medical certificate properly obtained would
    have given the cause of death in  those  circumstances  and  that  that
    impacted upon the assessment of credibility of the Sponsor.

 8. Similarly the death certificate for the Sponsor's son gave no cause  of
    death at all.  It was alleged by the  Appellant's  representative  that
    the death certificate could be linked to a medical report that appeared
    subsequently in the pages  of  the  evidence.   However  there  was  no
    reference within the death  certificate  of  the  son  to  the  medical
    report.  The death certificate appears  to  have  been  a  freestanding
    document.  It made no reference to any  medical  condition  or  medical
    report.  In the circumstances the judge was entitled to note  that  and
    entitled to conclude that if there had been any intention in the  death
    certificate to refer to the medical report that would have easily  been
    solved by a reference within the report itself but none was made.

 9. The judge was entitled on examining the certificates to find that there
    were material discrepancies between the certificates and  the  evidence
    of the Sponsor such that the evidence of the Sponsor was  not  credible
    in those circumstances.

10. The judge otherwise has noted other discrepancies between the  evidence
    of the Sponsor and the documentary evidence.  There was reference to  a
    Nzenze  Lulualu.   The  documents  translated  and  submitted  by   the
    Appellant referred to the person as being a male and to being  a  major
    as of March 2013.  The  Sponsor  had  by  comparison  referred  to  the
    individual as being a lady and a seamstress.   It  was  only  when  the
    discrepancies were  pointed  out  that  the  Sponsor  had  changed  her
    evidence.

11. Also with regard to Nzenze Lulualu the Sponsor had referred to  her  as
    being an aunt and had referred to the relationship but the relationship
    was not consistent within her evidence.

12. It has to be noted that the Sponsor had originally come to  the  United
    Kingdom in 2005.  The Sponsor has been in the United Kingdom since that
    period of time.  It is suggested that the answers that the Sponsor gave
    in Lingala were not properly translated by the interpreter.  The  judge
    has within the body of the determination  noted  at  paragraph  9  that
    there was no evidence of any problems in the translation at the time of
    the hearing  itself.   It  was  only  subsequently  after  the  refusal
    decision  had  been  promulgated  that  the  problems  with  regard  to
    translation were pointed out.  Throughout the course of the proceedings
    the Appellants have been represented.  The Sponsor was being  asked  to
    comment upon documents and answer questions about  documents  that  the
    Appellants themselves had submitted.   The  discrepancies  between  the
    documents and the evidence of the Sponsor were such that the judge  was
    entitled to make adverse findings with regard to credibility.

13. Taking all the matters into account the judge was entitled to  come  to
    the conclusions that he did on the basis of the evidence.  There was no
    evident problem with the interpretation at the hearing.   The  problems
    have only been identified subsequently.  The Sponsor has  been  in  the
    United Kingdom a substantial period of time and should have  understood
    some English.  If there were a genuine problem with  the  documentation
    the  Appellant's  representative  could   have   clarified   the   same
    beforehand.  The fact that it was during the course of the hearing that
    the problems between the Sponsor's evidence and the documents came  out
    is a matter that inevitably occurs in the present type  of  proceedings
    but that judge was entitled to come to the conclusion that  he  did  on
    the basis of the evidence.

14. In the circumstances the judge was entitled to treat  the  evidence  of
    the Sponsor in the manner that he did.  There were  clear  and  evident
    inconsistencies between the  Sponsor's  evidence  and  the  documentary
    evidence.  Those inconsistencies have not been explained by the alleged
    discrepancies  asserted  within  the  Grounds  of  Appeal.    In   such
    circumstances the judge was entitled to come to come to the conclusions
    that he did on the evidence presented.  There is no material  error  of
    law within the determination.

15. I uphold the decision to dismiss this matter on all grounds.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure

