

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/10174/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 May 2017                        |On 01 June 2017                      |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MR MD MIZANUR RAHMAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Respondent:    Mr Z Malik, Counsel
For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. For convenience, I refer to the parties as they were in the  First-tier
    Tribunal with the Secretary of State as respondent and  Mr  Rahman  the
    appellant.


 2. No anonymity direction was made in the First-tier Tribunal and none  is
    required now.

Background

 3. The appellant is a Bangladeshi citizen who submitted a certificate from
    Educational Testing Service ("ETS") in connection with  an  application
    to study in the  UK.  The  respondent  later  decided  that  there  was
    significant evidence to conclude that the appellant's  certificate  had
    been fraudulently obtained by the use of a proxy  test  taker.    As  a
    result, she decided on 20 August 2014 that he should  be  removed  from
    the UK pursuant to s10 of the Immigration and  Asylum  Act  1999.   The
    appellant appealed, from  outside  the  United  Kingdom,  against  that
    decision. His appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Thew  ("the
    FTTJ") who allowed it in a decision promulgated on 1 November 2016.


 4. The respondent sought permission to appeal and this was granted in  the
    following terms:

           "... It is arguable that in coming to his conclusions the  Judge
           did not take note of the guidance in SM and Quadir [sic]  [2016]
           UKUT 00229 despite reference being made to it in the decision."


 5. Hence the matter came before me today.

 6. At the outset of the hearing, I showed Mr Nath the respondent's  bundle
    in the First-tier Tribunal; it contains only the notice of liability to
    removal, reasons letter, notice of immigration decision and the  notice
    and grounds of appeal together with those documents  submitted  by  the
    appellant in support of his appeal.   Mr  Nath  accepted  it  does  not
    contain any evidence to support the  respondent's  assertion  that  the
    appellant had submitted a fraudulent certificate.

 7.  Mr  Nath  conceded,  appropriately  in  the  circumstances,  that  the
    respondent had not produced, in the First-tier Tribunal,  any  evidence
    to support her assertion that the appellant had exercised deception  in
    support of an application for leave to remain as a student. He accepted
    that the FTTJ's decision was therefore unassailable.

 8. Mr Malik referred me to Beatson LJ's comments at paragraph 30 of SSHD v
    Shehzad [2016] EWCA Civ 615 at [30]:

           "... in the circumstances where  the  generic  evidence  is  not
           accompanied  by  evidence  showing  that  the  individual  under
           consideration's test was categorised as  "invalid",  I  consider
           that the Secretary of State faces a difficulty in respect of the
           evidential burden at the initial stage."


    However, this is a case where the respondent did not even  produce,  at
    the appeal hearing in the First-tier Tribunal,  the  generic  evidence,
    quite apart from any evidence relating to the appellant himself.

 9. The appellant's appeal before the FTTJ was bound to  be  successful  in
    such circumstances, the respondent having failed to meet the evidential
    burden on her.

Decision

10. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve a
    material error of law and the decision is not set aside.





Signed                                             Date 30 May 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black


