

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/10418/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 10 June 2015                      |On 15 June 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (NEW DELHI)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              DEEPA KUMARI RAI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A. Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M. Puar, counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    For the sake of continuity the Tribunal will refer to the  parties  as
    they were before the First-tier  Tribunal  although  the  Secretary  of
    State is technically the appellant in this appeal. The appellant  is  a
    citizen of Nepal whose date of birth is 12 January 1982.  She  appealed
    against the respondent's decision dated 29  April  2013  to  refuse  to
    grant her entry clearance to join her family in  the  UK  as  an  adult
    dependent relative. First-tier Tribunal Judge Walker found that she did
    not meet the requirements of the  immigration  rules  but  allowed  the
    appeal on human rights grounds in a decision promulgated  on  19  March
    2014. The judge was satisfied that, despite her age, the appellant  was
    still dependent on her parents and had a family life that  was  engaged
    for the  purpose  of  Article  8.  The  judge  concluded  that  in  the
    particular circumstances of the case, and  in  light  of  the  historic
    injustice done to the Ghurkhas, the decision to refuse entry  clearance
    was disproportionate.

2.    The respondent was granted permission to appeal against the  decision.
    Although the grounds of appeal purport to  make  two  points  they  are
    essentially the same. The respondent argues that the  judge  failed  to
    consider whether  the  decision  showed  a  lack  of  respect  for  the
    appellant's family life  of  "sufficient  gravity"  as  to  engage  the
    operation of Article 8 given that the appellant is now  33  years  old,
    has been separated from her family since 2002 in order to study in  the
    USA, is working in the USA (albeit only on campus) and is  not  "wholly
    or mainly" dependent financially on  the  UK  sponsor.  The  respondent
    seeks to distinguish the facts of the case from  Ghising  (family  life
    adults - Ghurkha policy) [2012] UKUT 00160. The respondent argues  that
    her dependency is only temporary given that she is a student  and  that
    it was not open to the judge to find that they were a close family unit
    when there has been no element of co-habitation for a long time.

3.    The matter comes before the Upper Tribunal to  determine  whether  the
    First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error of law.

4.    I heard submissions from both parties, which have  been  noted  in  my
    record of proceedings and  where  relevant  are  incorporated  into  my
    findings.

Decision and reasons

5.    After having considered the grounds of appeal and the  oral  arguments
    I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal decision  did  not  involve
    the making of an error of law.

6.    The judge carefully set  out  the  long  history  to  the  appellant's
    application for entry clearance [3-5] and the evidence before her  [14-
    22]. On 30 March 2007 the appellant applied for entry clearance to join
    her father in the UK alongside her mother and two brothers.  They  were
    granted entry clearance but the  appellant's  application  was  refused
    although there was perhaps little discernable  difference  between  the
    appellant and her older brother who was also over 18 at the time except
    that he was studying in Nepal and she was  studying  in  the  USA.  The
    appellant said that when she went to study in the USA in 2002 the  plan
    was for her to complete her studies and then return to  her  family  in
    Nepal.

7.    The respondent argues that it was not open to the  judge  to  conclude
    that the appellant had a family life with her parents that engaged  the
    operation of Article 8 in view of her age, the fact that she  had  been
    separated from her family since  2002,  she  was  working  in  the  USA
    (albeit on campus) and was not "wholly or mainly" financially dependent
    on the sponsor. Given that the appellant has now lived apart  from  her
    family for a long period of time it was argued  that  she  now  has  an
    independent life and that the decision did not show a lack  of  respect
    for her right to family life of sufficient gravity  as  to  engage  the
    operation of Article 8  of  the  European  Convention.  The  respondent
    relies on the following extract from the decision in  Kugathas  v  SSHD
    [2003] EWCA Civ 31:

           "Generally  the  protection  of  family  life  under  Article  8
           involves  cohabiting  dependents,  such  as  parents  and  their
           dependent  minor  children.  Whether   it   extends   to   other
           relationships depends on the  circumstances  of  the  particular
           case. Relationships between adults, a mother and her 33 year old
           son in the present  case,  would  not  necessarily  acquire  the
           protection fo Article 8 of the Convention  without  evidence  of
           further elements of dependency, involving more than  the  normal
           emotional ties."

8.    In Ghising (family life-adults-Gurkha policy) [2012]  UKUT  00160  the
    Tribunal considered the authorities relating  to  family  life  between
    adult relatives  in  some  detail.  The  Tribunal  concluded  that  the
    decision in Kugathas had been read too restrictively in  the  past  and
    ought to be read in the light of subsequent decisions of  the  domestic
    and Strasbourg courts [56]. The  Tribunal  noted  that  the  Strasbourg
    court found that family life  existed  between  adult  relatives  in  a
    number  of  cases  without  evidence  of  exceptional   dependence   or
    necessarily the need for cohabitation [60]: see for example  Boughanemi
    v France (1996) 22 EHRR 228. A significant factor was whether the adult
    child has founded a family of his own. If he is still single and living
    with his parents he is likely to enjoy family life with them [61].  The
    Tribunal emphasised that the assessment of whether family  life  exists
    for the purpose of Article 8(1) is highly fact-sensitive. The  Tribunal
    also had regard to the following well-known dicta of  Lord  Bingham  in
    Huang v SSHD [2007] 2 AC 167:

           "Human beings are social animals. They depend on  others.  Their
           family, or extended family, is the group on  which  many  people
           most   heavily   depend,   socially,   emotionally   and   often
           financially. There comes a point at which, for  some,  prolonged
           and unavoidable separation from this ground  seriously  inhibits
           their ability to live full and fulfilling lives. Matters such as
           the  age,  health  and  vulnerability  of  the  applicant,   the
           closeness and previous history of the  family,  the  applicant's
           dependence on the financial and emotional support of the family,
           the prevailing cultural tradition and conditions in the  country
           of origin and many other factors may all be relevant."

9.    In light of this framework I am satisfied that  the  judge's  findings
    as to whether the decision showed a lack of respect for the appellant's
    family life that was of sufficient gravity as to engage  the  operation
    of Article 8 are sustainable on the evidence before her. The judge  was
    able to hear evidence from the witnesses  and  assess  what  weight  to
    place on the ties between the appellant and her family members  in  the
    UK. The judge found the appellant's father to be an impressive  witness
    and was satisfied that there was daily contact  between  the  appellant
    and members of her family in the UK. She said that they  clearly  found
    the separation of the family difficult but  had  tried  their  best  to
    arrange some family visits despite difficulties in making the practical
    arrangements. The judge was satisfied that  the  fact  that  they  made
    those visits "speaks of the close family bond"  between  the  appellant
    and her family in the  UK  [29].  The  judge  was  satisfied  that  the
    appellant is unmarried and has not formed an independent  family  unit.
    While she might not be "wholly or mainly" financially dependent on  the
    sponsor she was limited as to the number of hours a week that she could
    work on campus so without  her  father's  financial  contributions  she
    could not survive [31 & 34].  Having  taken  into  account  the  family
    history and heard evidence from the appellant's father I find  that  it
    was open for the judge to conclude that this was a "very  close  family
    unit" [39].

10.   Although the appellant has not lived  with  her  parents  for  a  long
    period of time the essence of Article 8 is the bond between  the  adult
    relatives, which the judge found was still a "close family  bond".  The
    appellant comes from a culture where an unmarried daughter would  still
    expect to live within the extended family home  and  the  evidence  was
    that she planned to return to her family after she finished her studies
    in the USA. It was only after she was refused entry clearance to the UK
    to join her father alongside other members of the family that  she  had
    to make further plans to continue her education in the USA. As a matter
    of circumstance the appellant has been  living  independently  but  her
    family life, including social,  emotional  and  financial  support,  is
    still quite firmly centred on her immediate family in the UK. In  these
    circumstances I am satisfied that the judge's findings relating to  the
    close bonds between the family were open to her  on  the  evidence  and
    disclosed no material error of  law.  No  challenge  was  made  to  the
    judge's assessment of proportionality, which was well reasoned  and  in
    accordance with the guidance given by the Tribunal in the later case of
    Ghising & others (Ghurkhas/BOCs: historic wrong;  weight)  [2013]  UKUT
    00567.

11.   For the reasons given above I conclude that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision did not involve the making of an error of  law.  The  decision
    shall stand.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law

The First-tier Tribunal decision shall stand



Signed   [pic]   Date 11 June 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan

