
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
OA/10987/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 4th May 2016                          |   On 20th May 2016               |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                              earl katey carboo
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, accra

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Amadi, Counsel, instructed by Crome Legal
                    Services
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge M A Khan (the judge), promulgated on 1 October 2015,  in
    which he dismissed the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.  That  appeal
    was against the Respondent's decision of 13 August  2014,  refusing  to
    grant entry clearance under paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules (the
    Rules).

 2. On or soon after 23 May  2014  the  Appellant  had  applied  for  entry
    clearance to join his mother (the sponsor) in the  United  Kingdom.  In
    refusing the application the Respondent concluded that the sponsor  did
    not have sole responsibility for  the  Appellant  and  nor  were  there
    serious and compelling family or other  reasons  making  his  exclusion
    from this country undesirable.

 3. The sponsor appeared in person before the judge. The judge  found  that
    the sponsor had not visited the Appellant in Ghana between  2003  (when
    she left the country) and 2011. He found that she then made five visits
    between 2011 and 2012, the last of these being  in  February  2012.  He
    rejected the sponsor's explanation as to  why  she  had  not  seen  the
    Appellant more often and concluded that the latter was not top  of  the
    list of priorities for the former  (paragraph  27).  He  found  that  a
    medical letter provided to show that the Appellant's great grandparents
    were ill was deficient and attracted little weight.  At  paragraph  29,
    whilst he accepts that the sponsor  had provided financial  support  to
    the  Appellant,  he  finds  that  the  sponsor  did   not   have   sole
    responsibility for him, and he then directs  himself  to  the  relevant
    case of TD (paragraph  297(i)(e):  sole  responsibility)  Yemen  [2006]
    UKAIT 00049.

 4. In paragraph 32 the judge concludes that  there  were  no  serious  and
    compelling family or other reasons. As to Article 8, the judge believed
    that the relevant date for consideration of the facts was that  of  the
    hearing. He rejects the Article 8 claim.



The grounds and grant of permission

 5. Ground 1 asserts that the judge made a factual error  in  finding  that
    the sponsor last went opt see the Appellant in February 2012,  when  in
    fact she went in December 2013 too. Ground 2  asserts  that  the  judge
    failed to consider the case of Mundeba (s.55 and para 297(i)(f)) [2013]
    UKUT 00088(IAC) when assessing the issue of sole responsibility. Ground
    3 asserts that the judge erred in considering the Article 8 claim as at
    the date of hearing.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Shimmin
    on grounds 1 and 2, but refused on ground 3.



The hearing before me

 7. Mr Amadi confirmed that no application had been or was  being  made  to
    renew ground 3. I found this  somewhat  surprising  given  the  obvious
    error by the two First-tier Tribunal Judges. In any event, ground 3  is
    not before me.

 8. Mr Amadi relied on grounds 1 and 2. The sponsor had in  fact  made  six
    visits to the Appellant, not five.  The  sponsor's  passport  had  been
    shown to the judge and this showed the  relevant  stamp  into  Heathrow
    airport in January 2013. In respect of the sole  responsibility  issue,
    the judge erred in not considering it in light of  section  55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009. The  judge  should  have
    adjourned for the sponsor to obtain better medical evidence.

 9. Mr Bramble submitted that there was no factual error as the sponsor has
    said in her oral evidence that she last went to Ghana in February 2012.
    If there was an error, it was immaterial. The  judge  was  entitled  to
    attach little weight to the medical letter. The judge did  not  mention
    "best interests", but had taken all relevant matters into  account.  He
    was wrong about the date for consideration of the facts, but  this  was
    immaterial.



Decision on error of law

10. I have to say that the judge's decision is  not  a  particularly  well-
    written piece of work. That does not mean of course  that  it  contains
    material errors of law.

11. There is no material error in respect of the sole reasonability issue.

12. The judge was entitled to find that the sponsor  had  not  visited  the
    Appellant since February 2012. I have checked  the  judge's  Record  of
    Proceedings and the note of hearing produced by the Presenting  Officer
    (provided to Mr  Amadi  and  myself  by  Mr  Bramble).  Both  of  these
    documents clearly show that the sponsor herself stated that she had not
    been to Ghana since February 2012. It is of course possible that either
    the Presenting  Officer  or  the  judge  misheard  the  oral  evidence.
    However, it is very unlikely, I find, that both made the  same  mistake
    about the very same aspect of the evidence.  In  addition,  I  have  no
    further evidence from the sponsor as to what she asserts  was  in  fact
    said at the hearing. Further,  there  was  clear  documentary  evidence
    before the judge (in the form of flight booking confirmation) as to the
    trip in February 2012. By contrast, the  sponsor's  passport  (which  I
    will accept was shown at the hearing) showed only an entry  stamp  into
    Heathrow airport on 18 January 2013. This in itself did not  of  course
    prove that the  sponsor  had  returned  from  Ghana.  In  view  of  the
    foregoing, the judge made no error of fact.  The  conclusions  he  drew
    from the visits made by the sponsor were open to him.

13. Even if there had been an error of fact amounting to an error  of  law,
    it was not material. The judge clearly rejected the sponsor's  evidence
    as to why more visits had not been made  in  the  very  lengthy  period
    between 2003 and 2011 (see paragraph 27). Adding  a  single  additional
    visit in December 2013 would not have altered the overall conclusion of
    the judge.

14. I therefore reject ground 1.

15. As to ground 2, it is misconceived insofar as it purports to relate  to
    the sole responsibility issue. Mundeba is  directed  towards  paragraph
    297(i)(f), not (e).

16. It is right that the judge does not expressly refer to the  Appellant's
    best interests and welfare. He should have done so, as these  are  part
    and parcel of the assessment under  paragraph  297(i)(f).  Having  said
    that, the judge found that the  Appellant  had  lived  with  his  great
    grandparents since 2003 (a period of some eleven years as at  the  date
    of decision). The Appellant had not lived with the  sponsor  since  the
    age of seven. He found that the Appellant had  been  looked  after  and
    provided with all relevant facilities. He had already  found  that  the
    Appellant was not top of the sponsor's list of priorities. Importantly,
    the judge was entitled to have placed  little  weight  on  the  medical
    evidence. Having examined for myself the only medical evidence  I  have
    in my papers, it is of very poor quality, consisting of (as  the  judge
    notes) a handwritten note without naming the author or subject, or  any
    indication of functional  impairment.  It  appears  to  relate  to  one
    individual only. The judge was therefore entitled to conclude (at least
    implicitly) that no care concerns arose in respect of  the  Appellant's
    wellbeing.

17. There is no suggestion in the grounds or indeed  the  evidence  that  I
    have can see on file to indicate the  existence  (as  at  the  date  of
    decision) of any other serious and compelling factors weighing  in  the
    Appellant's favour.

18. Taking the judge's  decision  in  the  round,  including  the  findings
    relating to sole responsibility, the substance of the Appellant's  best
    interests  have  been  adequately  dealt  with  through  the  prism  of
    paragraph 297(i)(f).

19. As stated previously, ground 3 is not before me. Even if it  had  been,
    the relevant matters were dealt with in substance by the judge when  he
    considered paragraph 297(i)(f) (see  above).  There  is  nothing  which
    Article 8 could add beyond the scope of the Rule.

20. There is no merit in the suggestion that the judge was obliged to  have
    adjourned the appeal of his own volition in order for  the  sponsor  to
    obtain further and better medical evidence. The sponsor herself  raised
    the question if the  great  grandparent's  claimed  ill-health  in  her
    statement provided with the notice of appeal  in  September  2014.  The
    appeal was heard almost exactly a year later. Standard directions as to
    the provision of evidence had been sent out to the sponsor.  There  was
    every opportunity for her to  have  obtained  proper  medical  evidence
    prior to the hearing. She did not seek an adjournment at  the  hearing.
    There was, as far as I can see, no explanation from the sponsor  as  to
    why better evidence had not been provided at any stage,  nor  that  any
    such evidence was 'in the pipeline', as it were. In these circumstances
    the judge did not err in failing to consider adjourning the appeal.

21. The Appellant's appeal therefore fails.

Anonymity

22. I make no direction. None has been sought and none is appropriate.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.
The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


Signed                                       Date:  19 May 2016


H B Norton-Taylor

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                       Date:  19 May 2016

Judge H B Norton-Taylor

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
