
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/11714/2013
                                                               OA/11704/2013
                                                               OA/11720/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2 September 2014                           |On 16 September 2014         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between

                   mrs Sita Devi Agarwal (FIRST APPELLANT)
                  mr ram chandra agarwal (SECOND APPELLANT)
                    miss Anita Agarwal (THIRD appellant)
                                                                   Claimants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr MD Monirul Islam, London Law Associates

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   In this appeal I shall refer to the parties as the Secretary  of  State
    who is the appellant and to the claimants.

2.     This matter comes before me for consideration as to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in the determination.   The  appellant
    is the Secretary of State for the Home Department and the claimants are
    husband, wife and daughter, all of whom are citizens of India and whose
    dates of birth are 1 January 1948, 26 October  1951  and  24  September
    1977.  The sponsors are the sons/brothers  of  the  claimants  and  are
    resident in the UK and British citizens.

3.   The Secretary of State has appealed a decision  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Stanford) promulgated  on  24  May  2014  in  which  he
    allowed  the  appeals  under  the  Immigration  Rules  granting   entry
    clearance as adult dependent relatives (Appendix  FM  -  paragraph  EC-
    DR.1.1) and on human rights grounds.

Background

4.   The reasons for refusal dated 26 April 2013 issued in  respect  of  all
    three claimants were that:

    (1)  They had travelled extensively to other countries and last visited
         in September 2012.  This was inconsistent with their claimed  level
         of disability.


    (2)   The  current  arrangement  could  continue  with  the  additional
         employment of a new housemaid  and  finance  and  visits  from  the
         sponsors.


    (3)  The Secretary of State was not satisfied that the claimants  could
         not obtain the required level of care in the country of India.   No
         challenge  was  made  as  regards  relationship,   maintenance   or
         accommodation issues.

5.   Lengthy grounds  of  appeal  were  submitted  together  with  extensive
    medical evidence.

6.   The Entry Clearance Manager reviewed the decision and argued  that  all
    medical conditions for the three claimants were managed in India.   The
    required level of help could be sourced in the country rather than  the
    locality and was affordable.  Visits and support  could  continue  from
    the sponsors.

7.   In his determination  the  Tribunal  accepted  the  medical  conditions
    suffered  by  each  claimant  as  evidence  in  extensive  medical  and
    psychological reports.

8.   He found that external support and care was needed  and  that  none  of
    the three claimants was fit or strong enough  to  meet  long-term  care
    needs [24].

9.   The care needs were met by a combination of domestic worker,  maid  and
    the sponsor's frequent visits to India.  [25]. He did not accept that a
    replacement maid could not be found to cook and clean [26].   He  found
    that in the long  term  the  claimants  required  additional  emotional
    support for depression and physical support for disabilities and  there
    was a need for all claimants to be able to  rest.   [27]  The  Tribunal
    found that care was not provided by any local authority or other  local
    society.  He accepted credible evidence from the  sponsors  that  there
    were no commercial agencies available which could guarantee  that  they
    could provide a carer for the long-term to meet the required  needs  of
    the claimants.  [28].  He found that there were no relatives  in  India
    who were able to provide such care.

10.  At [33] the Tribunal found that the relevant Rule included  an  element
    of reasonableness and he interpreted  the  same  by  finding  that  the
    sponsors had made reasonable efforts to find a suitable carer in India.



11.  Article 8 human rights were briefly considered in [38 to 41].

Grounds of Appeal

12.  The Secretary of State submitted that any  deficit  in  care  could  be
    provided by a domestic worker or maid and that  the  Tribunal  accepted
    that a replacement maid could be found and employed.

13.  The Tribunal was wrong to find that emotional  support  was  needed  as
    the Rules applied to illness or disability.  There was no  evidence  to
    indicate that care was not available in the country of India.

14.  The Tribunal failed to apply the Immigration Rules correctly.

15.  The Tribunal failed to adopt the "Gulshan" approach as regards  Article
    8, namely to establish the  existence  of  arguably  good  grounds  for
    consideration of Article 8 outside of the Rules.

Initial Hearing

16.  At the hearing before me Mr Bramble relied on grounds of appeal  having
    conceded that paragraph 4 line three was inaccurate and was not  relied
    on. Paragraph 5 line one was not an accurate  account  of  the  judge's
    finding at [25] and not relied on.

17.  Mr  Bramble  amplified  the  arguments  submitting  that  the  Tribunal
    unlawfully introduced a reasonableness test in assessing  the  evidence
    as to availability of care in India.

18.  Mr Islam submitted that the Tribunal correctly  applied  the  facts  to
    the Immigration Rules.  The issue of affordability was not in question.
     The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal amounted to a  disagreement
    with the decision reached by the Tribunal.

19.   At  the  end  of  the  hearing  I  announced  my  decision  that   the
    determination disclosed no material error of law and  shall  stand.   I
    now give my reasons.




Discussion and Decision

20.   I  am  satisfied  that  the  Tribunal  had  a   clear   and   accurate
    understanding of the requirements of the relevant Rules  in  particular
    in sub-Section (b) [29].  The Rules provide that the required level  of
    care "..  is not available and there is no person in that  country  who
    can reasonably provide it."

21.  There was extensive  evidence  before  the  Tribunal  setting  out  the
    physical and mental health problems suffered  by  each  claimant.   The
    Tribunal also relied on  the  credible  evidence  of  the  sponsors  in
    reaching findings and conclusions.  I am satisfied that those  findings
    and conclusions were open to the Tribunal on the  evidence  before  it.
    The issues raised by the Secretary of State amount to no  more  than  a
    disagreement.  There is no real criticism raised of  the  determination
    in the grounds of appeal at paragraphs 1 -  7.   I  am  satisfied  that
    those  grounds  are  without  merit  particularly  in  light   of   the
    corrections made by Mr Bramble to the grounds of  appeal.  Taking  into
    account those matters there  is  little  if  anything  in  the  grounds
    showing any error of law.

22.   Mr  Bramble  in  submissions  sought  to  refocus  on  the  Tribunal's
    introduction of a reasonableness test [33]  notwithstanding  that  this
    was not specifically raised in the grounds of appeal and  no  leave  to
    amend was applied for or granted.

23.  The Tribunal referred to an "element  of  reasonableness"  existing  in
    the rule rather than a test [33]. It is clear that the Rules do contain
    reference to an element of reasonableness. The Tribunal considered  all
    the evidence having regard to the required care  needs  for  the  three
    claimants in the long-term and having regard to the evidence before him
    as to the efforts made to establish and source what care was reasonably
    available in India.  The reasonableness relates to the provision of the
    care. There is no evidence from the Secretary of  State  relied  on  to
    counter the conclusion reached.   I  find  no  material  error  of  law
    disclosed.

24.  I am satisfied that the findings and conclusions were clearly  open  to
    the Tribunal on the evidence  before  it.   The  Tribunal  specifically
    found that the needs of the claimants  went  beyond  the  provision  of
    domestic tasks finding that there was  a  need  in  the  long-term  for
    physical support for those with disabilities and emotional support  for
    depression.   Further  he  distinguished  between  the  care  that  was
    presently provided and that which  was  needed  in  the  long-term  and
    concluded that the level of care was not reasonably available in India.



25.   There is no material error of law in the determination  having  regard
    to the decision under the Immigration Rules which shall  stand.   I  do
    not consider it necessary or material to further examine the assessment
    under Article 8 as a consequence of my decision under  the  Immigration
    rules and also because the ground concerning the  "Gulshan  "  approach
    falls away following MM(Lebanon)[2014]EWCA Civ 985.  This is no  longer
    a necessary step to consider in an Article 8 appeal.

Decision

26.  I find no material error of law in the determination.

27.  The determination shall stand.


Signed                                  Date 15.9.2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black



No anonymity order made.

Fee award made in full.



Signed                                  Date 15.9.2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

