
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
OA/11242/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |  Decision and Reasons           |
|                                       |Promulgated                      |
|On 2nd October 2015                    |  On 14th October 2015           |
|                                       |                                 |

                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                               ISHRAT MEMOONA
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:       Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Benjamin Hawkin (counsel) instructed by HRS
Solicitors LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. An anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant, but there is no indication that any risk  is  created  to
the appellant by participating in the  appeal  process.  No  application  is
made for an anonymity direction. Having  considered  all  the  circumstances
and evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal but  in
order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as  they  were  in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Kimnell, promulgated on  15  May  2015
which allowed the Appellant's appeal.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 14 March 1973 and is a national of Pakistan.

4. On 22  August  2014  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
application for entry clearance  as  the  parent  of  a  child  present  and
settled in the UK.


The Judge's Decision

5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Kimnell ("the Judge") allowed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision under the Immigration rules.


6. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on  20  July  2015  Judge  Davies  gave
permission to appeal stating inter alia

      "The Judge has not considered at all whether the  Appellant  currently
      does or will in  the  future  take  an  active  role  in  the  child's
      upbringing"

The Hearing

7. Ms Everett, for the respondent, adopted  the  terms  of  the  grounds  of
appeal and argued that  the  decision  contains  a  material  error  of  law
because the test set out in paragraph E-ECPT 2.4 is  a  two-part  test.  She
argued that at [17] and [18] of the decision the judge failed to  carry  out
the second part of the test; i.e. the  judge  ignored  the  requirement  for
evidence that the appellant is taking and intends to  continue  to  take  an
active role in the child's upbringing. Ms Everett relied on the cases of  JA
(meaning of "access rights") India [2015] UKUT 225 (IAC), and TD  (Paragraph
297(i)(e): "sole responsibility") Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049 .  She  asked  me
to set aside the judge's decision and to remake the decision of new.

8. Mr Hawkin,  counsel for the appellant, told me  that  the  decision  does
not contain a material error of law, and that the judge  correctly  directed
himself in [17] and [18] by specifically applying the test in TD Yemen,  and
considering the case of JA (meaning of "access rights") India. At  [14]  the
judge sets out the two-part test  required  by  paragraph  E-ECPT  2.4,  and
thereafter applies that test.  He  took  me  through  the  judge's  decision
emphasising parts of [16], [17] &  [18]  where  he  argues  that  the  judge
expressly found that the appellant is taking, and  intends  to  continue  to
take, an active role in the child's upbringing. He urged me to  dismiss  the
appeal.

Analysis

9. In JA (meaning of "access rights") India [2015] UKUT  225  (IAC)  it  was
held that (i) where the Immigration Rules are silent as  to  interpretation,
it may be necessary to refer to the  Children  Act  1989  (as  amended)  and
other family legislation in order to  construe  those  parts  of  the  Rules
which provide a route to entry clearance or leave to  remain  as  a  parent;
(ii) "Access" in the latest version of the Immigration Rules means the  same
as "contact" in the previous paragraph 284A. Neither term  is  now  used  in
the Family Court where Child Arrangements Orders are made to  regulate  "(a)
with whom a child is to live, spend time or otherwise have contact; and  (b)
where a child is to live, spend time or  otherwise  have  contact  with  any
person."; (iii) The expression "access rights" in paragraph E-LTRPT.2.4  (a)
(i) may refer equally to parents who have "indirect" access to  a  child  by
means of letters, telephone calls etc as well as to  those  who  spend  time
with a child ("direct" access). A  parent  may  also  have  "access  rights"
where there is no court order at  all,  for  example,  where  parents  agree
access arrangements (the "no order" principle; section 1(5) of the  Children
Act 1989 (as amended)); (iv)Having satisfied the requirements  of  paragraph
E-LTRPT.2.4 (a) (i), an appellant must still prove that  he/she  "is  taking
and  intend  to  continue  to  take  an   active   role   in   the   child's
upbringing"(paragraph E-LTRPT.2.4 (a) (ii)). Whether he/she will be able  to
do so will depend upon the evidence rather than the nature  of  the  "access
rights." However, it is likely to be  unusual  that  a  person  having  only
"indirect" access rights will be able to satisfy  this  provision.  In  some
cases, Tribunals may need to examine the reasons why the  Family  Court  has
ordered "indirect" rather than "direct" access.

10. In this case it is  beyond  dispute  that  the  appellant  has  indirect
access to her child. That is quite clearly because she lives in  a  separate
country. At [14] the  judge  clearly  sets  out  the  two-part  test  in  by
paragraph E-ECPT 2.4. In [17] of the decision the  judge  repeats  the  two-
part test, and specifically finds that the appellant has access  rights.  He
then goes on to say that there is evidence of contact which  will  continue.
It is implicit that the judge finds  that  evidence  to  be  persuasive.  He
concludes [17] by saying "if the appellant comes to the United  Kingdom  she
will have a parental relationship with the child in question".

11. At [18] of the decision the judge finds that "the sponsor and parent  in
the UK will not stand in the way of his separated wife  playing  a  parental
role". The judge does not use the language found in  paragraph  E-ECPT  2.4,
but it is quite clear from a fair reading of the  decision  that  the  judge
applied to part test required by paragraph E-ECPT 2.4, and found that  there
was sufficient evidence to satisfy those parts of the test.  The  conclusion
reached by the judge after  he  correctly  directed  himself  in  law  is  a
conclusion which was open to the judge to reach.

12.   In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside)  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)
the Tribunal held that (i) Although there is a legal duty to  give  a  brief
explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which  an  appeal  is
determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole
makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the  judge;  (ii)
Although a decision may contain an error of law where  the  requirements  to
give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.

13.     It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to  give
too little weight or too much weight to a factor,  unless  irrationality  is
alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to  deal
with every factual issue under argument. Disagreement with  an  Immigrations
Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of the evidence or assessment  of
credibility, or his evaluation of risk does not give rise  to  an  error  of
law. I find that the Judge's determination when read  as  a  whole  set  out
findings that were  sustainable  and  sufficiently  detailed  and  based  on
cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

14. I therefore find that no errors of law have been  established  and  that
the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

15. The appeal is dismissed.

Signed


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

