

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/11314/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10 June 2014                               |On 11 June 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                        MR FEISAL MOHAMMED AWEIS OMAR

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, NAIROBI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms G Loughran, Counsel
For the Respondent:     Ms J Isherwood, HOPO


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW


1.   The appellant's appeal has been remitted to the Upper Tribunal by the
    Court of Appeal for a full determination of the appellant's appeal
    under Article 8 of the ECHR.  The error of law agreed to by the Court
    of Appeal is set out in the concluding paragraph in the Statement of
    Reasons.  It states the parties were in agreement that the UT made a
    material error of law in failing to consider or determine the
    appellant's appeal on Article 8 grounds.  This was in issue before the
    FtT but the FtTJ did not make any findings on it either because she
    allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules.  The UT substituted its
    decision for the FtT determination, but the UT determination did not
    demonstrate that any consideration was given to the Article 8 issues.

2.   As the appellant's appeal under Article 8 was not determined by the
    First-tier Judge, it is appropriate to remit this appeal to the First-
    tier Tribunal for a full determination of the Article 8 issues.
    Counsel said she was not running the English language requirement as a
    separate issue but would incorporate it as part of the considerations
    under Article 8.

3.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Thew found at paragraph 21 that there was no
    dispute that the sponsor was in a position to provide adequate
    accommodation.  At paragraph 35 she was satisfied that the appellant
    and the sponsor would be able to maintain themselves and their son
    adequately without recourse to public funds.   These findings shall
    stand.






Signed                                  Date:  10 June 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun




DIRECTIONS

The appeal is to be reheard at Taylor House by a FtTJ other than FtTJ Thew

Date of Hearing - 14 October 2014

Time estimate - 2 hours

Sponsor is the only witness

No interpreter required.
