
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: oa/11202/2012
                                                               OA/11204/2012
                                                               OA/11206/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Sent         |
|On 23 October 2013                              |On 29 October 2013         |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON

                                   Between

                MR JONATHAN BOATENG DANQUAH (FIRST appellant)
             MR EMMANUEL KWAME GYMFI DANQUAH (SECOND appellant)
             MR BLESSING KWAKU APPIAH DANQUAH (THIrD appellant)
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                       entry clearance officer - accra
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms S Akinbolu of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker - Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants applied for admission to the United  Kingdom  as  family
    members of an EEA national who is exercising rights of free movement in
    the United Kingdom.  The applications were refused in  decisions  dated
    24 April 2012.  The Entry Clearance Officer was not satisfied that  the
    appellants  were  related  as  claimed.   Their  mother  stated  in  an
    application that she made in 2009 that she had no children and that she
    lived with her niece in Ghana and no one else.

 2. The appeal came before a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal.  The appeals
    were dismissed but upon application and  for  reasons  set  out  in  my
    decision  dated  24  May   2013   the   First-tier   Tribunal   Judge's
    determination was set aside under Rule 43  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008. I directed a complete rehearing  and  that
    took place before me on 23 October 2013.

Documentation

 3. The documentation that I have before me is far more  than  that  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.  I checked carefully that the  representatives
    and myself had the same documentation before proceeding.

 4. Apart from the refusal bundles for each appellant I was  provided  with
    the Entry Clearance Manager's review, which was  not  in  the  original
    file bundle, a witness statement from the appellants' purported  mother
    Victoria Anning dated 13 August 2013,  a  bundle  headed  "Evidence  of
    Cohabitation"'; correspondence relating  to  DNA  testing,  a  skeleton
    argument dated 14 August 2012 (this must have meant 2013), a GCID  case
    record sheet and appendices, and two pay slips for Mr  J  Boateng.   In
    addition there is a report from Priority Forensics  dated  19  February
    2013 attaching "Maternity Analysis Reports" in respect of each  of  the
    appellants.

 5. Ms Akinbolu on behalf of the appellants chose not to call Ms Anning  to
    give evidence.  The hearing therefore proceeded on submissions only.

 6. Before dealing with the submissions on behalf of the appellants  it  is
    said on their behalf that their mother Ms Anning is married to  an  EEA
    national who is exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom.  He  is
    therefore a qualified person as defined in  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006.  The children are said  to  be  family
    members as defined in Regulation 7(1)(b)(i)  because  they  are  direct
    descendants of his, his spouse or his civil partner who are under 21.

Burden and standard of proof

 7. The burden is upon the appellants to show that  they  are  entitled  to
    succeed in their appeals and the standard  of  proof  is  that  of  the
    balance of probabilities.

My Findings

 8. It is not in issue that Ms Anning  married  Mr  J  Boateng.   There  is
    documentation that has been produced on behalf of the  respondent  that
    indicates that Ms Anning entered the UK  on  14  May  2010  with  entry
    clearance on an EEA family permit  as  a  spouse  and  that  the  leave
    granted was valid until 20 October 2010.  It is  also  clear  from  the
    documentation that the marriage ran  into  difficulties  such  that  Ms
    Anning commenced proceedings with a view to obtaining  a  divorce  from
    her husband.  However, thereafter there is evidence in the file from  a
    solicitor acting on behalf of Ms Anning dated  4  May  2011  indicating
    that her husband consented to the divorce petition being dismissed.  "I
    have sent this (consent) to the court  and  I  now  await  the  court's
    decision in respect of our earlier application."

 9. I am satisfied on that basis that the marriage was still  in  existence
    at that time and there is nothing to  support  any  argument  that  the
    Decree Absolute has been pronounced.  There is some additional evidence
    that has been produced such as  voter  registration  form,  bills  etc.
    which suggest that Ms Anning and her husband are still together as both
    their names are referred to.  There is a copy of an  identity  card  in
    the name of Ms Anning's husband, a copy of his contract  of  employment
    (although part of that is missing) and two copy pay slips in  his  name
    from June 2013.  On balance I am satisfied on  that  evidence,  and  it
    does not in any event appear to be in issue, that Ms  Anning's  husband
    is a Dutch citizen who  is  exercising  treaty  rights  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

10. As referred to in Ms Akinbolu's submissions the main issue  is  whether
    the appellants are related to Ms Anning.  The Entry  Clearance  Officer
    noted that the birth certificates in respect of the children were  only
    issued a few months before the applications were made and in the  first
    named appellant's case some sixteen years after  his  claimed  date  of
    birth.  Suspicions arose because of that fact and the appellant in  her
    application in 2009 stating that she had no children and named none  on
    her application form.

11. As to that point the respondent has never produced a copy of  the  2009
    application form.  Mr Walker informed me that a search  had  been  made
    but it could not be found.  However, Ms Anning  in  her  statement,  to
    which I can give little weight considering that she has  not  confirmed
    its contents to be true and was therefore  not  cross-examined  on  its
    contents, had this to say about it:-

         "I did not declare my children when I made the application as  John
         (her husband) advised me that we would make a  further  application
         for the children separately.  I was new to the system and not  very
         good with reading so I followed what John had told me.   John  does
         not (have) any legal knowledge of any immigration matters.  However
         I trusted him as my husband to do the right thing for the family."

     It is apparent therefore that Ms Anning accepts that when she made  her
    application to join her husband in  the  United  Kingdom  she  did  not
    reveal that she had three children in Ghana.  How the question may have
    been phrased in the form I do not know but it is hardly surprising that
    the Entry Clearance Officer,  and  thereafter  the  Manager,  would  be
    suspicious when Ms Anning applies for the children to join her,  having
    stated that she  had  none.  The  birth  certificates  that  have  been
    produced are of very little evidential weight because  they  have  been
    issued so long after the event.

12. It is inevitable therefore that the  DNA  evidence  that  is  available
    becomes the main focus of this appeal.   What  I  have  before  me  are
    reports that indicate  to  a  probability  of  99.99%  that  the  three
    appellants are the biological children of Ms Anning.  Those reports are
    headed "Maternity Analysis Report" and come from "Identigene"  in  Salt
    Lake City, United States of America.  The reports have  been  notarised
    and were sent under cover of a letter from Priority Forensics dated  19
    February 2013 to Lucia Benyu who is a solicitor working  for  Peters  &
    Company which firm is  representing  the  appellants  in  this  appeal.
    There is a statement from Ms Benyu dated 13 August 2013.

13. The reports state  that  "the  collection,  transport  and  testing  of
    specimens for the purpose of generating the data shown in  the  reports
    were performed in compliance with relationship testing  and  "chain-of-
    custody"  guidelines  established   and   maintained   by   the   AABB.
    Associations of name, relationship, date of  birth  and  race/ethnicity
    with the accompanying results rely strictly upon  information  provided
    to the laboratory.".  I do not know what the AABB is and of course  the
    results rely upon information provided to the laboratory.  As  to  that
    Ms Benyu  has  made  some  effort,  it  seems,  to  establish  how  the
    information was provided to the laboratory.

14. There is an email from Charley Gracey of Priority Investigations  dated
    13 August 2013 attaching scans of the identification provided for  each
    child.  A copy was made of each child's passport, and the  copy  signed
    and dated by both "Dr Quarshie and the uncle who  accompanied  them  to
    the appointment.  A photograph of each child was taken at the  time  of
    the appointment.  This can be seen in the  left  hand  corner  of  each
    scan.  I am getting a full breakdown of our guidelines from my manager,
    and I will have these to you as quickly as possible".

15. As far as I am aware the guidelines have not been produced.  I  do  not
    know who Dr Quarshie is although each copy document produced refers  to
    Dr Eric L. Quarshie "Collector" dated 26 January 2013. Also referred to
    is Mr Emmanuel Gyamf who  describes  himself  as  "uncle".   There  are
    photographs  accompanying  what  appear  to  be  copy  entries  in  the
    passports and those photographs appear to be the same as those  on  the
    application forms for the children  seeking  admission  to  the  United
    Kingdom.

16. As to the position with regard to Ms Anning there is another  email  to
    Ms Benyu from Mr Gracey attaching photographic ID provided by Ms Anning
    which is said to have been at the  time  of  her  appointment  with  PI
    Limited agent Jamie Wither who confirmed that  the  individual  he  met
    with was Ms Anning.  "Our  agents  must  be  satisfied  that  they  are
    meeting with the correct person  before  they  undertake  the  sampling
    procedure".  There is in the papers what appears to be a copy of a page
    from  the  passport  of  Ms  Anning.   Finally,   Ms   Benyu   in   her
    aforementioned statement said that she contacted or became aware of the
    existence of PI from a colleague in the office who had previously  used
    them for "their matter".

17. I find that there are many questions that could be raised  in  relation
    to the DNA evidence but that opportunity has been  lost  in  the  sense
    that Ms Anning did not give evidence, upon advice presumably,  and  the
    gaps have not been filled in any  other  way.   I  am  left  to  ponder
    therefore what the true position is.

18. There does not appear to be any real  doubt  that  the  appellants  are
    related to each other as claimed.  Unless the test  results  themselves
    are completely fraudulent, and on balance I find that  not  to  be  the
    case because of the amount of detail provided,  the  DNA  of  the  true
    biological mother of the children would have had to  have  been  tested
    for the results to appear as they do, namely that  the  probability  of
    the three children's relationship to the person tested  is  99.99%.  It
    seems to me therefore that the only question is whether Ms  Anning  was
    the person who was tested.

Conclusion

19. The evidence that has been obtained that it was indeed Ms Anning  whose
    DNA was tested raises questions to which answers have  not  been  given
    but evidence going the other way is really only that provided by her in
    her 2009 application, namely that she had no children.  I  give  little
    weight to her explanation as to why she did not mention them  but  that
    explanation is nevertheless of some weight.  If  Ms  Anning  needed  to
    prove her relationship with the children beyond reasonable doubt I find
    that she would be unable to do so  on  the  evidence  presented.  As  a
    result the appellants would not succeed  in  their  appeals.   However,
    that is not the applicable  standard  of  proof  which,  as  previously
    mentioned, is that of the balance of probabilities.  To that standard I
    find that the appellants have proved their relationship to  Ms  Anning.
    The DNA evidence produced allows me to make that finding.

20. Thus these appeals succeed because  the  relevant  parts  of  the  2006
    Regulations apply to these appellants and this is for the  above  given
    reasons.

Decision

21. The appeals of the first, second and third appellant are allowed.

22. An anonymity direction was not sought. In the particular  circumstances
    of these appeals I find that the  interests  of  the  children  do  not
    require that an anonymity direction be made.

23. Fees have been paid in respect of the appeals of each of the  children.
    Although the appeals were dismissed by the  First-tier  Tribunal  (IAC)
    and have been allowed by me I regard it as almost entirely the fault of
    the sponsor, or her husband perhaps, that  the  applications  were  not
    granted in the first place and therefore fee awards are not warranted.



Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton
