
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/11683/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31st March 2016                            |On 13th April 2016            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRENCH

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                         (on behalf of ECO pretoria)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                Nancy Kasema
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER not MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Caswell of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Nancy Kasema is a citizen of Zambia who was born on 1st March 1989.   I
    will refer to her as "the  Claimant".   She  is  the  daughter  of  the
    Reverend Robert Jilenda Kasema whom I will refer to as  "the  Sponsor".
    He is a qualified minister of religion who on  14th  August  2014  left
    Zambia with his four younger children, who were at the time  under  the
    age of 18.  The three youngest children were born respectively  on  3rd
    February 2002, 22nd October 2007 and 1st August  2011.   The  names  of
    those three children are Elijah, Alfa and Hannah.  The Sponsor's  wife,
    mother of all the children, had died shortly after Hannah's  birth,  of
    liver failure.  It is the Claimant's case that she was  very  close  to
    Hannah in particular and was entrusted with the  care  of  the  younger
    children by her dying mother.  At the time the Sponsor and the  younger
    children came to the United Kingdom, the entry clearance application in
    respect of the Claimant was still outstanding but  it  was  refused  on
    18th August 2014.

 2. The Claimant's appeal against that refusal was heard  before  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Myers, who allowed the appeal under  Article  8
    ECHR, in a decision promulgated on 21st April 2015.  The  Sponsor  gave
    evidence at the hearing before Judge Myers and was found to be entirely
    credible.  The judge found that there  were  exceptional  circumstances
    justifying her going beyond the Immigration Rules and  considering  the
    appeal under Article 8.  She found that the decision did interfere with
    the Article 8 rights  of  the  Claimant,  the  Sponsor  and  the  other
    children, that there would be no burden on the public purse should  the
    Claimant join her family, that  she  was  the  mother  figure  for  the
    children and that the separation was having a negative  impact  on  the
    ability of the Sponsor to carry out his  duties.   She  also  commented
    that the separation had been detrimental to the Claimant's  health  and
    to her well-being and to that of the youngest child Hannah.

 3. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal  on  behalf  of  the
    ECO.  It was said in the grounds that the judge's approach to Article 8
    was arguably flawed, that she appeared to have taken account  of  post-
    decision  evidence,  she  had  not  considered  whether  it  would   be
    reasonable for the family to  return  to  Zambia  to  reside  with  the
    Claimant and had failed to provide adequate reasoning to establish that
    Article 8 was engaged. It was also contended that  she  had  failed  to
    take into account the  Immigration  Rules,  had  failed  to  take  into
    account public interest considerations, notably under Section  117B  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and finally had failed
    to identify any compelling  circumstances  adequate  to  justify  entry
    clearance under Article 8.

 4. Permission was granted by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Landes  on
    12th June 2015.  She found it arguable that  the  judge  had  erred  in
    taking into account  post-decision  circumstances  and  had  failed  to
    consider whether it was reasonable for the family to return to  Zambia.
    Shortly before the hearing  the  Claimant's  representative  put  in  a
    skeleton argument arguing that the current basis of challenge  had  not
    been argued at the First-tier Tribunal but that post-decision  evidence
    could shed light on the true position  as  at  the  date  of  decision,
    citing DR (ECO: post-decision evidence)  Morocco  [2005]  UKIAT  00038.
    The separation between  the  Claimant  and  the  younger  children  had
    occurred prior to the date of  decision  and  the  degree  of  hardship
    involved in a relocation would be high.  The best interests of children
    were of fundamental importance.

 5. At the commencement of the hearing before me Mr  Mills  said  that  the
    strongest of his grounds  was  that  the  judge  had  considered  post-
    decision evidence.  It was clear from Section 85A of the 2002  Act,  in
    the form existing as at the date of decision  under  appeal,  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal could consider only the circumstances  appertaining
    at the time of the decision.  It was clear from the  statute  and  from
    the decision of the House of Lords in AS (Somalia) v SSHD  [2009]  UKHL
    32 that the  restriction  applied  not  only  to  decisions  under  the
    Immigration Rules but also to those under Article 8.  Any argument that
    a point had not been argued before the First-tier  Tribunal  could  not
    take  the  matter  further  forward  if  it  was   one   of   statutory
    jurisdiction.  Whether that was  argued  or  not  it  still  bound  the
    Tribunal.  He accepted that it might be  appropriate  to  consider  the
    issue of the separation of the Claimant from the younger  children  but
    it was not open for the  judge  to  consider,  as  she  had  done,  the
    difficulties encountered by the Sponsor  in  getting  the  children  to
    school.  The fact that Hannah was now withdrawn was  a  factual  matter
    which the judge was not entitled to consider.

 6. Mr Mills continued that the judgment of the Court of Appeal in  SSHD  v
    SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387 was declaratory of how Article 8  should
    be applied.  It was clear from paragraph 57 and  58  of  that  judgment
    that if circumstances had changed a new  application  should  be  made.
    Post-decision evidence was irrelevant.  He said it was also clear  that
    the Rules did not provide for the adult child of a Tier  2  Migrant  to
    come to this country.  That he said was not an accident.  The fact that
    there was no Rule to cover that circumstance was an expression  of  the
    public interest as expressed in the Rules.  He asked me  to  set  aside
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

 7. In response Mr Caswell said that if  there  was  an  error  the  matter
    should be resolved by  a  fresh  Article  8  assessment  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  He accepted that the judge had recited evidence relating  to
    subsequent events following the date of decision but the depth  of  tie
    between Hannah and the Claimant existed as at the date of decision.

 8. Having heard these arguments I  came  to  the  view  that  reading  the
    decision and reasons as a whole it was  apparent  that  the  judge  had
    taken account of post-decision evidence relating to matters  which  did
    more than simply illuminate the correct situation as  at  the  date  of
    decision under appeal.  I accept that  mere  recital  of  post-decision
    evidence was not necessarily injurious to the decision making  process.
    However at  paragraph  23,  in  her  substantive  findings,  the  judge
    referred specifically to Hannah having  become  withdrawn  since  being
    apart from the Claimant and the separation having a negative impact  on
    the ability of the Sponsor to carry out his duties.  As there was  only
    a period of four days between the date of departure of the Sponsor  and
    the other children for the United Kingdom  and  the  date  of  decision
    under appeal, I found that the judge had indeed taken account of post-
    decision evidence to which she was not  entitled  to  have  regard,  in
    breach of the guidance in DR (Morocco).  Accordingly I  set  aside  the
    decision.  I bore in mind what  Mr  Caswell  had  said  concerning  the
    future disposal of the appeal.  No interpreter was necessary and I  was
    in a position to re-decide the appeal myself and proceeded to do so.  I
    expressly  preserved  the  positive  credibility  findings  as  to  the
    evidence of the Sponsor made by Judge Myers.

 9. In his evidence before me the Sponsor said that it would not have  been
    possible in 2014 for him to have  returned  to  Zambia  to  take  up  a
    position as a minister.  He had transferred from a  Pentecostal  Church
    to the Methodist Church and had been released by the Pentecostal Church
    with a blessing.  His position was  no  longer  open  to  him  and  new
    positions in Zambia would be taken by recently graduating ministers, of
    whom there was no shortage.  He would have no work were he  to  return.
    His intention had been to see how his  ministry  would  evolve  in  the
    United Kingdom.

10. He clarified that when his wife had been ill, shortly after  the  birth
    of Hannah, she had requested Nancy to look after the children  and  the
    Claimant found herself in the situation that she felt that she was  not
    doing what she had been entrusted to do by her dying  mother.   It  was
    also culturally expected that the older sibling would take care of  the
    younger.  Prior to her mother's death the Claimant had been training as
    a teacher.  She was currently at home trusting that  the  appeal  would
    succeed.  She had not considered coming in any other  capacity  as  the
    main purpose of her entry would be to care for the younger children.

11. In submissions Mr Mills said that  the  judge  at  first  instance  had
    accepted  that   there   were   compelling   circumstances   warranting
    consideration beyond the  Immigration  Rules.   That  finding  was  not
    attacked.  The facts were sufficiently compelling for Article 8  to  be
    considered outside the Rules.  As at the date of decision  the  Sponsor
    had been the carer for the younger children for two years.  The younger
    children included a very young  child  and  understandably  there  were
    strong ties.  That argued in favour of allowing  the  appeal.   Against
    that the Rules approved by Parliament did not include provision for  an
    adult child of a Tier 2 Migrant to come to this  country.   The  public
    interest was struck in the format of the Rules.  A lot of what was  now
    being argued was as a result of the separation and ensuing difficulties
    with childcare.  He referred again to the judgment in SS (Congo) to the
    effect that if circumstances changed an applicant should make a further
    application for entry clearance.  The Claimant could also seek to enter
    as a student or for work purposes.

12. Finally in response Mr Caswell said  that  the  first  application  had
    merit.  It was accepted by the Home Office that there  were  compelling
    circumstances warranting going beyond the Rules and there  were  strong
    ties between the Claimant and the children.  He reminded me that it had
    been the mother's dying wish for the  Claimant  to  take  care  of  the
    children and he said that the interests  of  children  were  paramount.
    There would be no financial hardship for the United Kingdom treasury as
    the expenses were all met by the Methodist  Church.   The  Sponsor  had
    undergone higher education in English.  Applying the  guidance  in  the
    various leading cases on Article 8 he said  that  all  pointed  in  one
    direction.

13. In considering the merits of this appeal I have borne in mind that  the
    burden of proof of establishing the facts is upon the Claimant and  the
    standard is the  balance  of  probabilities.   The  relevant  date  for
    consideration of the merits is the date of decision under appeal,  that
    is to say 18th August 2014.  I accept the evidential findings  made  by
    the judge at first instance insofar as they are relevant to  issues  as
    at the date of decision.  Having heard the Sponsor give evidence myself
    I accept that he was placed in a very difficult situation in August  of
    2014.  He had given up his position  with  the  Pentecostal  Church  in
    Zambia and had accepted a position with the  Methodist  Church  in  the
    United Kingdom and entry clearance had been granted both to him and  to
    the four younger children.  The decision  for  the  Claimant  had  been
    referred and no decision had been taken as at the  date  that  he  left
    Zambia.  He was not in a position to wait if he  was  to  take  up  the
    position with the Methodist  Church  and  find  places  for  the  other
    children in schools on his arrival.  Whatever he  decided  involved  an
    element of risk but arguably the risk that he  took,  to  come  to  the
    United Kingdom with the other children was the lesser one.  Be that  as
    it may having heard his evidence I accept that his late wife  entrusted
    the care of the younger children, in particular Hannah, to the Claimant
    and that would have been the normal cultural  course  to  take  in  the
    society from which they came.  I accept  that  the  Claimant  undertook
    that role and indeed cared for the children for two years prior to  the
    Sponsor's departure.  It does not take a great deal of  imagination  to
    envisage the very close bond which must have existed as at the date  of
    decision between the younger children, in particular  Hannah,  and  the
    Claimant who I accept was the surrogate mother of the children.

14. Mr Caswell in his submissions referred to the interests of the children
    being paramount.  That is not correct but their interests are a primary
    consideration.  On the evidence I find that the best interests  of  the
    children are served by being in the United Kingdom  with  their  father
    but in the company of the surrogate mother, their older sister.  As  to
    the suggestion that the family should have decamped back to  Zambia  as
    at the date of decision I do not find that that  was  a  reasonable  or
    practical proposition.  The Sponsor had responsibility for the children
    and no longer had any work in  Zambia.   He  did  have  a  position  in
    Leicester with all expenses being  met  and  where  he  had  agreed  to
    continue his ministry.

15. That Article 8 may be an available means for family entry is clear from
    various cases, including in particular A (Afghanistan)  v  SSHD  [2009]
    EWCA Civ 825.  Each case must be considered on its merits.  It was  not
    in dispute that it was appropriate to go beyond the Rules in this  case
    as there were compelling reasons to do so.  It was also not in  dispute
    that there was sufficient interference or lack of  respect  for  family
    life to engage Article 8.  The remaining issue  was  therefore  one  of
    proportionality.

16. Mr Mills quite properly made the point that there was no  provision  in
    the Immigration Rules for over age children of Tier 2 Migrants to  come
    to this country and that he said was an expression  through  Parliament
    of the public interest.  That is a factor I bear very much in mind.  In
    considering proportionality I of course have regard to Section 117B  of
    the 2002 Act.  This Sponsor was in a position to maintain the  Claimant
    as at the date of decision and she would not have been  a  burden  upon
    the treasury.  She had been to higher  education,  taught  in  English.
    She had a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with the younger
    children and as at the date of decision I have found that it would  not
    have been reasonable for the family at that stage to have  returned  to
    Zambia to resume family life there.  I have already found that  it  was
    in the best interests of the children for the Claimant to  be  in  this
    country.  Taking all of those factors into account I have come  to  the
    conclusion that refusal of entry clearance for this particular Claimant
    in her very particular circumstances was disproportionate.  Accordingly
    the appeal is allowed under Article 8, ECHR.

Notice of Decisions

      1) The making of the decision by the First-tier Tribunal  involved  an
         error on a point of law and I have set aside that decision.  I have
         remade the decision and for the reasons set out above the appeal of
         Nancy Kasema is allowed under Article 8, ECHR.

    (2)  There was no request for a fee award.  The outcome of this  appeal
         was not obvious and I have only reached the decision that I have in
         the light of argument and oral evidence.  In  the  circumstances  a
         fee award is not appropriate.

    (3)  There was no request for an anonymity order and none is made.




Signed                              Dated  11 April 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French


