



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/11784/2012

                                                       OA/11785/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London                    |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 5th June 2013                                |On 21st June 2013          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts

                                   Between

                                   Ms A k
                                     and
                                  Miss a b
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Fransman QC
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. In this determination I refer to Ms A K and her minor daughter Miss A B
    as the Appellants and the Secretary of State as the Respondent.

Background

 2.  The  Appellants  are  citizen  of  Belarus  (formally   nationals   of
    Kyrgyzstan). They are mother and daughter.

 3. In summary, on 26th April 2010 the first Appellant  applied  for  entry
    clearance as a Tier 1 Migrant. The second Appellant's  application  was
    dependant upon that of the first.

 4. The applications were refused by the Entry Clearance Officer Minsk. The
    Appellants appealed that refusal on 18th June 2012.

 5. On 19th October 2012 the Appellants applied for  family  reunion  entry
    clearance as the partner and child of  M  B,  a  man  who  was  granted
    refugee status in the UK on 5th October 2012.

 6. The Appellants arrived in the UK  on  21st  November  2012.  They  were
    granted temporary admission initially and  on  11th  January  2013  the
    Respondent granted the Appellants  leave  to  enter  under  the  Family
    Reunion Provisions. Their appeals against the Entry  Clearance  Officer
    Minsk's decision remained outstanding.

 7. Those appeals were heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Jhirad  on  13th
    February 2013 at Taylor House.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  allowed  the
    Appellants' appeal essentially under the provisions of Article 8  ECHR.
    The Judge however in his decision stated,

         "The appeal is allowed  under  the  Immigration  Rules.  The  human
         rights appeal is allowed".

    This  decision  was  despite   an   acceptance   by   the   Appellant's
    representatives in the original grounds of appeal on  18th  June  2012,
    acknowledging that any right of appeal  was  restricted  to  Section  6
    Human Rights.

 8. The  Respondent  sought  to  appeal  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    decision and permission was granted. The matter  was  set  down  for  a
    hearing to consider whether the First-tier Tribunal decision  disclosed
    an error of law such that it would need to be  set  aside  and  remade.
    Thus the matter came before me.

The Hearing Before Me.

 9. At the hearing before me Mr Avery on behalf of  the  Respondent  stated
    that he now sought  permission  to  withdraw  the  Respondent's  appeal
    against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Jhirad.  His  reasons
    for doing so were opaque and seemed to amount to a  pragmatic  approach
    which was that the Appellant (referring to the first Appellant) and her
    daughter  were  now  in  the  United  Kingdom  with  leave.  The  Entry
    Clearance Officer was therefore in effect abandoning the appeal because
    leave was already granted.

10. Mr Fransman on behalf of  the  Appellants,  not  surprisingly  did  not
    oppose Mr Avery's application.  He  did  point  out  however  that  the
    Respondent could only withdraw the appeal  with  the  Upper  Tribunal's
    permission. That is governed by Rule 17 of the Upper Tribunal Procedure
    Rules.

11. Rule 17 which is entitled 'Withdrawal' states that;

         "17 Withdrawal

          1) Subject to paragraph (2),  a  party  may  give  notice  of  the
             withdrawal of its case, or any part of it-

             (a)  ...by sending or  delivering  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  a
                  written notice of withdrawal; or

             (b)  orally at a hearing.

          2) Notice of withdrawal will not  take  effect  unless  the  Upper
             Tribunal consents to the withdrawal except in  relation  to  an
             application for permission to appeal".

    There was nothing put before me to show why I should not consent to the
    withdrawal of the  Respondent's  appeal.  The  Respondent's  appeal  is
    therefore withdrawn and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

Direction regarding anonymity - rule 45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration
Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005

The appellant is granted anonymity throughout these proceedings, unless  and
until the Tribunal directs otherwise. No report of these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.  This
direction applies both to the Appellant and to the  Respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of Court proceedings.



Signature                                             Dated



Judge of the Upper Tribunal


