
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/11430/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |  Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                    |
|On 8 January 2016                             |  On 20 January 2016           |
|                                              |                               |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART

                                   Between

                              umme habiba sifat
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Rahman
For the Respondent:    Mr Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh.  She was born  on  1  January
    1996.

 2. She appealed against the Entry Clearance Officer's decision  to  refuse
    her application under Tier 4  (General)  Student  of  the  points-based
    system with particular relevance to paragraph 245ZV.

 3. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Oakley  (the  judge)  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 16 July 2015 allowed the appellant's appeal as he  found
    that the respondent had  not  substantiated  her  conclusion  that  the
    appellant was not a genuine student.  He  went  on  to  find  that  the
    respondent's decision was not  in  accordance  with  the  law  and  the
    applicable Immigration Rules such that he allowed the appeal under  the
    Immigration Rules.

 4. The grounds claimed that the appellant had no out-of-country  right  of
    appeal as it was a points-based application.  She was only entitled  to
    administrative review.  The judge erred in not striking  the  case  out
    for want of jurisdiction.  The judge could not impose a right of appeal
    or jurisdiction which did not have any statutory basis.  The respondent
    sought that the determination be set aside for want of jurisdiction.

 5. Judge P J M Hollingworth granted permission to appeal.  He said that an
    arguable error of law had arisen in relation to  the  question  of  the
    scope of the jurisdiction of the judge.

Submission on Error of Law

 6. Mr Nath relied upon the grounds.  He submitted that the  appellant  had
    no right of appeal. He relied upon a document he handed up with  regard
    to the commencement date of the provisions of the 2014  Act,  that  is,
    with regard to Tier 4, 20 October 2014.

 7. Mr Rahman submitted that the judge had not erred and asked me  to  find
    that he had made no error in his decision.

Conclusions on Error of Law

 8. The decision was dated 25 August 2014.  At that time, not  all  of  the
    provisions of the Immigration Act 2014 had come into effect

 9. Relevant commencement dates under the 2014  Act  for  Tier  4  were  as
    follows:

    20 October 2014.  No right of Tier 4 PBS appeal against a decision made
                    on any application submitted on or after this date.

    6 April 2015. No right of Tier 4 PBS appeal against a decision made  on
                    or after this date on any application  submitted  before
                    20 October 2014.

10. With effect from 1 April 2008 in relation to decisions made under  part
    6A of the Immigration Rules relating to the points-based system, Tier 4
    applicants wishing to challenge a refusal of entry clearance  were  not
    entitled to appeal except  on  human  rights  and  race  discrimination
    grounds.  S.88A 2002 Act inserted by s.4(1) of the 2006 Act.   Annex  4
    of  the  Tier  4  policy   guidance   provided   for   an   alternative
    administrative review mechanism, such request having to be made  within
    28 days from the date of the refusal notice.

11. Mr Nath submitted the appellant  had  no  right  of  appeal  whatsoever
    against the decision. I find the Immigration Act 2014 was irrelevant to
    the appellant's circumstances as  the  application  and  decision  were
    prior to the  commencement  dates.  Nevertheless,  in  so  far  as  the
    appellant's grounds of appeal before the judge raised issues under  the
    Immigration Rules, the judge had no jurisdiction to consider the  same.
    The only jurisdiction the judge had, was with  regard  to  s.6  of  the
    Human Rights Act 1998 raised at [2] iii of the grounds  before  him.  I
    find that the appellant did have a  right  of  appeal  but  limited  to
    s.84(1)(c) of the 2002  Act  as  indicated  in  the  refusal  of  entry
    clearance.

12. The judge erred in allowing the appeal under the Immigration  Rules  in
    circumstances where there was no right of  appeal  in  respect  of  the
    same, only on grounds that the decision was unlawful under Section 6 of
    the Human Rights Act 1998, regarding which he did not address. For  the
    reasons I have given, I set aside the judge's decision and  remake  the
    same.

13. I have taken account of the grounds of appeal before the judge  insofar
    as they are relevant to the human rights grounds raised. The  appellant
    had been accepted to study for an LLB at BPP University.  The  ECO  did
    not accept she was a genuine student for the reasons  set  out  in  the
    refusal. The grounds claimed the decision had shattered her  hopes  and
    aspirations. Further, that she  had  been  psychologically  devastated.
    There was no  credible  evidence  in  that  regard.  It  was  in  those
    circumstances that  the  appellant  claimed  that  the  respondent  had
    unlawfully interfered with her private life.

14. SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387 is authority for  the  proposition  that
    Article 8 imposes no general obligation to facilitate the choice  of  a
    person to reside here. See SS  at  [39].   Sunassee  [2005]  EWHC  1604
    (Admin) gave a helpful analysis  of  SS  and  sought  to  simplify  the
    complex  requirements  under  the  Rules  by  suggesting  that  whether
    circumstances were "compelling" or "exceptional" was not  a  matter  of
    substance.  Rather, they  must  be  relevant,  weighty  and  not  fully
    provided for within the Rules.  That is, there must  be  a  "gap",  not
    covered by the Rules.  Whilst in practice, those gap issues were likely
    to  be  both  compelling  and  exceptional,  that  was  not   a   legal
    requirement.

15. I am required to give consideration to the aspects specified  in  S.117
    of the 2002 Act as amended by the Immigration Act 2014.   There  is  an
    overlap between the Rules and S.117. A relevant factor under  S.117B(1)
    is that the maintenance of effective  immigration  control  is  in  the
    public interest. The appellant has no right of appeal under the  Rules.
    I do not accept that it is any answer to claim  that  the  refusal  has
    devastated  the  appellant's   hopes   and   aspirations   and   caused
    psychological distress.

16. I bear in mind S.117B(5) that little weight should  be  given  to  life
    established when immigration status was precarious.   See  SS  at  [37]
    which discusses marriage and family life to  a  foreign  national  when
    that person has no right to  come  here.  I  find  that  a  student  or
    prospective student is arguably in a  more  precarious  situation  than
    that considered in SS. See also Patel [2013] UKSC 72 at [57]:

         "It is important to remember  that  Article  8  is  not  a  general
         dispensing power.  It is to be distinguished from the Secretary  of
         State's discretion to allow leave  to  remain  outside  the  Rules,
         which may be unrelated to any protected human right.  The merits of
         a decision not to depart from  the  Rules  are  not  reviewable  on
         appeal: Section 86(6).  One may sympathise with Sedley LJ's core in
         Pankina 'for commonsense'  in  the  application  of  the  Rules  to
         graduates who have been studying in the UK for some years (see para
         47 above).  However,  such  considerations  do  not  by  themselves
         provide grounds of appeal under Article 8, which is concerned  with
         private or family life, not education as such.  The opportunity for
         a promising student to complete his course in this country, however
         desirable in general terms, is not  in  itself  a  right  protected
         under Article 8". (My emphasis)

17. For the reasons I have given, I set  aside  the  judge's  decision  and
    remake the same. The appellant's limited right of appeal  is  dismissed
    on human rights grounds there being no jurisdiction with regard to  the
    Immigration Rules.

Notice of Decision

12.  Appeal dismissed.

Anonymity direction not made.


Signed                              Date 8 January 2016





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 8 January 2016





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart


