
[pic]

UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/11878/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House on              |Decision and Reasons Promulgated on  |
|18 January 2016                      |29 January 2016                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between

                           entry clearance officer
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         Mrs Agatha Ozoemena OkenYI
                         No anonymity direction made
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Sponsor present


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as "the entry clearance officer" and the
    respondent as "the claimant."

 2. The claimant is a Nigerian national  born  on  10  February  1987.  Her
    appeal against the decision of the entry  clearance  officer  dated  10
    September 2014 refusing her application for entry clearance as a spouse
    under Appendix Armed Forces of the Immigration Rules was  dismissed  by
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge in a decision promulgated on 6 July 2015.



 3. The Judge found that she could not succeed under the Immigration  Rules
    as she had not satisfied the English  test  requirement,  although  the
    other requirements had been satisfied as at the date of decision [25].

 4. The Judge then went on to consider  the  appeal  under  Article  8  and
    allowed her appeal on human rights grounds.

 5. He noted  that  after  the  date  of  the  decision  the  claimant  had
    subsequently passed the English  test  to  the  relevant  standard.  He
    stated at [33] that

         "... against this  in  human  rights  appeals  on  entry  clearance
         refusals the Tribunal looks at the circumstances at the time of the
         decision , the view having been taken that  the  correct  approach,
         where there is a post-refusal change of circumstances, is  for  the
         [claimant] to reapply. It has been open to this [claimant]  to  re-
         apply since she achieved the desired English result last November."



 6. He referred again at [36] to the fact  that  she  had  now  passed  the
    English test, and  that  he  has  made  positive  findings  as  to  the
    relationship.  He stated that that assuming the same evidence  were  to
    be provided in respect of maintenance and accommodation,  the  claimant
    should succeed on any future spouse entry application under the  Rules.
    She is free to apply immediately "... and to do  so  may  well  be  the
    quickest way to bring this litigation to an end." [36].

 7. He found that the present refusal constituted an interference with  the
    parties' family life  by  preventing  them  from  living  together  and
    potentially with the sponsor's private life, since if he  relocated  to
    Nigeria he would bring his British army career to an end.

 8. He stated at [37] that in considering the issue of proportionality,  he
    has taken into account the fact that even if the claimant were  in  the
    UK, there would be significant periods of separation when  her  husband
    is on tours of duty, so that a decision to refuse entry clearance which
    had the effect of continuing  the  present  separation,  might  not  be
    greatly increasing the periods of separation, although it no doubt does
    increase it. He also took into account the fact that the sponsor cannot
    relocate now without breaching military law.

 9. In the circumstances, he concluded that exceptionally  it  would  be  a
    disproportionate interference with the family and private life  of  the
    claimant and sponsor to  refuse  her  entry  clearance.  The  strongest
    elements in the claim were the couple's well established  family  life,
    the inability of the sponsor now to return to Nigeria to  enjoy  family
    life without breaching military law, and the effect on doing so on  the
    sponsor's private life as evinced by his career  in  the  British  Army
    [38].  He accordingly allowed the appeal on human rights grounds [39].

10. On 2 November 2015, First-tier Tribunal Judge Colyer  granted  the  ECO
    permission to appeal against the decision, on the  basis  that  it  was
    arguable that he erred by  taking into account that  the  claimant  had
    now passed the English language test. Moreover, he misdirected  himself
    in failing to properly apply the  principles  set  out  in  SS  (Congo)
    [2015] EWCA Civ 387.

11. Mr Kotas submitted that the  Judge  materially  erred  in  taking  into
    account the fact that the claimant had now passed the English  language
    test. The relevant date had been the date of  decision.  That  was  the
    only relevant matter. It ought to have been concluded that it was  open
    to the claimant to make a fresh entry clearance  application  in  which
    she could provide the recent English language test result.

12. He referred to [57] of SS, supra, where the Court of Appeal dealt  with
    a submission that there appeared  to  be  a  reasonable  prospect  that
    within a period of weeks or months, they  would  in  fact  be  able  to
    satisfy the  requirements  of  the  Rules.  They  maintained  that  the
    secretary of state should have taken this into  account  when  deciding
    whether to grant leave to enter outside the rules.

13. The Court of Appeal held that this affords  very  weak  support  for  a
    claim for a grant of leave to enter outside the rules. The secretary of
    state remains entitled to enforce the Rules in the usual  way,  to  say
    that the Rules have not been satisfied and that  the  applicant  should
    apply again when the circumstances have indeed  changed.  This  affects
    the fair balance between the interests of the individual and the public
    interest.

14. The Court of Appeal held that generally it is fair that  the  applicant
    should wait until the circumstances have changed so the requirements in
    the rules are satisfied and then apply, rather than attempting to  jump
    the queue by asking for preferential treatment  outside  the  rules  in
    advance.

15. Mr Kotas also submitted that the Judge erred in his approach by finding
    that the sponsor could not relocate and that would result in  a  breach
    of military law. All UK based spouses and  sponsors  in  the  army  are
    expected to carry out their duties. The Judge was thus not entitled  to
    find that the circumstances are exceptional as that would mean all army
    personnel's' circumstances are to be treated as compelling and the rule
    would serve no useful purpose.

16. In reply, Mr Okenyi stated that  his  wife  is  now  pregnant.  He  had
    visited her in August 2015 and left her on 12 September  2015.  She  is
    staying with his parents. They are taking care  of  her.  He  maintains
    contact with her by telephone.

17. He said that he is supposed to be in Canada but has not  been  able  to
    go. Accordingly, this has affected his work.

18. Mr Kotas informed the Tribunal that the claimant's application was made
    on 15 May 2014 and a  decision  was  made  on  10  September  2014.  He
    ascertained that 13% of applicants have their  applications  considered
    between 10 and 30 days and that 86% of the applications are  considered
    after 60 days.  Provided  the  circumstances  relating  to  maintenance
    continue to apply, the application would most likely be considered in a
    reasonably short period.

    Assessment

19. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found that the claimant could not satisfy
    the immigration rules  as  she  could  not  satisfy  the  English  test
    requirements. He found that all the other elements were satisfied as at
    the date of decision. The English test requirement had by the  date  of
    the hearing been satisfied. Those finding have not been disputed.

20. As noted, the Judge also stated at [36] that assuming the same evidence
    is provided relating to maintenance  and  accommodation,  the  claimant
    should succeed on any future spousal entry clearance application  under
    the relevant Rules. In that respect, she was free to apply  immediately
    "and to do so may well be the quickest way to bring this litigation  to
    an end."

21. I have had regard to [53] of the decision in SS, where it was held that
    good reason would need to be  shown  why  a  particular  applicant  was
    entitled to more preferential treatment with respect to  evidence  than
    other applicants would expect to receive under the rules. Moreover,  in
    relation to the proper administration of immigration  controls,  weight
    should also be given to the secretary  of  state's  assessment  of  the
    evidential requirements needed to ensure prompt and fair application of
    the substantive rules. If an applicant says that they should  be  given
    more preferential treatment with respect to  their  evidence  than  the
    rules allow for, and more individualised consideration of  their  case,
    good reasons should therefore be put forward to justify that.

22. The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not consider the  approach  taken  by
    the Court of Appeal in SS. He found that "exceptionally" it would be  a
    disproportionate interference with the family and private life  of  the
    claimant and her husband to refuse her entry clearance. That was  based
    primarily on the well established family life and the inability of  the
    sponsor to return to Nigeria now to enjoy family life without breaching
    military law.

23. There is force in Mr Kotas's argument that the approach  taken  by  the
    Judge with regard to the specific Rule was erroneous. UK based  spouses
    and sponsors who are in the army, are nevertheless  expected  to  carry
    out their duties. To hold that  the  circumstances  in  this  case  are
    exceptional would mean that all army personnel's' family  circumstances
    were to be treated as exceptional and compelling with the  result  that
    the rules would serve no useful purpose.

24. In such a case, the claimant should have submitted a properly supported
    application for leave to enter once the requirements of the rules could
    be properly satisfied.

25. I find that the Judge erred in concluding that exceptionally  it  would
    be a disproportionate interference with their private and  family  life
    to refuse to grant her entry clearance. I do not find that  there  were
    compelling circumstances shown as  to  why  the  Rules  should  not  be
    applied in the claimant's case in the usual way. The circumstances were
    not such as to entitle the claimant to "jump the queue."

26. I accordingly set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and re-
    make it.

27. For reasons already given, I conclude that no  sufficiently  compelling
    circumstances have been advanced to  justify  the  grant  of  leave  on
    Article 8 grounds. I do  not  find  that  there  would  be  significant
    interference with family life with a  temporary  separation.  There  is
    nothing disproportionate in the entry clearance  officer's  application
    of the rules according to the terms in her case.  The  statistics  show
    that 13% of settlement visa  applications  from  Abuja  are  considered
    within 30 days and 86% are considered within 60 days.

28. In giving effect to the need to meet the public interest  which  is  in
    issue, the requirement  that  the  claimant  make  an  entry  clearance
    application  from  abroad  does  not  constitute   a   disproportionate
    interference with her right to respect for family life.

29. Although the entry clearance  officer  refused  her  application  under
    paragraph 23(d)  of  the  relevant  Appendix  on  the  basis  that  the
    relationship was not genuine and subsisting, the Judge  properly  found
    on the evidence that it was a subsisting relationship.  Moreover,  they
    intend to live together permanently as husband and wife [22]. The entry
    clearance manager had  already  conceded  the  issue  relating  to  the
    financial requirements [23].

30. Accordingly the only outstanding issue was the  English  language  test
    which had not been satisfied as at the date of the decision.

31. As this has  now  been  satisfied,  it  is  to  be  expected  that  her
    application will be considered on the basis  set  out  within  a  short
    period following its submission.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and is set aside.

    I substitute a fresh decision dismissing the claimant's appeal.

    No anonymity direction is made.




    Signed   Date 28 January 2016
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer
