
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/11443/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2nd October, 2012                          |On 28th October 2013         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

                            mrs ovonimo nora erih

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ABUJA

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Karnic of Counsel instructed by BINAS
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant was born on 22nd  October,  1983  and  is  a  citizen  of
    Nigeria.  She made application to the Entry Clearance Officer Abuja for
    entry clearance as the spouse of Onome Efekpokoor  ("the  sponsor"),  a
    British citizen who also has Nigerian nationality.

2.   The application was made under paragraph 281 of  Statement  of  Changes
    in Immigration Rules, HC 395, as  amended  ("the  Immigration  Rules").
    The  respondent  was  not  satisfied  that  the   appellant   met   the
    requirements of paragraph 281(iii) or paragraph 281(iv).

3.   The appellant appealed that decision to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer considered the appeal without an  oral
    hearing.  He found that the appellant  did  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 281(iii), but not paragraph 281(iv).  He went on to  consider
    the appellant's Article 8 appeal  and  said  at  paragraph  18  of  his
    determination:-

         "18. In relation to human rights, it is  in  the  couple's  child's
             best interests to be with her mother wherever she  is.   There
             is no evidence to suggest that  the  appellant  is  unable  to
             provide care to an adequate  standard.   The  child  is  at  a
             nursery in Nigeria.  That can continue.  I  am  not  satisfied
             that the  child  is  sufficiently  old  to  have  developed  a
             significant private life outside the family home  or  to  have
             developed a settled life within  the  education  system  here.
             Her British nationality is not a trump card especially as both
             her parents are Nigerian nationals and that  country  provides
             the core of her cultural origin.  Her father can leave to live
             in Nigeria with them if he  wishes.   He  can  send  money  to
             support them and can visit them."


4.   The judge concluded that it had not been established that  consequences
    of gravity existed to the appellant or her child by  them  residing  in
    Nigeria.  In  the  alternative,  he  found  that  it  would  not  be  a
    disproportionate interference with their private  or  family  life  for
    them to continue it in Nigeria.

5.   The appellant challenged the  decision,  pointing  out  that  both  the
    sponsor and the appellant's daughter are British citizens and that  the
    daughter is dependent on both her parents.

6.   Counsel suggested that it was  wrong  of  the  judge  to  consider  the
    balancing exercise on the basis that the child should be expected to be
    required to live outside the United Kingdom.  The child is, after  all,
    a British subject.  The child's nationality is important.  At the  time
    of the hearing the child was living in  Nigeria  with  the  appellant's
    mother, but the judge erred in  failing  to  recognise  that  the  best
    interests of the appellant's child were  served  by  living  with  both
    parents.

7.   With his customary fairness, Mr Harrison, on behalf  of  the  Secretary
    of State for  the  Home  Department,  entirely  properly  in  my  view,
    conceded that the judge  had  erred  in  law  by  failing  to  properly
    consider the best interests of the  appellant's  child.   He  explained
    that he was not in a position to concede the appeal on  behalf  of  the
    appellant, but accepted that he would find it  extremely  difficult  to
    argue that in all the circumstances of this appeal the decision of  the
    respondent was proportionate.

8.   I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did  err  in  failing
    property to consider the best interests of the  child  and  recognising
    that the child could  not  be  required  to  live  outside  the  United
    Kingdom, of which the child is a national.  The best interests  of  the
    child are served by living  with  both  its  parents.   The  judge  was
    satisfied that  the  appellant  could  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 281(v) and given that the decision was on 24th May, 2012,  on
    the evidence before the judge it  seems  unlikely  that  the  appellant
    would have been able to meet the requirements of the  new  Rules  which
    became effective in July 2012.  The period of  separation  was  likely,
    therefore, to be lengthy and the extent of the  interference  with  the
    appellant's family life rights, extensive.

9.   Having found an error of law on the part of the First-tier Tribunal,  I
    set aside  the  decision.   I  have  concluded  that  the  respondent's
    decision is a disproportionate response in the particular circumstances
    of this appeal and I substitute the First-tier Tribunal  decision  with
    mine.  This appeal is allowed.






Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

