
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/11661/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6th January 2016                  |On 15th January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                         mrs Mithula Uthayabaskaran
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Spurling, Counsel instructed by David Benson
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is  a  citizen  of  Sri  Lanka  whose  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules and the 1950 Convention was dismissed  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Maxwell in a decision promulgated  on  24th  June  2015.
    The grounds of application were lodged essentially on  the  basis  that
    the judge having found there was family life between the Appellant  and
    her family had failed to go on and consider the case  under  Article  8
    ECHR.  This was particularly important because there had been  a  delay
    of fourteen months in the Secretary of State deciding the  application.
    That delay was a factor which could weigh in favour of an  Appellant  -
    see EB (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL 40.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the judge  may  have
    materially erred by not carrying out  a  full  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27
    analysis under Article 8 particularly given the  circumstances  of  the
    case were not limited to the Respondent's delay in  making  a  decision
    which might have prejudiced the Appellant.

 3. The Respondent lodged a Rule  24  notice  observing  that  it  was  now
    settled law that in order to venture  into  a  freestanding  Article  8
    assessment there had to be  compelling  circumstances  which  were  not
    covered by the Rules.  It was submitted that there were  no  compelling
    circumstances in this case over and above the requirements in the Rules
    to justify venturing into a Razgar  analysis.   Thus  the  case  called
    before me on the above date.

 4. For the Appellant Mr Spurling relied on the grounds.  There had been no
    consideration of the substantive facts of  the  case.   There  were  no
    factual findings relevant to Article 8.  Absent a proper  consideration
    of  the  facts  it  was  impossible  to  consider  whether   compelling
    circumstances arose.  I was asked to conclude that  there  had  been  a
    material error in law and the matter should be sent back to the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 5. For the Respondent Mr Staunton relied on the Rule 24 response and asked
    that I uphold the decision.

 6. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

 7. Neither party before me had appeared at  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    there does not appear to be a Record of Proceedings on file which would
    allow me to have seen the extent of which, if at  all,  Article  8  was
    argued before the judge.  I note that Article 8 is mentioned in  Ground
    9 of the Grounds of Appeal from the Entry Clearance Officer.  It can be
    said without fear of contradiction that Article 8 is  regularly  argued
    in an appeal where someone seeks entry to the United Kingdom under  the
    Immigration Rules.  Equally it can be said that it would be a rare case
    where an appeal fails under the Immigration Rules but is allowed  under
    Article 8.

 8. It is arguable that the judge did touch on human rights  in  the  final
    sentence of paragraph 17 of his decision and in paragraph 18  he  found
    that the decision appealed against would not cause the  United  Kingdom
    to be  in  breach  of  the  law  or  its  obligations  under  the  1950
    Convention.  However it has to  be  said  that  the  decision  goes  no
    further than that and no reasoning is applied.  As Mr Spurling  pointed
    out there is no consideration of substantive facts of the case and what
    flows from that in relation to Article 8. It cannot be  said  that  the
    Article 8 case was bound to fail. In my view it was necessary  for  the
    judge to go further than he did and set out  the  basic  facts  of  the
    Appellant's family life and why he considered (as it  appears  he  did)
    that there was no breach of the Appellant's fundamental  but  qualified
    rights under Article 8 if the appeal was dismissed.

 9. Absent reasons for the apparent dismissal of the appeal under Article 8
    I have concluded that  the  decision  of  the  judge  is  significantly
    incomplete and because of that there is a material error in law.  It is
    on that basis that the decision will have to be set aside and the  case
    heard again by the First-tier Tribunal.

10. For the sake of clarity the  next  decision  will  be  confined  to  an
    assessment under the Appellant's rights under Article  8  ECHR  outside
    the rules.  On the basis that further  fact-finding  is  necessary  the
    decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.   Under  Section
    12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and of Practice Statement  7.2  the  nature
    and extent of the judicial fact-finding necessary for the  decision  to
    be remade is such that it is appropriate to remit the case to the First-
    tier Tribunal. There is no need for an anonymity order.

Notice of Decision

11. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

12. I set aside the decision.

13. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald

