
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/11033/2014
     OA/11037/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 19 July 2016                            |On 31 August 2016                |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, NAIROBI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AMK
                                     FKN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr C Jowett, instructed by Albany Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. I make an anonymity order under  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI  2008/2698  as  amended)  in  order  to
    protect the anonymity of the respondents one of whom is a child.   This
    order prohibits the disclosure directly or indirectly (including by the
    parties) of the identity of the respondents.  Any disclosure and breach
    of this order may amount to a contempt  of  court.   This  order  shall
    remain in force unless revoked or varied by a Tribunal or court.

Introduction

 2. In these  appeals,  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  appeals  against  a
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge N J Osborne) promulgated  on
    20 October 2015 in which the appeals of the respondents (hereafter "the
    claimants" - "A1" and "A2" respectively) were allowed under  Art  8  of
    the ECHR.

 3. The claimants are citizens of the Democratic Republic of Congo  ("DRC")
    and were born respectively on 29 May 1997 and 21 May 2002.  In 2014, A1
    and A2 made applications for entry clearance to join their uncle  ("the
    sponsor") who had come to the UK in 2008 and had been  granted  refugee
    status in April 2010.   He,  together  with  his  wife  ("F")  who  had
    subsequently joined him, were granted indefinite leave to remain in May
    2015.  The claimants' applications were made under  para  352D  of  the
    Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended) which allows for  family  reunion
    between a child and a parent who is a refugee in the UK.

 4. On 13 August 2014, the ECO refused the claimants' applications  on  the
    basis that the sponsor was not their "parent" as required by the  Rule.
    In  addition,  the  ECO  concluded  that  there  were  no   exceptional
    circumstances which justified the grant  of  leave  outside  the  Rules
    under Art 8 of the ECHR.

 5. Both claimants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.   It  was  accepted
    before Judge Osborne that the claimants could  not  succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules,  in  particular  para  352D  or  Appendix  FM.   The
    claimants' case was made solely under Art 8 and Judge  Osborne  allowed
    both claimants' appeals under Art 8.

 6. The ECO sought permission to appeal on the basis that Judge Osborne had
    erred in law by  failing  to  identify  "compelling  circumstances"  to
    justify the grant of leave outside the Rules.

 7. On 21 April 2016, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Simpson)  granted  the
    ECO permission to appeal on that basis.

 8. In a notice under Rule 24 dated 9 September 2015, the claimants  sought
    to uphold the decision of Judge Osborne.

The Issues

 9. In these appeals, the Entry Clearance Officer argues that Judge Osborne
    erred in law in his approach  to  Art  8.   The  ECO  argues  that,  in
    determining whether the claimants could succeed under Art 8 outside the
    Rules, the judge was required to apply the well-known 'two-stage  test'
    first identified in R (Nagre)  v  SSHD  [2013]  EWHC  720  (Admin)  and
    subsequently approved on numerous occasions by the Court of Appeal, for
    example in SSHD v SS (Congo) and Others [2015] EWCA Civ 389  and  Singh
    and Khalid v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 74.  That approach required first,  a
    consideration  of  whether  an  individual  can   succeed   under   the
    Immigration Rules applicable  to  Art  8  (in  particular  Appendix  FM
    dealing with 'family life') and  para  276ADE  (dealing  with  'private
    life').  Then, secondly if  an  individual  cannot  succeed  under  the
    relevant Rules dealing with Art 8 then the decision maker must consider
    whether  there  are   "compelling   circumstances"   not   sufficiently
    recognised in the Immigration Rules  to  justify  the  grant  of  leave
    outside the Rules under Art 8.  The ECO  argues  that  approach  should
    have been, but was not, applied by Judge Osborne in his  decision  who,
    instead, adopted a 'free-standing' assessment under Art 8 applying  the
    five stage test in R (Razgar) v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27 and  SSHD  v  Huang
    [2007] UKHL 11.  Further, the  ECO  argues  that,  in  any  event,  the
    circumstances identified by Judge Osborne  though  "unusual"  were  not
    "compelling" so as to justify the grant of leave outside the Rules.

10. The claimants argue that the 'two-stage test' was not applicable as the
    claimants' applications were not under Art  8  but  rather  for  family
    reunion under para 352D of the Rules which is not  part  of  the  Rules
    which "incorporate" Art 8.  Secondly, in any event, the claimants argue
    that if the 'two-stage test' is applicable,  it  is  clear  from  Judge
    Osborne's reasoning that, in fact, he properly identified circumstances
    that were "compelling" and his finding was not perverse  or  irrational
    that the public interest was outweighed by the circumstances given  the
    unusual features of the claimants' circumstances and  the  strength  of
    their family life both with their uncle and his wife (their  aunt)  who
    are both recognised refugees with ILR in the UK.

The Rules

11. The claimants' applications were made under  para  352D  of  the  Rules
    which deal with the grant of entry clearance to the "child of a parent"
    who is currently a refugee in the UK.  Para 352D provides as follows:

         "352D.   The requirements to be met by a person  seeking  leave  to
                enter or remain in the United Kingdom in order  to  join  or
                remain with the parent who is currently  a  refugee  granted
                status as such under the immigration  rules  in  the  United
                Kingdom are that the applicant:

                (i)    is the child of a parent who is currently  a  refugee
                    granted status as such under the  immigration  rules  in
                    the United Kingdom; and

                (ii)   is under the age of 18, and

                (iii)  is not leading an independent life, is unmarried  and
                    is  not  a  civil  partner,  and  has  not   formed   an
                    independent family unit; and

                (iv)   was part of the family unit  of  the  person  granted
                    asylum at the time that the person granted  asylum  left
                    the country of his habitual residence in order  to  seek
                    asylum; and

                (v)    would not be excluded from protection  by  virtue  of
                    article 1F of the United Nations Convention and Protocol
                    relating to the Status of Refugees if he  were  to  seek
                    asylum in his own right; and

                (vi)   if seeking leave  to  enter,  holds  a  valid  United
                    Kingdom entry clearance for entry in this capacity."

12. It was accepted before the judge that the claimants could  not  succeed
    under this Rule as the sponsor, their uncle was not a "parent".  He had
    not formally adopted the claimants and neither was  there  a  de  facto
    adoption (see definitions in paras 6 and 309A of the Rules).  That,  as
    I say, was not  a  matter  in  dispute.   The  claimants'  applications
    therefore necessarily failed under para 352D.

13. Equally, before the judge it was accepted that the claimants could  not
    succeed under Appendix FM.  That follows, no doubt,  from  the  reality
    again that the claimants could not establish  that  they  were  seeking
    leave to enter as the child of a "parent" within Section EC-C (see,  in
    particular E-ECC.1.6).  A further reason would be that this route under
    Appendix FM only applies where the parent is in the  UK  with  "limited
    leave to enter or remain" and, of course, even if the  sponsor  was  "a
    parent" he was in the UK with indefinite leave to remain.

14. The private life provisions in para 276ADE had no  application  to  the
    claimants because para 276ADE is concerned with the grant of "leave  to
    remain" and hence is concerned with  the  situation  of  an  individual
    already in the UK rather than someone seeking entry clearance and leave
    to enter the UK.

15. On that basis, it was common ground before me that the claimants had no
    claim under the Immigration Rules.

16. Whilst I am content to determine this appeal on that basis, I  do  note
    that neither representative drew  my  attention  to  para  297  of  the
    Immigration Rules which deals with  the  requirements  for  "indefinite
    leave to enter the United Kingdom as the child of a parent, parents  or
    a relative present and settled or being admitted for settlement in  the
    United Kingdom".  That provision,  albeit  dealing  with  ILR,  is  not
    restricted to a child seeking to join a "parent" in the UK but includes
    "a relative" who is present and  settled  here.   That,  on  its  face,
    contemplates the sponsor's situation.  Under para 276(i)(f) ILR may  be
    granted, inter alia, where there are "serious and compelling family  or
    other considerations which make exclusion of the child undesirable  and
    suitable arrangements have been made for the child's care".

17. As I have already indicated, I was not referred  to  para  297  at  the
    hearing before me and no reliance was placed upon it in argument or  in
    the documents and no reliance appears  to  have  been  placed  upon  it
    before Judge Osborne.  It is, in any event, a  rule,  like  para  352D,
    that is not intended to be an explicit incorporation of Art 8  but,  in
    substance, its requirements ("serious and  compelling"  considerations)
    closely reflect  the approach set out in the case law for the grant  of
    leave outside the Rules in an Art 8 case.

18. I need say nothing more about para 297  as  nothing,  in  my  judgment,
    turns upon it  in  determining  these  appeals  as  will  become  clear
    shortly.

The Application of the 'Two-Stage Test'

19. The 'two-stage test' is well established in  the  senior  courts'  case
    law.  The approach reflects the introduction from 8 July 2012 of  rules
    seeking to reflect how under Art 8 of the ECHR the  balance  should  be
    struck between an individual's right for respect to his or her  private
    and family life and the  public  interest.   In  the  case  of  "family
    members" those provisions are found in Appendix FM and in  relation  to
    private life issues are  found  in  para  276ADE  and,  in  respect  of
    deportation, in paras 398-399B.  In these appeals, of course, I am  not
    concerned with the provisions dealing with deportation  in  respect  of
    which the Rules (when read with part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002) amount to a "complete code" for determining Art  8
    claims (see, e.g. MF (Nigeria) v SSHD  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192  and  NA
    (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 662).

20. The position in non-deportation cases was stated by Sales J (as he then
    was) in Nagre at [29] as follows:

         "It is only if, after [refusing the  application  under  the  Rules
         incorporating the Art 8], there remains an arguable case that there
         may be good grounds for granting leave to remain outside the  Rules
         by reference to Art 8 that it will be necessary for Art 8  purposes
         to go on to consider whether there are compelling circumstances not
         sufficiently recognised under the new Rules to require the grant of
         such leave." (emphasis added)

21. That approach has been endorsed by the  Court  of  Appeal  in  numerous
    other cases including Singh and Khalid at [62] and SS (Congo) at  [40]-
    [41] - the latter concerned with entry clearance  -  with  the  proviso
    that it does not create a 'threshold' question.

22. Although not referred to by Mr Richards in his submissions on behalf of
    the  ECO,  the  grounds  suggest  that  the  proper  test  is  one   of
    "exceptional circumstances" but, as the case law makes clear, there  is
    no  test  of   "exceptionality"   but   rather   one   of   "compelling
    circumstances" (see Nagre at [49] and SS (Congo) at [49]).

23. The underlining rationale recognised in the case law is that the  Rules
    introduced from 8 July 2012 set out in general the balance to be struck
    between the public interest and an individual's private and family life
    protected by Art 8.  If their circumstances do not  bring  them  within
    the Rule then only if there are "compelling" circumstances  either  not
    covered by the Rules or which are not sufficiently accommodated  within
    the Rules will the public interest be outweighed.  That assessment  is,
    of course, a fact-sensitive one and a matter of judgment to be made  by
    the decision maker.

24. In these appeals, Mr  Jowett  submitted  that  this  approach  was  not
    applicable as the claimants had not made an  application  under  Art  8
    governed by the Rules dealing with Art 8 but rather under para 352D for
    family reunion.  The family reunion Rules, he submitted, did  not  seek
    to incorporate and strike a balance between the claimants' family  life
    and the public interest.  He  submitted  that  in  the  absence  of  an
    applicable Rule which explicitly sought to  strike  that  balance,  the
    'two-stage  test'  was  not  relevant  but  rather  a   'free-standing'
    assessment of Art 8 had to be undertaken applying Razgar and Huang.

25. Whilst I accept  that  the  claimants  did  not  specifically  make  an
    application for entry clearance based  on  Art  8,  nevertheless  their
    applications were dealt with under Art 8, initially by the  ECO  having
    refused entry clearance under para 352D and ultimately by Judge Osborne
    as the only basis relied upon by the claimants before him.  It seems to
    me that once Art 8 is relied  upon  and  properly  forms  part  of  the
    appeal, the fact that  the  claimants  did  not  initially  seek  entry
    clearance based upon Art 8 does not detract  from  the  fact  that,  by
    their own choice, they have now sought to rely upon Art 8 to which,  at
    least in principle, the initial consideration of their case  must  fall
    under the Rules dealing with Art 8.   That  is,  I  apprehend,  why  Mr
    Jowett accepted before Judge  Osborne  that  the  claimants  could  not
    succeed under Appendix FM.

26. I see no basis for differentiating between an appeal hearing where  the
    initial application is made not on the basis of Art 8 but is relied  on
    in the appeal proceedings and a case where Art 8  has  been  relied  on
    from the start.  Providing Art 8 is properly raised and can  be  relied
    upon in the appeal, the balance struck by Parliament by  approving  the
    relevant Rules dealing with 'family life' (in Appendix FM) and 'private
    life' (in para 276ADE) has equal force and relevance to  an  assessment
    of the individual's Art 8 claim.

27. In these proceedings, the claimants were  relying  upon  their  'family
    life' with the sponsor, their uncle  and  his  wife,  F.   Appendix  FM
    contains provisions dealing with situations  in  which  a  child  could
    obtain entry to the UK to join a person in the UK.   That  Appendix  FM
    was restricted to a claim to join a "parent" did not dilute the  impact
    of the Art 8 Rule simply because the claimants could not establish that
    they had a "parent" in the UK.  The  Rule  applied  but  could  not  be
    satisfied by the claimants.  In principle, that is no different from  a
    situation where, applying the "partner" Rule in Appendix FM, a  partner
    cannot establish, as required, that  he  or  she  meets  the  financial
    requirements of the Rules.  The  absence  of  a  rule  in  Appendix  FM
    dealing with a child seeking entry clearance to join someone who is not
    a "parent" merely reflects the strength of the public interest limiting
    entry by a child to join anyone who is not their "parent".

28. That, then, becomes the starting point in applying the second-stage  of
    determining whether there are "compelling"  circumstances  (given  that
    the child is not seeking  to  join  a  "parent"  and  cannot  therefore
    succeed under the Rules)  such  as  to  outweigh  the  public  interest
    reflected in the limitation of who a child may join in the UK  set  out
    in Appendix FM.

29. Against this view, Mr Jowett relied upon  the  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in AT and another (Article 8 ECHR -  child  refugee  -  family
    reunification) Eritrea [2016] UKUT  00227  (IAC).   In  that  case,  he
    pointed out that the Upper Tribunal (McCloskey J, President) applied  a
    "free-standing" approach to Art 8 in a case where  the  appellants  had
    sought entry clearance to join a refugee in the UK who was respectively
    their son and brother.  Mr Jowett submitted the present appeals were on
    all-fours with the situation in AT and another.  The  appellants  there
    could not succeed under the Refugee Family Reunion Rule in paras  352A-
    352F as there was no provision that allowed family members  to  join  a
    child refugee in the UK.  Mr Jowett submitted that, therefore,  AT  and
    another supported his primary submission that the 'two-stage test'  did
    not apply when a claim for entry clearance based  upon  family  reunion
    with a refugee failed under the Rules and the Tribunal was  considering
    whether the refusal of entry clearance breached Art 8.

30. I acknowledge that AT and another is, on its face, consistent  with  Mr
    Jowett's primary submission in these appeals.  It  is,  however,  clear
    from reading the determination in AT and  another  that  the  arguments
    raised in these appeals were not raised before the President in AT  and
    another.

31. As in these appeals, the appellants in AT and another do not appear  to
    have argued that they had any claim under Appendix FM.  Indeed,  as  in
    these appeals, the case proceeded on the basis that the  only  argument
    was whether they could succeed under Art  8  outside  the  Rules.   The
    Upper Tribunal proceeded  on  the  basis  that  there  was  a  "blanket
    prohibition" in operation under the Rules where  an  individual  sought
    family reunification with a child (see [10]-[11]).   That  may  not  be
    precisely analogous to these appeals where there is,  at  least,  Rules
    dealing with family reunification by children with a sponsor who  is  a
    "parent" including an adoptive parent.   The  Rules,  in  other  words,
    contemplate  family  reunification  with  a  refugee  in   a   parental
    relationship but limited to a person defined as a  "parent"  under  the
    Rules.

32. The appellants in AT and  another  were,  before  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    relying upon their "family life" and, as presently advised, that in  my
    judgment engaged the provisions of Appendix FM but which they, like the
    claimants in these appeals, could not succeed under.  As I have already
    indicated, the arguments raised in these appeals were simply not raised
    in AT and another.  I am unable to discern, therefore,  what  view  the
    President would  have  expressed  in  respect  of  them.   For  obvious
    reasons, he does not engage with the arguments made by the  parties  in
    the appeals before me.   Even  so,  it  is  with  some  hesitation  and
    caution, given the President's approach, that I reach the conclusion on
    the applicability of the 'two-stage test' that I have  above.   In  the
    absence of any reasoned authority to the  contrary,  I  have  concluded
    that in the circumstances of  these  claimants,  in  determining  their
    claims under Art 8, Judge Osborne was required to apply the  'two-stage
    test' and to consider whether, given that they could not succeed  under
    the Art 8 Rules, there were "compelling" circumstances which  were  not
    recognised adequately or at all under the Rules  which  outweighed  the
    public interest so as to justify the grant of leave under Art 8 outside
    the Rules.

Judge Osborne's Decision

33. In form, I am satisfied that Judge Osborne did not apply the 'two-stage
    test' but, in substance, he did.  For the reasons that I now give, I am
    satisfied  that  Judge   Osborne   properly   identified   "compelling"
    circumstances in the case of the claimants  based  upon  their  unusual
    circumstances and strength of their  family  life.   His  finding  that
    those circumstances outweighed the public interest such that the  ECO's
    decisions were disproportionate was a rational finding  based  properly
    upon all the evidence and is legally unassailable.

34. I turn, therefore, to Judge Osborne's reasoning.  His  full  reasoning,
    which is detailed and thorough, is found in  para  14(i)-(xxxvii).   At
    para 14(ii)-(xvii), Judge Osborne set out the background  circumstances
    of the claimants (whom he refers to as the "appellants"), the  sponsor,
    his wife "F" and their family leading to the  sponsor  gaining  refugee
    status and ILR in the UK as follows:

         "(ii)    Neither of the Appellants are the natural children of  the
                Sponsor.  Neither  of  the  Appellants  have  been  formally
                adopted by the Sponsor.

         (iii)    A1 is now aged 18 years and so is not a minor.

         (iv) Having heard the evidence of [the sponsor] and his wife F  and
                having compared  their  oral  evidence  with  their  written
                statements I find that  despite  skilled  and  appropriately
                probing cross-examination by Miss  Eleanor  Jefferies  (Home
                Office Presenting  [Officer])  no  material  inconsistencies
                emerged in their evidence.  Additionally, I find that  their
                evidence was  given  in  a  disarmingly  understated,  open,
                relatively  anxious,  and  genuinely   caring   manner.    I
                unhesitatingly  assess  both  the  Sponsors  as  honest  and
                credible witnesses who attempted throughout  their  evidence
                to genuinely assist the decision making process.

         (v)  [The sponsor] confirms in his statement that  his  own  father
                died in 1997 whereafter he continued to live at  the  family
                home with his mother and  two  younger  brothers,  [B1]  and
                [B2].  His brother [B3] was the father  of  A2  (the  second
                Appellant).  [B3] was not married to A2's mother and in 2004
                when A2 was 2 years, [B3] brought A2 to live at  the  family
                home as her mother did not wish to care for her.

         (vi) [A1] is the son of the Sponsor's sister [S].   [S]  had  lived
                with her husband, A2 and their other son [J].  Both [S]  and
                her husband died of AIDS in 2006.  From 2005 the Sponsor and
                his mother had assumed care of both A1 and [J].

         (viii)   The Sponsor's sister [E] never married or left the  family
                home.  Her son [D] was born in 2006 and lived at the  family
                home with the Sponsor and the rest of the family.   [E]  and
                the Sponsor's brother [B3] were killed  in  a  road  traffic
                accident in 2007 in which six other  people  in  total  were
                also killed.

         (ix) The Sponsor married his wife [F] in 2000.  They have never had
                any natural children of their  own.   [F]  and  the  Sponsor
                cared for all six children who  had  been  left  by  various
                family members  at  the  family  home  by  reason  of  their
                respective deaths or abandonment.  The Sponsor's mother  was
                also ill and was cared for by  [F].   The  Sponsor's  mother
                died in 2011 by which time the Sponsor was living in the  UK
                as he had fled to this country in search of asylum.

         (x)  The [sponsor] was arrested and detained in the DRC on  several
                occasions due to his involvement with the UDPS (and  due  to
                his political opinion).  He did not see  his  wife  nor  his
                mother or any  of  the  children  during  his  detention  or
                following his escape from custody prior to fleeing from  the
                DRC.  He was detained in Congo for  the  last  time  between
                January and October 2008.  He then fled to Kenya but due  to
                the risk of being deported from there back to Congo, he made
                his way to the UK where  he  applied  for  and  was  granted
                refugee status.

         (xi) He applied  for  guardianship  orders  for  the  six  children
                because [F]  and  he  were  for  all  intents  and  purposes
                responsible for all six children from 2006 onwards.  It  had
                become  difficult  dealing   with   schools,   doctors   and
                formalities on a day-to-day basis without  formal  paperwork
                confirming that he was responsible for them and able to make
                decisions on their behalf.  The Sponsor had a formal meeting
                (the minutes of which have been adduced  in  evidence)  with
                his extended family members who confirmed their  consent  to
                the Sponsor being appointed as the legal guardian of the six
                children.  [F] had hoped that they would be  able  to  adopt
                the children as their own but they were legally advised that
                in cases where a couple have been married for five years  or
                more, they would only be able to adopt  a  large  number  of
                children if they already had at least  one  child  of  their
                own.  They had no such natural  child.   Consequently,  they
                proceeded to obtain guardianship orders instead of  adoption
                orders.

         (xii)    The Sponsor was granted refugee status in the UK in  April
                2010.

         (xiii)   The Sponsor applied for family reunion  for  his  brothers
                [B2] and [B1].  The  Respondent  refused  that  application.
                [B2] and [B1] appealed but their  appeal  was  dismissed  by
                Immigration Judge Woolley in  a  determination  and  reasons
                promulgated 18 November 2011 on the basis of the  particular
                facts of those appeals as they applied at that time.

         (xiv)    [F] and the other four children were finally  issued  with
                passports in 2012.  [D] became ill in  2011  with  pulmonary
                problems.  The Sponsor earned money which he sent to [F]  to
                pay for [D]'s medical care.  Payment of those  medical  fees
                prevented the Sponsor from saving money for airfares for the
                remainder of his family.  [D] died in 2011.  His  death  has
                profoundly upset [F], [A2] and [A1].

         (xv) [J] turned 18 and was told by the Sponsor that he was now  too
                old to be the subject of an application for family  reunion.
                [J] and [B1] now live their own independent lives.

         (xvi)    Applications for family reunion were made  for  [F],  [A2]
                and [A1] in 2014.  [F]'s application proved  successful  and
                she has travelled to  join  the  Sponsor  in  this  country.
                Although [F] was tempted to remain in  the  DRC  caring  for
                [A2] and [A1], the Sponsor and [F] considered  that  if  she
                did not leave at that stage she would be unlikely to ever be
                reunited with him.  They had not seen each other since  2008
                when the Sponsor had been arrested, detained, and then  fled
                the country.  Unfortunately, the applications  of  [A2]  and
                [A1] were refused.  It is those appeals which now fall to be
                decided.

         (xvii)   In  May  2015  both  [F]  and  the  Sponsor  were  granted
                indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the   UK   as   refugees.
                Meanwhile, the Sponsor had persuaded his  old  friend,  [PM]
                (whom he calls [P]) to care for [A2] and [A1] for  three  to
                six months  whilst  their  appeals  were  processed.   Their
                appeals have taken  longer.   The  Sponsor  has  on  several
                occasions had to beg [P] to continue with  the  arrangement.
                The Sponsor sends [P] money  for  their  financial  support.
                The money has, for the most part, been sent through  Western
                Union transfers to [B2] who has thereafter provided [P] with
                agreed  sums.   Although  an  inconsistency  arose  in   the
                Sponsor's evidence as to precisely who collected  the  money
                he sent to the DRC for the support  of  [A2]  and  [A1],  on
                balance I am satisfied that he has over a protracted  period
                sent sums of money to his home  country  for  the  continued
                financial support of the two Appellants."

35. Whilst the judge refers to A1 as being an adult, in fact, at  the  date
    of the ECO's decision on 13 August 2014 both claimants  were  children.
    A1 was 17 years old and A2 was 12 years old.  As  the  judge  correctly
    noted at paragraph 8 of his determination, in assessing the  claimants'
    Art 8 claims he was required to take account of the fact as at the date
    of the ECO's decision.

36. The judge (at para 14(xviii)-(xxiv)) carefully  analysed  the  evidence
    and made findings as to the  relationship  between  the  claimants  and
    their uncle and aunt - which he described as their "effective  parents"
    - and the impact (and inevitability) of separation if A1  and  A2  were
    not granted entry clearance:

         "(xviii)      [A1] is now aged 18 years.  He has had to  leave  his
                studies as the Sponsor has been unable to afford to pay  for
                him and [A2] to be educated.  [A2] is age 13 years  and  has
                continued in education.  [A1] was upset that he had to leave
                his education but the Sponsor explained to  him  that  older
                members of a family must make sacrifices to help the younger
                members.

         (xix)    [F] and the Sponsor usually telephone [A2] and [A1] once a
                week but the day they speak varies.  They  use  a  telephone
                landline from a friend's house; they  use  telephone  cards;
                they also exchange messages via Viber  (a  facility  whereby
                they are able to communicate through  the  internet).   [A1]
                and [A2] are not happy living with [P].  They  miss  [F]  in
                particular.  She has been their de  facto  mother  for  many
                years.

         (xx)     The Sponsor has been employed through an agency  for  over
                two years as a mental health support  worker  for  Pro  Care
                Nursing.  He works nightshifts but the number of  nights  he
                works varies as he is engaged in agency work.  He  does  not
                claim working tax credit or housing  benefit.   He  supports
                himself and [F] in the UK and the children in the  DRC  from
                his wages.  He believes that it  is  his  responsibility  to
                support his family as he always has done.  In due course [F]
                would like to obtain employment and she presently is engaged
                in  attending  English  lessons  so  that  she  can   better
                communicate in the English language.

         (xxi)    [F] and the Sponsor have been  the  effective  parents  to
                [A2]  and  [A1]  since  2004  and  2006  respectively.   [F]
                provided their day-to-day care until September 2014 when she
                joined the Sponsor in the UK.  They remain  responsible  for
                the financial support of both [A2] and [A1]  and  they  make
                the decisions which affect their lives.

         (xxii)   The evidence of the Sponsor was entirely  corroborated  by
                [F].

         (xxiii)  Neither the Sponsor nor [F] can reasonably be expected  to
                return to live in the DRC.  I have no hesitation in  finding
                as a fact upon hearing the evidence of the Sponsor  and  [F]
                and upon reading all the evidence  which  has  been  adduced
                that there is a well-established  family  and  private  life
                between the Sponsor, [F], [A2], and  [A1].   They  have  all
                been part of the  same  family  unit  since  2004  and  2006
                respectively.  The circumstances of this family and  private
                life are unusual and have been marked by a series of  family
                tragedies caused by the abandonment of [A2]  by  her  mother
                and then the premature death of  [A2]'s  father  and  [A1]'s
                actual  parents.   I   find   that   the   Sponsor   assumed
                responsibility for them as their natural uncle.  He and  his
                wife [F] had unfortunately not had natural children of their
                own and so have throughout, treated [A2] and [A1]  as  their
                children.  [A2] cannot remember her own mother and so [F] is
                effectively the only mother she has known.

         (xxiv)   As I have already said above, I find that the  appeals  of
                the  Appellants  fall  outside   paragraph   352D   of   the
                Immigration Rules and outside Appendix FM of the Immigration
                Rules.  However I find that all  four  .....  (sic)  of  the
                Sponsor, [F], [A2], and [A1] are members of the same  family
                unit by reason of the private and family life that they  led
                together in the DRC and have continued to  lead  as  far  as
                they have been able since first the  Sponsor  and  then  [F]
                have left the DRC and set up their own family  life  in  the
                UK.

37. At paragraph 14(xxvii), the judge set out the  five  step  approach  in
    Razgar and at para  14(xxviii),  the  judge  found  that  Art  8.1  was
    engaged.  The claimants had established family life  with  the  sponsor
    and his wife which would be interfered with if  they  remained  in  the
    DRC:

         "(xxviii)     I resoundingly find that family life  exists  between
                the Sponsor, [F],  [A2]  and  [A1].   The  Sponsor  and  [F]
                financially support [A2] and [A1] and they speak  with  them
                on at least a weekly basis over the telephone.  I find  that
                the Respondent's Decision interferes with  the  respect  for
                that family and private  life.   I  further  find  that  the
                interference is in accordance with the law as the Appellants
                have failed to fulfil the requirements  of  the  Immigration
                Rules as set out above.  In that  context  the  Respondent's
                Decision has  the  legitimate  aim  of  immigration  control
                insofar as that is in itself a legitimate aim. "

38. As can be seen, for the purposes of Art  8.2  the  judge  accepted  the
    decisions were in accordance with the law and  had  a  legitimate  aim.
    Consequently,  the  judge  then  went  on  to  consider   whether   the
    interference with their family life was proportionate.  He  did  so  at
    para 14(xxxi)-(xxxvii) in the context of Part 5A  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The judge said this:

         "(xxxii) Section 117A applies where a court or Tribunal is required
                to determine whether a Decision made under  the  Immigration
                Act breaches a person's right to  respect  for  private  and
                family life under  Article  8  and  as  a  result  would  be
                unlawful under Section 6 of the Human Rights Act  1998.   In
                considering the public interest question, regard must be had
                to the considerations listed in Section  117B.   The  public
                interest  question  means  the  question   of   whether   an
                interference with a person's right to  respect  for  private
                and family life is justified under Article 8(2).

         (xxxiii) In Section 117B, the proper consideration should be  given
                to the maintenance of effective immigration  controls  which
                are in the public  interest.   Additionally  it  is  in  the
                public  interest  and  in  the  interests  of  the  economic
                wellbeing of the United Kingdom that  persons  who  seek  to
                enter or remain in the United  Kingdom  are  able  to  speak
                English, because persons who can speak English are less of a
                burden on taxpayers and are better able  to  integrate  into
                society.

         (xxxiv)  The Sponsor and [F] each gave evidence through  a  Lingala
                interpreter.  They are not fluent in the  English  language.
                There is no evidence that [A2] and [A1] are  able  to  speak
                English.  It is up to  the  Appellants  to  establish  their
                cases.  They have not established that they  can  speak  the
                English language.

         (xxxv)   It is also in the public interest and in the interests  of
                the economic wellbeing of the United  Kingdom  that  persons
                who seek to enter  or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
                financially independent because such persons also are not  a
                burden on taxpayers and are better able  to  integrate  into
                society.

                The Sponsor has given evidence that he considers himself  to
                be financially responsible for his family  and  he  has  not
                contemplated claiming state benefits.  I find therefore that
                to that extent [A2] and [A1] are  and  will  be  financially
                independent and to that extent  will  not  be  a  burden  on
                taxpayers and are better able  to  integrate  into  society.
                There  are  no   other   issues   which   require   specific
                consideration.

         (xxxvi)  This family has been separated by reasons which have  been
                reflected in the grant of refugee status to the Sponsor  and
                his wife [F].  Since  2004  and  2006  they  have  been  the
                effective day-to-day parents of [A2] and [A1].  Guardianship
                orders have been obtained which reflect that [A2]  and  [A1]
                are the responsibility of the Sponsor, their natural  uncle.
                The guardianship orders are dated 5 September 2007  made  by
                the Peace Court of Kinshasa/Lemba.  [A2]  remains  a  minor.
                [A1], although having attained the age of 18 years  has  not
                established an independent  life  of  his  own  and  remains
                living and being cared for by [P] the person with  whom  the
                Sponsor has made arrangements for the care of both [A2]  and
                [A1].

         (xxxvii) Having taken  account  of  all  the  evidence  and  having
                carefully balanced  the  same  between  the  rights  of  the
                individual and the interests of the UK public, for  all  the
                above reasons I find that the Respondent's Decision and  the
                interference caused by that Decision is not proportionate in
                a democratic society to the legitimate aim to be achieved."

39. It is clear beyond peradventure that Judge Osborne made clear  findings
    based upon a careful and detailed consideration of  the  evidence.   He
    found that there was family life between A1 and A2 and the sponsor  and
    his wife.  He found that family life could  not  continue  in  the  DRC
    because the sponsor and his wife were refugees in the UK and could  not
    return to the DRC.   The  decisions  to  refuse  entry  clearance  were
    maintained, therefore, the separation between the claimants and sponsor
    and his wife would be inevitable.  The judge also  identified,  in  his
    assessment of the evidence,  the  tragic  circumstances  in  which  the
    family including A1 and A2 had been subjected to and that  the  sponsor
    and his wife had become the de facto parents of A1 and A2 but had  been
    unable to adopt them as they did not have a child of  their  own.   The
    judge also had well in mind that the claimants  were  currently  looked
    after by an "old friend" but on a temporary basis.   Financial  support
    and all important decisions were made by the sponsor and his wife.

40. In the ECO's grounds, it is argued that the judge failed to  take  into
    account that the father of the sponsor's wife and her brother  remained
    in the local area in the DRC.  Whilst that was F's evidence in outline,
    in fact in her statement (A10 of FtT bundle at paras  15  and  20)  she
    identified that her parents were elderly and that her brother supported
    them.  However, her parents were too elderly to care for the  claimants
    and her brother, who was unmarried, would not be able to care  for  the
    claimants as he had to work and earn money to support himself  and  his
    parents.  The evidence before Judge Osborne,  which  he  accepted,  was
    that A1 and A2 had been cared for and brought up as the children of the
    sponsor and F since 2004 and 2006 respectively.  Mr  Richards  did  not
    seek to address me on this point in his oral evidence and I see nothing
    in the evidence to undermine the judge's finding that the sponsor and F
    were and are the de facto parents (as they have been for many years) of
    the claimants and that the effect of these decisions is  inevitably  to
    separate children from those  who  act  as  their  parents.   There  is
    nothing in the evidence that could have led the judge to conclude  that
    satisfactory alternative arrangements could be made for their long term
    care in the DRC.

41. Mr Jowett also placed reliance upon the Supreme Court's decision in  AA
    (Somalia) v Entry Clearance Officer [2014] 1 WLR 43.  In that case, the
    Supreme Court was also  concerned  with  a  decision  to  refuse  entry
    clearance to a child in order to join a family member who was a refugee
    in the UK.  He was the husband of the applicant's sister and  had  been
    granted refugee status having left Somalia as a  result  of  the  civil
    war.  In seeking entry clearance under para 352D as  the  "child  of  a
    parent" who is a refugee in the UK, the applicant  argued  that,  as  a
    result of Islamic law and the institution  of  Kafala,  having  been  a
    member of the sponsor's family unit  she  was  to  be  treated  as  his
    "child".  The Supreme Court rejected that argument on  the  basis  that
    the sponsor was not  the  applicant's  "parent"  whether  by  de  facto
    adoption as defined in  the  Rules  or  otherwise.   Nevertheless,  the
    applicant succeeded - indeed it was not challenged in the Supreme Court
    - because the First-tier Tribunal (whose decision had  been  upheld  on
    appeal) had allowed the applicant's appeal under Art 8.

42. Before Judge Osborne, Mr Jowett relied upon AA (Somalia)  and  drew  an
    analogy between these appeals and the outcome under Art 8 in that case.
     In particular, Mr Jowett submitted before me that  the  Supreme  Court
    had recognised the utility of Art 8 in a case such as  AA  (Somalia)  -
    and Mr Jowett submitted likewise in these appeals -  where  the  Family
    Reunion Rule was narrowly drawn in respect of definition of a "parent".
     Judge Osborne, having cited a number of passages in  the  judgment  of
    Lord Carnwath JSC noted at para 14(xvi) that:

         "In AA (Somalia) [2013] the Appellants lost their appeal under  the
         Rules but those appeals were allowed under Article 8 ECHR.  If  the
         positions of the Appellants in AA (Somalia) is not identical to the
         positions of A2  and  A1,  they  are  for  every  practical  effect
         directly analogous."

43. Of course, the individual assessment required  in  determining  whether
    there are compelling circumstances and a breach of Art 8 necessarily is
    fact-sensitive.  However, the general observation by Judge Osborne  is,
    in my view, well made and is reflective of the fact that,  albeit  that
    these claimants cannot succeed under the Family Reunion Rule or  indeed
    under the Art 8 Rules, they have an  analogous  relationship  with  the
    sponsor and his wife in these appeals to that of a "parent" or,  as  in
    AA (Somalia), are de facto parents.  That, in my judgment, was, and is,
    a matter properly to be taken into account in determining  whether  the
    claimants' circumstances were "compelling".

44. In my judgment, Judge Osborne properly considered  the  balance  to  be
    struck between the  public  interest,  having  regard  to  the  matters
    required to be taken into account under s.117B of the 2002 Act and,  in
    substance, the 'best interests' of the  claimants  which  were  engaged
    despite the fact that they were not in  the  UK  and  so  s.55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009  did  not  apply  (see  T
    (s.55 BCI 2009 - entry clearance) Jamaica [2011] UKUT 00483 (IAC)).

45. In my  judgment,  Judge  Osborne's  reasoning  identifies  "compelling"
    circumstances which outweighed the public  interest  reflected  in  the
    fact that the claimants could not succeed under any Rule.  None of  the
    judge's primary findings of fact are challenged and, in substance  even
    if not in form,  Judge  Osborne  carried  out  the  required  balancing
    exercise outside the Rules and came to a wholly sustainable  conclusion
    that the  public  interest  was  outweighed  by  the  strength  of  the
    claimants' individual circumstances.

46. Consequently, any error  of  law  made  by  the  judge  in  failing  to
    explicitly apply the 'two-stage test' was not material to his  decision
    that the ECO's decisions in respect of each of the  claimants  breached
    Art 8 of the ECHR.

Decision

47. Thus, for these reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  to  allow
    each of the claimants' appeals under Art 8 did not involve  a  material
    error of law.  The First-tier Tribunal's decisions stand.

48. Accordingly,  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's  appeals  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal are dismissed.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                       Date 31st August 2016


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Judge Osborne made a full fee award in favour of each of  the  claimants  in
the sum of �140 and I see no reason to decide otherwise  and  accordingly  I
affirm that order.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                       Date 31st August 2016

