







UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/11539/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 30 July 2014                              |On: 12 August 2014           |
|Prepared:  11 August 2014                     |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                           Entry Clearance Officer

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         Mrs Vaishnavi Murugeswaran
                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Spurling, counsel (instructed by Biruntha
Solicitors)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. For the sake of convenience I shall refer  to  the  appellant  as  the
      entry clearance officer and the respondent as "the claimant."


   2. The claimant is a Sri Lankan  national  born  on  6th  May  1990.  She
      appeals  against  the  decision  of  the   respondent   refusing   her
      application for an entry clearance  to  the  UK  as  a  partner  under
      Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.


   3. In a determination promulgated on 9th May  2014,  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Andonian allowed the claimant's  appeal  under  the  Immigration
      Rules.


   4. At paragraph 4 of the determination, the Judge noted that  the  burden
      of proof was on the appellant. It was "true" that the  sponsor's  bank
      statements did not show credits that  directly  matched  the  payments
      that he had received from various employers but that was because  they
      pay the sponsor in cash. He had however provided payslips and evidence
      that they pay him  the  required  salary  and  that  would  have  been
      sufficient. It was "....not fair to refuse to allow the  appellant  to
      join the sponsor just because the respondent expects people to be paid
      direct into the bank account and not by cash."


   5. He had earlier noted at paragraph 3 that the entry  clearance  officer
      made a  number  "of  technical  objections  to  the  evidence  of  the
      sponsor's pay." The sponsor had done his best to provide  the  missing
      evidence in the bundle  before  the  Tribunal  and  to  show  that  he
      continues to earn enough to support himself and the appellant  without
      recourse to public funds. However, he could not provide everything  as
      specified because he could not find the payslips for the weeks 22  and
      36.


   6. He noted that First Call had provided a letter to confirm the type  of
      work that the sponsor does for them at the moment. He had asked for  a
      letter from them with the information required for the entry clearance
      officer but they said they would not provide him with such information
      in writing other than the letter they had given him and which had been
      supplied.


   7. On 12th June 2014, First-tier Tribunal Judge Colyer granted the  entry
      clearance officer permission to appeal on the  basis  of  the  grounds
      prepared by the respondent.  These were that the Judge paid no  regard
      to the specified evidence comprehensively set out in the  rules.  Some
      documentation did not satisfy the requirements specified. He failed to
      deal with issues raised in the refusal letter. He did not have  proper
      regard to the specified period before the relevant date,  for  example
      with regard to the sponsor's failure to provide  payslips  covering  a
      six month period.  It is not clear what  the  sponsor's  actual  gross
      income was as at the date of application.


   8. Ms Everett on behalf of the entry clearance officer submitted that the
      rules relating to the specified evidence required to be  produced  are
      set out in Appendix FM-SE to the rules. These  identify  the  type  of
      evidence required, the period they cover and the format they should be
      in.


   9. She submitted that the Tribunal had no regard  to  this.  Whilst  some
      documentation had been submitted, it did not satisfy the  requirements
      of Appendix FM-SE as set out in the reasons for refusal  letter.  That
      included missing payslips which were required  to  be  submitted.  The
      payslips from First Call Services did not cover a six month period and
      were not dated within 28 days of the application, being  weekly  slips
      rather than monthly. Nor were they sequential and payslips  for  weeks
      22 and 36 were missing.


  10. Although letters were provided from each of the  sponsor's  employers,
      only the letter from Park Stores met the requirements  of  the  rules.
      The letter from First  Call  Services  did  not  state  the  sponsor's
      employment type or salary or the period over which the  current  level
      of salary had been paid. Moreover, the letter from ST Stores confirmed
      the sponsor's salary but  did  not  confirm  the  length  or  type  of
      employment, i.e. whether permanent, fixed term,  contract  or  agency.
      Nor did it confirm the period over which the current level  of  salary
      had been paid.


  11. Further, the sponsor's Halifax bank  statements  from  11th  May  2012
      until 24th December 2012 had been provided. Although  they  covered  a
      six month period and are dated within 28  days  of  the  date  of  the
      application, they only show salary credits from  First  Call  Services
      but not the other two employers.


  12. She submitted that these documents are specified in Appendix FM-SE and
      must be provided.


  13. She submitted that the Judge dismissed the entry  clearance  officer's
      reasons as "technical objections".  He did however accept that it  was
      correct that the sponsor's bank statements did not show  credits  that
      directly matched the payments he had received from ST Stores and  Park
      Stores. However, the requirements are plain. It had not been  for  the
      Judge simply to ignore the failure to comply with the appendix.


  14. The entry clearance officer requires proof of income to be produced in
      particular ways. No specified documentation  in  this  case  had  been
      provided. The statement by the Judge at paragraph 4 that  it  was  not
      fair for the respondent to refuse to allow the claimant  to  join  her
      husband just because the entry clearance officer expects people to  be
      paid directly into their bank account and not by cash,  constitutes  a
      misdirection.


  15. Nor was this a case where it could be found that a kind of  evidential
      flexibility was apposite. There is still no documentation submitted to
      address the gaps in the claimant's evidence.


  16. Ms Everett submitted that there is no dispute that the claimant cannot
      succeed under the rules.  The  only  possible  basis  would  be  under
      Article 8. In the event that  the  determination  is  set  aside,  the
      Article 8 decision would  have  to  be  remade  without  any  findings
      preserved. She submitted that there needs  to  be  an  assessment  "ab
      initio."


  17. Mr Spurling initially sought to resist the appeal. No Rule 24 response
      had  been  provided.  He  accepted  that  it  was  "not  the  clearest
      determination". The Judge had regard to such documentary  evidence  as
      was produced coupled with the claimant's own oral  evidence  which  he
      found to be credible.


  18. Both parties accepted that the Judge failed to make any findings  with
      regard to Article 8, notwithstanding the fact that Article 8 had  been
      raised in the grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.


  19. Mr Spurling noted that it is clear from the entry clearance  manager's
      review dated 21st November 2013 that the claimant had raised Article 8
      grounds. In fact the review dealt at some length with  the  Article  8
      grounds.


  20. Ms Everett accepted that in the circumstances this was a  proper  case
      for remitting the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal on the basis  that
      there had been no consideration given to the  Article  8  grounds  and
      accordingly the claimant  had  been  deprived  of  the  benefit  of  a
      decision relating to Article 8 by the First-tier Tribunal.


     Assessment


  21. The First-tier Tribunal Judge was not entitled simply  to  ignore  the
      requirements of Appendix FM-SE in respect of specified  documentation.
      I also find that his assessment that it was "not  fair  to  refuse  to
      allow the appellant to join the sponsor just  because  the  respondent
      expects people to be paid direct into the  bank  account  and  not  by
      cash" is legally irrelevant.


  22.  There  was  no  justification  provided  for  simply   ignoring   the
      requirements under the Rules to provide documentation  and  to  comply
      with the mandatory requirements as to the nature and  extent  of  such
      documentation.


  23. Accordingly, I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge
      allowing the appeal under the Immigration Rules.


  24. There was no consideration given to the Article 8  claim.  Ms  Everett
      has properly conceded that in the circumstances the Article 8 decision
      would have to be remade without any findings preserved. She  submitted
      that there needs to be an assessment "ab initio."


  25. Both parties have submitted that  this  is  in  the  circumstances  an
      appropriate case for the appeal  to  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal for a hearing relating to Article  8,  which  has  not  taken
      place before the First-tier Tribunal.


  26. I have  had  regard  to  the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statement
      regarding the issue of remitting an appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal
      for a fresh decision. The normal  approach  would  be  for  the  Upper
      Tribunal itself to determine appeals where an error of  law  is  found
      even if some further fact finding is necessary.


  27. However, I am satisfied in this case that the failure to consider  the
      claimants appeal at all under article 8 has meant  that  the  claimant
      has been deprived  of  a  proper  opportunity  to  present  her  case.
      Furthermore, the extent of judicial fact finding  which  is  necessary
      for a decision to be re-made is fairly  extensive.  There  will  be  a
      complete re-hearing without findings preserved. I have also had regard
      to the overriding objective and conclude that it  would  be  just  and
      fair to remit the case.


  28. I canvassed with  Mr  Spurling  whether  the  best  interests  of  the
      claimant would  perhaps  not  be  better  served  by  making  a  fresh
      application from abroad. That is particularly so  if  the  sponsor  is
      currently able to meet all the relevant requirements under  the  rules
      and Appendix, including the annual gross income required. He indicated
      that this would indeed be discussed with his solicitors.


  29. In the circumstances I remit the appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      (Taylor House) for a fresh decision to be made,  by  any  Judge  other
      than First-tier Tribunal Judge Andonian.









                               Signed                 Date   11/8/2014


                               C R Mailer
                               Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge




