
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/11903/2013
     OA/11913/2013
     OA/11915/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 18th February 2014                           |On 18th February 2014      |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN

                                   Between

                               MRS SANA KASHIF
                             MISS MINAHAL KASHIF
                         MASTER MUHAMMAD UMAR KASHIF
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer - ISLAMABAD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     The Sponsor in person assisted by his Mackenzie
                  friend, Mr Yasar Rafiq)
For the Respondent:  Mr G Jack (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent  appeals to the Upper Tribunal against a decision of the
    First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Graham)  by  which,  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 16th December 2013, she allowed the Appellants'  appeals
    against the Entry Clearance Officer's decisions to  refuse  them  entry
    for settlement as the spouse and children  of  a   person  present  and
    settled in the UK.

 2. The relevant Immigration Rule is Appendix FM and the decision was taken
    on 10th May 2013.

 3. The Entry Clearance Officer argues that the Judge erred when she  found
    that as at the date of decision the Appellants met the requirements  of
    the Rules on the basis of evidence that was produced to her but not  to
    the Entry Clearance Officer.

 4. The Entry Clearance Officer is correct and I find that  the  Judge  did
    err. Whilst in an out of country appeal section 85 of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 provides that the relevant date is  the
    date of decision, that means that an applicant has to show that  as  at
    the date of decision they met the requirements of the Immigration Rules
    rather than at the date of hearing. Appendix FM requires  an  Appellant
    to have submitted the specified  documents  indicating  they  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules with the application. Therefore in  order  to
    meet the requirements of the Rules at the date of  decision  they  must
    have submitted all the documents with the application. They did not  do
    so in this case and therefore the Appellants could not possibly succeed
    under the Rules. In allowing the appeal under the Rules  therefore  the
    judge has made an error of law.  As  that  led  to  the  appeals  being
    allowed it is a material error of law and so I set aside the First-tier
    Tribunal's determination in its entirety.

 5. As the facts are straightforward I proceeded to redecide the appeal. It
    is clear that the Appellants cannot succeed under the Rules and so  the
    appeal under the Rules is dismissed.

 6. So far as Article 8 is concerned, although it is true that by  refusing
    the application this family are prevented from living together  in  the
    UK, that is a temporary state of affairs and I find that such  decision
    is not disproportionate. It seems clear from the  evidence  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal that  this  family  can  bring  itself  within  the
    requirements of  Appendix  FM.  Therefore  they  need  to  make  a  new
    application to the Entry Clearance Officer accompanied by the requisite
    documents. It is not a disproportionate interference to their right  to
    family life to expect them to comply with the Immigration  Rules.  Thus
    the appeal also falls to be dismissed on human rights grounds.

 7. Having found that the First-tier Tribunal made a material error of  law
    in its determination I set it aside and I redecide  it  such  that  the
    Appellants' appeals are dismissed.  Accordingly,  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

Signed                              Date 18th February 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
