
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/11488/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent          |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 3rd July 2014                                |On 14th July 2014          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COATES

                                   Between

                             MISS AMANDEEP KAUR
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss E Rutherford instructed by J M Wilson
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of India born on 28th September  1987.   Her
    application for an EEA family permit as a dependent family member of an
    EEA national exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom was refused
    by the Respondent on 3rd May 2013.  Her appeal against that refusal was
    allowed under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006
    by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Chohan on 19th February 2014.

 2. The Respondent's reasons for refusal of  entry  clearance  refer  to  a
    supporting statement submitted by the Appellant with  her  application.
    In this she stated that her studies  finished  in  2006  and  that  her
    mother and stepfather had been supporting her financially  since  then.
    However, she also stated that her mother met  her  stepfather  in  2009
    when she travelled to the UK as a visitor; she remained in the  UK  and
    subsequently married the Appellant's stepfather  in  April  2010.   The
    Appellant stated that she had not worked since finishing her studies in
    2006.  It was therefore evident that she  was  somehow  supported  from
    2006 until 2009/10 without the financial  support  of  her  stepfather.
    The Respondent doubted that the  Appellant  was  financially  dependent
    upon her stepfather.

 3. It was further noted that the  Appellant  was  previously  issued  with
    visit visas in  2008  and  2009.   The  Appellant  was  interviewed  in
    connection with one of those applications in the course  of  which  she
    stated that her family  received  income  from  agriculture  and  dairy
    farming.  She further mentioned that her brother worked on the family's
    land which led the Respondent to believe that income  was  still  being
    generated.   This  caused  the  Respondent  to  doubt  that   she   was
    financially dependent upon her stepfather.  Furthermore, she  was  able
    to be supported for three separate visits to the UK during a period  of
    little over a year at a time when her  mother  had  not  even  met  her
    stepfather.  In the circumstances, the  Respondent  was  not  satisfied
    that she was financially dependent on her stepfather as claimed.

 4. The First-tier Judge was satisfied on the evidence before him that  the
    Appellant was dependent on her stepfather, an  EEA  national,  who  was
    exercising treaty rights in the UK.  Accordingly, the  judge  concluded
    that the Appellant met the requirements of Regulation 7.

 5. Grounds submitted by the Respondent's representative in support  of  an
    application for permission to appeal argued as follows:

      a) An alleged failure on the part of the First-tier Judge to recognise
         that the Appellant would only meet the relevant dependency tests if
         it could be shown that the money being  sent  to  her  by  the  EEA
         national concerned was enabling her to meet her "essential  needs";
         and

      b) an alleged failure on the First-tier Judge's part to make  relevant
         findings as to what the Appellant's essential  needs  are  and  the
         extent to which, among other things,  the  Appellant  is  receiving
         financial support from other sources.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  6th
    March 2014.

 7. A Rule 24 response was submitted which, in  summary,  argued  that  the
    First-tier Judge had properly directed himself and  had  made  adequate
    findings based on the evidence.

 8. In oral submissions Mr McVeety relied upon  the  grounds  submitted  in
    support of  the  permission  application.   He  also  relied  upon  the
    decision of the ECJ in Jia [2006] EUECJC-1/05 and the decision  of  the
    Upper Tribunal in Moneke (EEA - OFMs) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 000341 (IAC).
     Mr McVeety referred in particular to  paragraph  41  of  Moneke  which
    states that dependency  is  not  the  same  as  mere  receipt  of  some
    financial assistance from the Sponsor.  The definition of dependency as
    set out in the current UKBA ECIs is then  set  out  which  states  that
    financial dependency should be interpreted as meaning that  the  person
    needs financial support from the EEA national or  his/her  spouse/civil
    partner in order to meet his/her essential needs - not in order to have
    a certain level of income.  At paragraph 99 of Jia the court stated -

         "Article 1(d) of Directive  73/148/EEC  is  to  be  interpreted  as
         meaning that the concept 'dependence' refers to  the  situation  in
         which a  relative  of  a  citizen  of  the  Union  is  economically
         dependent on that citizen of the Union to attain the minimum  level
         of subsistence in the country where he is  normally  resident,  not
         being the member state where he is seeking to reside, and that this
         situation is structural in character".

 9. Mr McVeety added that expenses do not equate to essential  needs.   The
    Tribunal has to ascertain if the financial assistance in  question  has
    been for the purpose of essential needs.  Mr McVeety submitted that the
    First-tier Judge had failed to make a finding on this core issue.

10. For the Appellant, Miss Rutherford relied upon  the  Rule  24  response
    which had been drafted by Counsel who  had  represented  the  Appellant
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  She submitted that,  when  read  as  a
    whole, the First-tier Judge's determination disclosed no error of  law.
    Miss Rutherford  submitted  that  the  First-tier  Judge  had  properly
    directed himself at paragraph 8 of the determination.

11. I concluded that Mr  McVeety's  submission  was  well-founded  and  was
    supported by the case law to which he had  referred.   I  am  satisfied
    that the First-tier Judge failed to make a finding on a core issue  and
    such failure amounts to a material error of law.

12. Both parties invited me to remit the matter to the First-tier  Tribunal
    for rehearing.  Having regard to the error of law which had been  found
    to exist, it was not appropriate  to  preserve  any  findings.   Having
    reminded myself  of  paragraph  7.2  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Practice
    Statements I agreed with the  representatives  and  directed  that  the
    matter should be remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  heard
    afresh.

DIRECTIONS

 1. This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  hearing
    before a First-tier Judge other than Judge Chohan.

 2. No interpreter shall be provided unless one is  specifically  requested
    by the Appellant's representatives.  In this  event  the  language  and
    dialect shall be specified.

 3. The appeal shall be heard at Sheldon Court, Birmingham which  is  where
    the original hearing before the First-tier Tribunal took place.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date 14th July 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Coates
