
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/11791/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 25th June & 17th July 2014                   |On 18th July 2014          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN

                                   Between

                              Ms Jetmira Gjini
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                      Entry Clearance Officer - Tirana
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Hayes (Turpin & Miller Solicitors (Oxford))
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes (25/06/2014) & Mr P Nath (17/07/2014)
                    (Senior Home Office Presenting Officers)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Respondent with regard to a determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Trevaskis) promulgated on  7th  April  2014.  For  the  sake  of
    clarity and continuity however,  I  shall  continue  to  refer  to  the
    Secretary of State as the Respondent and Ms Gjini as the Appellant.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Albania born on 14th June 1990. She  made
    an application for leave to enter the UK as a spouse under appendix  FM
    of the Immigration Rules. The application was rejected  in  a  decision
    dated 7th May 2013.

 3. The Appellant appealed  and  the  appeal  came  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 27th March 2014.

 4. The refusal was on the basis of the financial requirements contained in
    the Immigration Rules and also on the basis that  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer did not accept the marriage was genuine and subsisting.

 5. The Sponsor gave evidence to the First-tier Tribunal. He indicated that
    he had met the Appellant during a family visit to  Tirana  in  November
    2008 and the relationship began the  following  year.  They  maintained
    contact by telephone and by his visits and were married in  Albania  in
    January 2012. Since then they have maintained regular contact and  have
    been on holidays together to Turkey. He  gave  evidence  that  he  sent
    money to the Appellant and that  he  is  employed  as  a  self-employed
    licensed taxi driver and has been since 2011.

 6. He produced his wedding  album  to  the  Judge  and  printed  telephone
    records  from  his  mobile  phone.  He  produced  bank  statements  but
    acknowledged that he had not produced his accounts.

 7. The Judge allowed the appeal and the Respondent sought and was  granted
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal. Thus the matter came before
    me on 25th June.  My first task was to decide  whether  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had made an error of law and if so whether and to what  extent
    its determination should be set aside.

 8. In his findings the Judge found first that on the basis of Raju  &  Ors
    [2013] EWCA Civ 754 he could only take into account documents that were
    before the Entry Clearance Officer. That is wrong.  This  is  an  entry
    clearance  application  as  a  spouse,  not  a  Points   Based   System
    application and the Judge was entitled to take  into  account  all  the
    evidence provided that  it related to matters appertaining at the  date
    of decision.

 9. However despite that the Judge did in fact consider the  evidence  with
    regard to the marriage and was satisfied on the basis of the  documents
    and photographs produced and  the  Sponsor's  oral  evidence  that  the
    relationship was genuine and subsisting and that the couple intended to
    live together in the United Kingdom.

10. That left the question of the financial provisions and  the  acceptance
    by the Sponsor that he had not produced his accounts.

11. The Judge referred to the High Court ruling in MM and others v SSHD
    [2013] EWHC 190 (Admin.) He noted at paragraph 20 that it had been
    decided by the Home Office to put on hold decisions in respect of
    applications which would be refused solely on maintenance provisions
    and he then decided that the Respondent's decision in this case should
    await the outcome of MM before the Court of Appeal. He then went on to
    say at paragraph 21 that he was allowing the appeal on the grounds that
    the decision to refuse it was not in accordance with the law or the
    Immigration Rules or the ruling in MM.

12. Curiously, having so found the judge then allowed the  appeal  outright
    under the Immigration Rules. That  is  plainly  wrong.   If  the  Judge
    thought that the Entry Clearance Officer had failed to follow a  policy
    then the appeal should have been allowed  to  a  limited  extent.   The
    Judge in this case, having decided that the Appellant did not meet  the
    Immigration Rules, then allowed it under the Rules.

13. In any event Ms Holmes indicated that the only policy was to  hold  off
    any MM decisions until such time as the  Court  of  Appeal  had  ruled.
    However this is not an MM case.  This is not  a  case  where  the  sole
    issue was sufficiency of funds.  The Entry Clearance  Officer  was  not
    satisfied about the relationship itself and also it was not  the  level
    of funds that was the issue but the evidence of funds.

14. For those reasons I indicated the grounds were made out. The Judge  had
    made a material error of law. I therefore at the hearing on  25th  June
    set aside the determination preserving only the finding that the couple
    were in a genuine and subsisting relationship. Ms Holmes did not  argue
    with that conclusion.

15. That left the only issue to be decided as whether or not the  Appellant
    meets the requirements of the Immigration Rules with regard to finance.
    I adjourned the hearing with directions for a composite  bundle  to  be
    filed and upon receipt of the composite bundle for the Home  Office  to
    file a position statement.

16. Although the Appellant's representative complied with the direction and
    filed a composite bundle, the Home Office had done nothing further.  To
    be fair to the Home Office, that may partly be due to a failure by  the
    Tribunal to send out my directions.

17. When the matter came before me on 17th July I thus had the  benefit  of
    the full bundle of documents provided on the Appellant's  behalf  which
    included a detailed skeleton argument prepared by Mr Hayes in which  he
    cross referenced with the bundle the various documents  which  complied
    with Appendix FM - SE 7.

18. Mr Hayes having taken us through those, Mr Nath helpfully accepted that
    the Sponsor had produced the  requisite  documents  to  show  that  the
    Appellant met the financial requirements of the Immigration Rules.

19. Having found that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made a  material
    error of law in his decision and having set it  aside  I  redecide  the
    appeal and allow it under the Immigration Rules.




Signed                              Date 17th July 2014




Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
