
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/11622/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 21 May 2015                       |On 19 June 2015                       |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                         Mr SAHILL ALIAS DIPESH RAI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Howells, Counsel instructed by N C Brothers &
Co
For the Respondent:    Ms E Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1.     The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge PJM Hollingworth on 13  February  2015  against  the
         determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Froom who had  dismissed
         the Appellant's appeal against the refusal of his  entry  clearance
         application made  on  5  December  2012  under  Appendix  FM  as  a
         dependant relative and on human  rights  grounds  (Article  8  ECHR
         family life) in a determination promulgated on 22 September 2014.

    2.     The Appellant is a national of Nepal, born  on  10  March  1989.
         The Appellant's father had served in the British Army  (Brigade  of
         Gurkhas) and had settled in the United  Kingdom  in  January  2011,
         where he had been joined by his wife in May 2014.   It was conceded
         on the Appellant's behalf that he did not meet Appendix FM  of  the
         Immigration Rules. The appeal was pursued on Article 8 ECHR  family
         life grounds only.  The judge found as a fact  that  there  was  no
         family life between the Appellant and his sponsor and that  Article
         8 ECHR was  not  engaged,  but  that  if  he  were  wrong,  in  the
         alternative the Appellant's exclusion was proportionate.

    3.     Permission to appeal was granted because it was considered  that
         it was arguable that the judge had erred in his factual finding  by
         considering the "historic injustice" issue only  at  the  stage  of
         proportionality.

    4.     Standard directions were made by the tribunal,  indicating  that
         the appeal would be redecided immediately if a  material  error  of
         law  were  found.   A  rule  24  notice  had  been  filed  on   the
         Respondent's behalf, opposing the onwards appeal.

    Submissions

    5.     Mr Howells for the Appellant relied on  his  skeleton  argument,
         the grounds of onwards  appeal  and  the  grant  of  permission  to
         appeal.  In summary he contended that the judge's  findings  as  to
         family life as set out at [18] of the determination were  perverse.
         The findings were inconsistent with the findings  reached  at  [15]
         and [16], and could not stand.  Although the judge had referred  to
         the correct case law at [13], he had not examined the full picture.
          The fact that the Appellant had lived apart from his  parents  was
         not an indication of the lack of  family  life  but  rather  was  a
         consequence of the "historic wrong" which the judge had  failed  to
         factor into his assessment of the evidence.  Although the judge had
         considered the "historic wrong" later in  his  determination,  that
         was conflation of the issues  and  was  the  wrong  approach.   The
         determination should be set aside and the decision  remade  in  the
         Appellant's favour.

    6.     Ms Savage for the Respondent relied on the rule 24 notice.   The
         judge had taken  a  proper  approach.   The  Appellant  was  simply
         seeking to attack the judge's findings of fact which had been  open
         to him on the evidence.  There was no error of  fact.   NL  and  SL
         (Nepal) [2013] EWCA Civ 8 was relevant.  The  determination  should
         stand.

    7.     In reply, Mr Howells contended that NL and SL  (above)  was  not
         relevant and could not save the determination.

    8.     The tribunal indicated at the conclusion of submissions that  it
         found no error of law and reserved  its  determination,  which  now
         follows.




    No material error of law finding

    9.     In the tribunal's view the grant of  permission  to  appeal  was
         generous.  The grounds of onwards appeal were  an  attempt,  as  so
         often seen in the Immigration and Asylum Chamber,  to  dress  up  a
         difference of opinion or a disagreement with a First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge's proper findings as an error of law.

    10.    Ms Savage was correct to draw attention to  NL  and  SL  (above)
         where the Court of Appeal considered the lawfulness of  refusal  of
         entry clearance to the dependant adult children of  Gurkha  Brigade
         veterans now settled in the United Kingdom.  The  findings  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal in NL  and  SL  that  there  was  no  emotional
         dependence for Article 8 ECHR purposes was upheld in  turn  by  the
         Upper Tribunal and the Court of Appeal; see [50]: "In our view, the
         FTT was entitled to conclude that,  although  the  usual  emotional
         bonds  between  parents  and  their  children  were  present,   the
         requisite degree of emotional dependence was absent."

    11.     Mr   Howells's   assertion   that   the   First-tier   Tribunal
         determination was "perverse" was extravagant and  unjustified.   He
         identified no misapprehension of any fact by  the  judge,  nor  any
         error in the extensive and relevant case law accurately cited:  see
         [10]  onwards  of  the  determination.   The  judge  discussed  the
         evidence with obvious care, and explained the conclusions  he  drew
         about family life as at the date of the Entry  Clearance  Officer's
         decision, the material date, clearly and in detail at [18].   There
         was no conflict with his earlier findings which were a  summary  of
         effectively undisputed facts, including the  Appellant's  financial
         dependency.  The judge was alert to the "historic  wrong"  argument
         which he described as "an extremely  important  consideration"  and
         which the judge addressed fully in the alternative at [20] to  [23]
         of the determination.   Thus  the  judge  dealt  with  all  of  the
         arguments placed before him  on  the  Appellant's  behalf.   It  is
         little short of absurd to suggest that the approach he adopted  was
         mistaken, and that he was not alert to the "historic  wrong"  issue
         at all stages of the hearing and the decision making process.

    12.    The findings which the judge reached as to the non existence  of
         family life in Article 8 ECHR  terms  as  the  date  of  the  Entry
         Clearance Officer's decision were logical.  The  judge  applied  on
         the case law he had cited when stating that "The  longer  a  person
         lives apart from the rest of the family it must usually be the case
         that 'family life' in the  sense  of  emotional  dependency  tapers
         off."  The inferences which the judge drew from the facts  of  long
         separation and demonstrable personal independence were open to him.
          The arguments advanced to the tribunal to the contrary are at best
         a disagreement with the judge's findings.

    13.    The tribunal finds that there was no error of law  in  the  full
         and careful determination and there is  no  basis  for  interfering
         with the judge's decision.




    DECISION

    The making of the previous decision did not involve the  making  of  an
    error on a point of law and stands unchanged






    Signed Dated


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
