
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/11519/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 4 November 2016                 |On 9 November 2016                 |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - New Delhi
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                FATEMA BULBUL
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Miah (counsel) instructed by Sony Sadaf Haroon,
                    solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.   The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this  appeal  but
in order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Ripley, promulgated  on  24  May  2016
which allowed the Appellant's appeal.

Background

3.   The Appellant was born  on  19  October  1996  and  is  a  national  of
Bangladesh.

4.   On 20 July 2014 the Appellant applied for a certificate of  entitlement
as the daughter of Ahmed Amirul Haque, a  British  national.  On  14  August
2014, an entry clearance officer refused the Appellant's application.

The Judge's Decision

5.   The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Ripley ("the Judge")  allowed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision.

6.   Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 28 September  2016  Judge  Lambert
gave permission to appeal stating, inter alia

         "2. The refusal was on the basis of  provision  of  a  false  birth
         certificate.  The  Judge  accepted  at  paragraph  23   that   this
         certificate (A) was not genuine, but nevertheless went on  to  find
         that the appellant's date of birth was  corroborated  by  a  second
         birth certificate (B). There is an arguable inconsistency  or  lack
         of adequate reasoning in this respect and at  paragraphs  25-27  of
         the decision. The grounds further point to  inconclusive  DNA  test
         results in support of the contention that the  Judge's  conclusions
         were against the weight of evidence."

The Hearing

7.(a)    Mr Jarvis for the appellant took me to [2] of  the  decision  where
the Judge narrates that two birth certificates have been  produced  for  the
appellant (the Judge identifies them as "certificate A" & "certificate  B").
He told  me  that  a  document  verification  report  was  produced  and  is
discussed by the Judge at [3] of the decision, He then took me to  [23]  and
[24] of the decision. At [23] the Judge finds  that  certificate  A  is  not
genuine, but at [24] the Judge places weight on certificate  B  because  the
Judge finds it is corroborated by other evidence, even  though  the  sponsor
cannot explain why the appellant's birth was not registered until 2008.

(b)  Mr Jarvis argued that  to  find  that  certificate  B  is  reliable  is
illogical, because the evidence which the Judge found  to  be  corroborative
of certificate B  is  the  same  evidence  which  is  plead  in  support  of
certificate A. He told me that the appellant's date of birth is one  of  the
central issues in this case. As certificate A has been rejected there is  no
reliable support for certificate B.

(c)  Mr Jarvis told me that the Judge's error amounts to  a  material  error
of law and urged me to allow the appeal and set the decision aside.

8.(a)    Mr Miah, counsel for the appellant, opposed the appeal. He told  me
that the respondent's argument cannot succeed because of what is set out  at
[3] and [4] of the decision.  There,  he  told  me,  the  Judge  finds  that
certificate A could not be verified because it could not  be  found  in  the
records, but that certificate B  is  certified  by  the  custodians  of  the
records, who had been unable to find certificate A.  He  told  me  that  the
findings at [3] and [4] form the foundation for the  finding  at  [24]  that
certificate B can be relied on.

(b)  Mr Miah told me that the Judge took account of other  evidence  besides
the documentary evidence discussed between [25] and [28]. He  told  me  that
the conclusion reached by the Judge was well within the range of  reasonable
conclusions available to the Judge. He told me that the  decision  does  not
contain errors material or otherwise. He urged me to dismiss the appeal  and
allow the Judge's decision to stand.

Analysis

9.   At [2] of the decision, the Judge sets  out  the  documentary  evidence
submitted in support of  the  appellant's  application.  At  [3]  the  Judge
identifies the challenge to birth certificate A. Between [14] and  [17]  the
Judge correctly directs himself in law. It is at [20] the  Judge  starts  to
make his findings of fact.

10.  At [23] the Judge finds that birth certificate A  is  not  genuine.  At
[24] the Judge places reliance on birth certificate B and gives his  reasons
for doing so. Identifying the appellant's date  of  birth  is  an  important
part of the Judge's fact-finding exercise. The was  no  direct  evidence  to
suggest  that  certificate  B  is  not  genuine.  There   was   a   document
verification report in relation to certificate A, but not certificate B.

11.  In RP (proof of forgery) Nigeria [2006] UKAIT 00086 the  Tribunal  said
that an allegation of forgery needs to be proved  by  evidence  and  by  the
person making it.    A bare allegation of forgery, or  an  assertion  by  an
Entry Clearance Officer that he believed the document to be  forged  can  in
these circumstances carry no weight.  The  Tribunal  treats  a  document  as
forged only on the basis of clear evidence before it.

12.  It is because there was a document verification report challenging  the
authenticity of certificate A that the Judge found  that  certificate  A  is
not genuine.

13.  The Judge did not unquestioningly accept  certificate  B.  Instead,  he
considered the documentary evidence which points to the appellant's date  of
birth. He found that the was consistency in  the  documentary  evidence  and
that certificate B had been certified by the custodians of  the  records  of
birth. Applying the correct standard of proof,  the  Judge  found  that  the
appellant proves her date of birth and that certificate B can be relied  on.
Those findings which were within the range  of  findings  available  to  the
Judge.

14.  The second crucial part of this case is proof of paternity.  By  virtue
of The British Nationality (Proof of Paternity) Regulations  2006  proof  of
paternity  could  be  established  for  nationality  purposes  by  a   birth
certificate on which the person is named as the father of  the  child  where
the birth certificate was issued within one year of the date of the  child's
birth.  Alternatively the SSHD had to be satisfied and might have regard  to
DNA test reports or Court Orders. However, the  British  Nationality  (Proof
of Paternity) (Amendment) Regulations 2015 SI  2015/1615)  which  came  into
force on 10 September 2015 state that a birth certificate issued  within  12
months of birth  will  no  longer  be  sufficient  in  itself  to  establish
paternity for the purposes of British Nationality. Such a birth  certificate
would instead only act as evidence among a variety of other  considerations,
such as DNA evidence, which could  assist  to  identify  a  child's  natural
father.

15.  The Judge found the DNA evidence in this case to be  inconclusive.  The
DNA evidence was  however  sufficient  to  establish  that  the  appellant's
mother is the British citizen sponsor's wife.  Between  [25]  and  [29]  the
Judge finds that the appellant was born after the date of marriage and  that
the appellant's date of  birth  is  consistent  with  the  British  national
sponsors known history of visits to his wife  in  Bangladesh.  At  [27]  the
Judge finds that the documentary evidence (including marriage  certificates,
school records and references from  members  of  the  local  authority)  all
point towards the sponsor being the father of the appellant.

16.  It was the First-tier Judge to consider what weight  to  place  on  the
various strands of evidence before him. The Judge  carefully  sets  out  the
evidence that he rejects  &  the  evidence  that  he  accepts.  He  provides
reasons for rejecting some sources of evidence and accepting  other  sources
of evidence. The  Judge's  decision  to  place  weight  on  the  documentary
evidence and on birth certificate B is a decision which was well within  the
range of reasonable decision is available to  the  Judge.  The  Judge  gives
adequate explanation for reaching his conclusions  in  the  reasoning  given
between [24] and [28] of the decision.

17.  In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 85 (IAC)  the
Tribunal held that (i) Although there is  a  legal  duty  to  give  a  brief
explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which  an  appeal  is
determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole
makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the  judge;  (ii)
Although a decision may contain an error of law where  the  requirements  to
give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.

18.  The decision that the Judge reached may not be one  of  the  respondent
likes, but there is no error  in  the  Judge's  fact-finding  exercise.  The
Judge takes correct guidance in law, before reaching conclusions  which  are
reasonably open to the Judge. The  Judge's  decision  does  not,  therefore,
contain a material error of law

CONCLUSION

No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision promulgated  on
24 May 2016 stands.



DECISION

The appeal is dismissed.


Signed   Date 9 November 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

