
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/11416/2014
                                                               OA/11417/2014
                                                               OA/11418/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|                                             |                              |
|On 6 May 2016                                |On 19 May 2016                |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                      entry clearance officer (nairobi)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                                                                  m a a (1)
                                  K A H (2)
                                                                        K A
H (3)
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms F Allen, counsel instructed by CNA Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Aujla.

Background

   2. The  respondents'  applications  under  paragraph  297  of  the  Rules
      indicated that the first respondent was the minor son of  the  sponsor
      and the others her nieces.

   3. On 14  August  2014,  the  ECO  refused  the  said  applications  with
      reference to paragraphs 297(i)(a-d), 297(i)(e) and (f) of  the  Rules.
      In brief, the ECO did not accept the claimed relationships;  that  the
      sponsor was solely responsible for the first respondent  or  that  she
      could adequately maintain and accommodate three  additional  children.
      With regard to Article 8, it was said that the sponsor chose to settle
      in the United Kingdom without the respondents.

   4. In appealing, the respondents' stressed that they  were  destitute  in
      Kenya and without a carer since the  death  of  their  grandmother  in
      2013.

   5. An Entry Clearance Manager  (ECM)  reviewed  the  decision  to  refuse
      entry, however the decision was maintained on all grounds.

   6. At the hearing before the judge on 21 September 2015, counsel for  the
      respondents conceded that the Rules were not met and  the  appeal  was
      limited to Article 8 issues alone. The sponsor was  the  only  witness
      and the judge wholly accepted her evidence, which was supported by DNA
      evidence of the claimed relationships. The  appeals  were  allowed  on
      Article  8  grounds  on  the  basis  that  their  circumstances   were
      exceptional and compelling.

Error of law

   7. The grounds of application argue that the judge  materially  erred  in
      failing to have regard to or the public interest under section 117B of
      the 2002 Act; failed to apply those considerations; failed  to  follow
      the test in Razgar [2004] UKHL  27  or  to  consider  proportionality.
      Permission was granted on all grounds.

   8. At the hearing before me, Mr Bramble indicated he was relying  on  the
      grounds of appeal as it was apparent that the judge had not dealt with
      the s117B public interest matters,  however  if  that  submission  was
      accepted, he told me that he was happy for  a  fresh  decision  to  be
      substituted to the same effect, just  dealing  with  that  aspect.  He
      confirmed that the Secretary of State  did  not  dispute  the  factual
      matrix of these appeals. He left it to me to decide if the judge  made
      a material error of law or not.

   9. Ms Allen briefly argued that the judge's error was immaterial.

  10. At the end of the hearing, I announced that the judge made no material
      error of law and that his decision  is  upheld.   My  reasons  are  as
      follows.





  11. The judge did not make any reference to section 117B of the 2002  Act.
      As the respondents are seeking  entry  clearance,  the  only  relevant
      parts would be sub-sections (2) and (3), dealing with the  matters  of
      English language and financial independence. In view of the fact  that
      the respondents were minors at the date of the  decision,  I  have  no
      hesitation in accepting Ms Allen's  submission,  that  had  the  judge
      considered these provisions, it would have had no material  impact  on
      the decision he reached.  Given that the factual matrix of the appeals
      is unchallenged, I conclude that while the judge erred, this was not a
      material error.

  12. I maintain the anonymity direction made by the First-tier Tribunal  in
      the following terms:

        "Pursuant to Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order.  Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the original appellant. This  direction  applies  to,  amongst
    others, all parties. Any failure to comply with  this  direction  could
    give rise to contempt of court proceedings. "


Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The decision of Judge Aujla is upheld.





Signed:                                            Date: 13 May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

