
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/11488/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 31 October 2016                 |On 08 November 2016                |
|                                   |                                   |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between

                                NABILA LOUINI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs A Cherbal
For the Respondent:    Ms Petterson Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS



Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. Mrs Amanda Cherbal attended court  to  assist  her  brother  in  law  the
   Sponsor. I explained the procedure to her and  the  Appellant  explaining
   the roles of Ms Petterson and myself in the proceedings.
3. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.
4. This is a resumed hearing of an  appeal  by  the  Appellant  against  the
   decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Mulvenna promulgated on 8 June 2015
   which dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
   Respondent to refuse the Appellants application for  entry  clearance  as
   the spouse of a person present  and  settled  in  the  UK  namely  Yousef
   Cherbal.
5. The refusal was on the basis that the Appellant  had  not  submitted  all
   those  mandatorily  required  documents  to  establish  that  the  income
   threshold was met. The Appellants case  was  that  all  of  the  required
   documents had been sent but that they had been overlooked.
6. The Appellants applied for permission to appeal that decision  and  at  a
   hearing on 15 May 2016 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Baird  set  aside  the
   Judge's decision on the basis that there were errors of law in the Judges
   failure to grant an adjournment to the Presenting  Officer  who  conceded
   that they were unable to produce the bundle of documents  which  the  ECO
   considered in refusing the application as they had been mislaid and  also
   the Judge erred in failing to consider in the round all of  the  evidence
   before him.
7. At paragraph 17 of her decision she states:
   "I find that the decision cannot stand and  that  the  appeal  should  be
   reheard in the Upper Tribunal at which time at the very least a  list  of
   documents relied upon will be produced by the  Respondent  and  hopefully
   the documents themselves.'
8. Ms Petterson very fairly acknowledged before me that the  Respondent  had
   lost  the  documents  submitted  by  the  Appellant  in  support  of  the
   application many of which were original, irreplaceable, evidence  of  his
   financial situation. She accepted therefore that the Respondent could not
   therefore comply with the direction made by Deputy Upper  Tribunal  Judge
   Baird.
9. Ms Petterson also acknowledged that because the Refusal  Letter  and  ECM
   Review were written in such general terms wholly  failing  to  list  what
   documents it was  asserted  were  missing  she  was  actually  unable  to
   identify what the live issues in the case were other than to concede that
   while an issue had originally been  raised  about  the  standing  of  the
   accountant who prepared the report for the Appellant in  respect  of  his
   business it was no longer asserted that he did not belong to the required
   professional body.
10. The Appellant of course continued to maintain that all of  the  required
   bank statements that matched his claimed income had been provided. Before
   me his sister in law produced all of the  bank  statements  covering  the
   relevant period and asserted that there was no reason  why  the  required
   bank statements would not have been  sent  as  they  were  available  and
   showed that the income and deposits were as claimed.
11. Ms Petterson very fairly conceded that in the light of the  contents  of
   the tax return at page 17 of the bundle which confirmed that the  Sponsor
   met the financial requirements and  that  the  Respondents  loss  of  the
   documents in issue prevented the Appellant from fairly arguing  his  case
   she would not challenge the Sponsors assertion that all of  the  required
   documentation had been submitted with the  appeal  and  that  the  appeal
   should be allowed. I am satisfied that  this  is  a  concession  properly
   made.

CONCLUSION

12. I therefore find that the Appellant has discharged the burden  of  proof
   on her to show that the terms of Appendix FM of the Rules are met

DECISION

13. The appeal is allowed.


Signed                                                              Date
4.11.2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make a  full  award
of any fee paid as the loss of all the documents in this case  was  entirely
the fault of the Respondent, the refusal letter and ECM  reviews  failed  to
identify what documents were missing and thereby the  Appellant  was  unable
to argue his case. It was accepted that  all  the  required  documents  were
submitted and lost.


Signed

Debra                                                                Birrell
  Dated 4.11.2016
Judge of the First-tier Tribunal

