
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/11642/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 19 September 2013                          |On 16 October 2013           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD



                                   Between

                              ALI AKBAR SHAHZAD

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss N Bustani of Counsel, instructed by Paul John &
Co Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen  of Pakistan, born on 21 May 1981.

2.   On 10 February 2012 he applied for entry clearance to  settled  in  the
    United Kingdom as a spouse.

3.   The application was refused on 21 May 23012 on the limited  basis  that
    he had failed to demonstrate that he had sufficient  knowledge  of  the
    English language and failed to provide evidence that  he  had  obtained
    level A1 or above in speaking and listening  from  a  provider  on  the
    approved UKBA list.

4.   Since that occasion he has passed the requisite language test  with  an
    approved provider.

5.   The appellant sought to appeal  against  this  decision   which  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Wiseman  on  24  May  2013.   The
    Judge dismissed the appeal both in respect of the Immigration Rules and
    under Article 8 of the ECHR.

6.   Grounds of appeal  were  submitted  against  that  decision.  Leave  to
    appeal was granted.

7.   Thus the matter comes before me in pursuance of that grant.

8.   Fundamentally there were two arguments advanced before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge. The first argument was that the  Immigration  Rule  was
    itself defective because it sought to refer  to  material,  namely  the
    list of providers, when that list  itself  had  not  been  approved  by
    Parliament.  Reliance was placed upon the case of Alvi  v  SSHD  [2012]
    UKSC 33.   Miss Bustani, who represented the appellant on that occasion
    and represents him before me, invited me to find that the judge had not
    engaged with that aspect of the matter in any event. The second  matter
    raised was that of Article 8 given the situation and  circumstances  of
    the appellant and  his family.  Once again it was  submitted  that  the
    judge did not fully engage with that matter.

9.   The case of Alvi was a decision of the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United
    Kingdom [2012] UKSC 33, judgment being given on 18 July 2012.

10.  The appellant in that particular case was a  citizen  of  Pakistan  who
    obtained leave to remain in the United Kingdom  as  a  qualifying  work
    permit holder. The subsequent leave was refused on the  basis  that  he
    did not hold one of the skilled occupations required by the Rules.

11.  Essentially there were  a  list  of  skilled  occupations  required  by
    paragraph 82(a)(i)  of  Appendix  A  to  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    argument advanced was that the list of skilled occupations was not part
    of the Immigration Rules as the document  in which that  list  was  set
    out had not been laid before  Parliament  under  Section  3(2)  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971.  At the Court of First Instance  his  appeal  was
    dismissed on that ground on the basis that  it  was  the  intention  of
    Parliament that the list of skilled occupations, which was to be  found
    in the UK Borders Agency's website, should be an intrinsic part of  the
    Immigration Rules or subject to specific  Parliamentary  approval.  The
    Court of Appeal, however, allowed his  appeal  on  that  argument   and
    quashed the Secretary of State's  decision.   The  Secretary  of  State
    sought to appeal to the Supreme Court which appeal was dismissed.

12.  Section 3(2) of the 1971 Act  provides  that  the  Secretary  of  State
    shall from time to time lay before Parliament statements of the  Rules,
    or any changes in the Rules, laid down by  him as to the practice to be
    followed in the administration of the Act for regulating entry into and
    stay in the United Kingdom.

13.  It was common ground that the Code of Practice document referred to  in
    refusal letter, which stated that the appellant's job role which was to
    be below NSVQ level 3, had not been laid before Parliament  under  this
    subsection.

14.  Thus questions as to the meaning and effect  of  Section  3(2)  of  the
    1971 lay at the heart of the appeal.

15.  It was noted that the codes contained a list of  occupations  that  are
    recognised by the Secretary of State as sufficiently skilled to qualify
    under Tier 2. The code set out details about what was required and  the
    various levels of occupation.

16.  The issue was noted in paragraph  21  of  the  judgment.  The  question
    which lay at the heart of the  appeal  was  whether  the  reference  in
    paragraph 82(a)(i) of Appendix A to the United Kingdom Border  Agency's
    list of skilled occupations was sufficient to satisfy the  requirements
    of Section 3(2) of the 1971 Act.  Neither the statement in the  preface
    to the list that the job must be skilled and NSVQ level 3 or  above  be
    nor the list itself which showed that Mr Alvi's  occupation  was  below
    that level  formed  part  of  the  Immigration  Rules  as  laid  before
    Parliament.

17.  The judgment is  wider  ranging  considering  the  negative  resolution
    procedure, the Pankina line of cases.

18.  At paragraph 55, in particular, it  was  recognised  that  an  enormous
    amount of detail had been  built into the Immigration  Rules.  It  made
    good sense for guidance and codes or practice  which  are  designed  to
    assist those who must make the system work to be kept separate from the
    Rules themselves. There was,  however, a balance  to  be  made  between
    what ought to be in the  Immigration  Rules  themselves  and  what  can
    properly be dealt with by referring  to  extraneous  material.   It  is
    recognised that the balance has not always been  struck  in  the  right
    place.

19.  What is to be considered as  part  of  the  Rule  and  what  should  be
    guidance was recognised  not to be of  particularly  easy  decision  to
    make.

20.  It was noted in paragraph 57  that the codes contain material which  is
    not just guidance but detailed information, the  application  of  which
    will determine whether or not the appellant will qualify. It  was  felt
    that any  requirement  which,  if  not  satisfied,  will  leave  to  an
    application for leave to enter or remain being refused is a Rule within
    the meaning of Section 3(2).  The provision which is of that  character
    is a rule which in the ordinary meaning  of  that  word.  Thus  a  fair
    reading of Section 3(2) requires that it  be  laid  before  Parliament.
    The problem facing the Supreme Court was how to apply that simple  test
    to the material that was before them in the Alvi  case.  The  challenge
    mounted to the Secretary of State's decision by Mr Alvi was upheld.  As
    was found at paragraph 66

         "The statements in the  code  that  all  qualifying  jobs  must  be
         skilled  with  NSVQ  level  or  above  and  that  the  job   of   a
         psychotherapy assistant is below that level both as to a Rule  that
         ought to be laid before parliament under Section 3(*2) of the  1971
         Act."

21.  For similar reasons the other law lords agreed with that decision.

22.  It was highlighted by Lord Walker at paragraph 111 that the appeal  was
    an unusually stark illustration of the tension in public  law  decision
    making  between  flexibility  in  the  decision  making   process   and
    predictability of its outcome.   The  conclusion  of  non-mandatory  or
    advisory material cannot affect the validity of the Rules, where it may
    make them longer and possibly less clear.  The omission of a  mandatory
    provision - that is, a condition which an appellant must satisfy if the
    application is to succeed - would be a serious defect.

23.  Miss Bustani seeks to argue that the same  principles  applies  to  the
    list  of  approved  language  providers  which  imposes   a   mandatory
    requirement that the appellant obtain his language  qualification  from
    one of those.

24.  Subsequent to  the case of Alvi and indeed  the  requirement  for  such
    providers has been incorporated as part of the Rules in Appendix O.

25.  The complaint by Miss Bustani is that the judge has  failed  to  engage
    with the argument at all.

26.  As to Article 8, it is submitted that that was  a  particularly  strong
    case in the circumstances of this appellant.  He married the sponsor on
    20 October 2010 in Karachi.  She is a British citizen.  They  have  one
    child together born on 4 June 2011.  The child lives with  the  sponsor
    in the United Kingdom at the family home.   Her  parents  and  siblings
    live at that address.  The sponsor is in employment.

27.  The appellant himself is a proprietor of a tyre shop and  is  motivated
    to work when he comes  to  the  United  Kingdom.   There  has  been  no
    suggestion made that there is any overcrowding in the property  in  the
    United Kingdom, nor is there any concern expressed  as  to  maintenance
    and accommodation generally.  The only reason he fails to  qualify  for
    entry clearance is simply because he submitted the  incorrect  language
    document.  In any event he has now  completed  the  ESOL  tests   post-
    decision .  There is a second son born on 27 October 29012.  the  judge
    found that there was a genuine subsisting relationship that existed.

28.  Nevertheless the Judge felt constrained not to  circumvent  the  Rules.
    Miss Bustani submits that the judge did not engage with the  merits  of
    the Article 8 claim which she submitted was  very  strong  in  all  the
    circumstances.

29.  It seems to me that for the reasons advanced the judge did  not  engage
    with either argument and thus I find there to be a  material  error  of
    law such as to set aside the decision and to remake it.

30.  Having looked at Appendix O it cannot be said that  the  list  relating
    to language qualifications is particularly simple.  It may be that  the
    list of providers is perhaps much more  straightforward  to  understand
    than the list  of  skilled  occupations  as  was  the  subject  itself.
    Nevertheless it seems to me that the principle which has been addressed
    by the Supreme Court is one that has the potential to apply also to any
    Rule which relies upon the mandatory requirements not in the Rules.

31.  It is perhaps relevant to note that the  requirements as  to  providers
    are now set out in the Rules, which perhaps  is  an  indication  of  an
    acceptance by the respondent that the principle as set out in Alvi  was
    one to be applied.

32.  Thus applying the principles of Alvi I conclude  that  the  immigration
    decision itself is one that was not in accordance with the law in  that
    it purported to make an mandatory requirement such  condition  was  not
    within the Rules themselves.

33.  In any event, and  quite  separate  from  that  consideration,  I  have
    regard to the aspect of Article 8 of the ECHR. I remind myself  of  the
    date of decision being 21 May 2012

34.  Part of  that  consideration  of  course  is  the  consideration  under
    Section 55, namely the best interests of the children.

35.  I remind myself of the principles set out in Razgar.  The  presence  of
    family and private life is not in dispute but rather it is an issue  of
    proportionality.

36.  Mr Tarlow submits that Article 8 should not be used to  circumvent  the
    failure to meet an Immigration Rule, albeit  to  a  minor  extent.   He
    contends that the appellant could make a fresh application  now,  armed
    with his language certificate.

37.  It is  relevant,   however,  to  note  that  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules have now been met, albeit that that is perhaps  post-
    decision evidence.  What is clear, however, was that at the time of the
    decision there was family life as between the appellant and sponsor and
    that one child had  been  born  to  that  relationship  at  that  time.
    Although I have in mind the principles as set out in judicial decisions
    concerning near miss, it is relevant to note that at the  time  of  the
    decision the only impediment to family  unity  was  the  issue  of  the
    language certificate. It was clear that at the  time  of  decision  the
    Appellant could demonstrate a  knowledge of English and judging by  the
    speed in which he obtained the authorised certificate I  find  that  he
    would have satisfied the test at the date of decision had  he  realised
    that such was required. The nature of course of the family life has now
    ostensibly increased with the arrival of a second  child  but  I  focus
    upon the time of decision.

38.  It was and remains important, as I so find, that this young family  are
    able to live together as soon as possible.  I find that it was  in  the
    best interests of the child at the time in question that the family  be
    united.  Given the status as a British citizen of both the sponsor  and
    of the children I deem that it would have  been  unreasonable  to  have
    expected to expect them to live with the appellant outside UK. In  that
    connection the rights of the sponsor and of the child were to be  bourn
    in mind In those circumstances I find that it was  disproportionate  at
    the material time to deprive the appellant of the opportunity  to  live
    with them in the United Kingdom.

39.  Taking account of all matters, as at the time of the decision   I  find
    that Article 8 was engaged such that it was disproportionate to exclude
    the appellant from the United Kingdom. It goes without saying that  the
    birth of the second  child  makes  it  even  more  disproportionate  to
    exclude him now.  It is my hope that the ECO will respond without delay
    to grant the necessary leave.

40.  The appeal is allowed against the immigration decision  to  the  extent
    that it remains at large to be remade.  In  any  event  the  appeal  in
    respect of Article 8 is allowed.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

