
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: OA/11209/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 2 August 2016                       |On 9 August 2016                    |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (NAIROBI)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     L M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Respondent:    Mr Eteko, counsel, instructed by Iras & Co
For the Appellant:     Mr Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This matter comes before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Colvin ("the FTTJ") promulgated on 9  October  2015,  in
    which she allowed, on Article 8 grounds, the appellant's appeal against
    the refusal of his application for entry clearance.


 2. For ease of  reference  and  continuity,  throughout  this  decision  I
    maintain the descriptions of the parties as appellant  and  respondent,
    as set out in the FTTJ's decision, although it is the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer (not the Secretary of State, as  stated  by  the  FTTJ  in  the
    heading of her decision) who pursues this appeal.

 3. No anonymity direction was made in the First-tier Tribunal but, because
    the appellant is a minor, I make such a direction in this Tribunal.

Background

 4. The appellant is the de facto  adopted  son  of  the  sponsor  who  has
    refugee status in the UK.  It is accepted by the appellant that he does
    not qualify for entry clearance under the Immigration Rules because his
    adoption in the Democratic Republic of Congo is  not  recognised  under
    the Hague Convention. The appeal in the First-tier Tribunal was pursued
    under Article 8 and the "family reunion provisions".


 5. The appellant was  born  on  9  September  1999.   His  case  is  that,
    following the death of his biological mother shortly after  his  birth,
    his father, the sponsor's uncle, had decided the  appellant  should  be
    brought up by the sponsor who had been living in her uncle's  household
    until she was 18.  The sponsor went on to have two children of her own.
    She left the Congo in 2007 and claimed asylum in the UK in  that  year.
    She declared the appellant and her  own  two  children  as  her  family
    members when she claimed asylum.

 6. The FTTJ refused the appeal under the Immigration Rules but allowed  it
    on Article 8 grounds.  The Entry Clearance Officer sought permission to
    appeal and this was granted in the following terms:

           "... the Judges [sic] failure to  consider  s117  [sic]  of  the
           Nationality, Immigration & Asylum Act 2002 is arguably an  error
           of law.


           3. The grounds and the decision do disclose an arguable error of
    law."

 7. Hence the matter comes before me.

Submissions - Error of Law

 8. For the Entry Clearance Officer, Mr Kotas  relied  on  the  grounds  of
    appeal to this Tribunal. He  submitted  that  there  had  been  no  s55
    consideration.  It  is  implicit  from  the  decision  that  the   FTTJ
    considered the appellant's best interests to be to join his brother and
    adoptive mother in the UK but there was no careful analysis of his best
    interests. It might not be in his best interests  to  be  uprooted;  he
    might be accustomed to living with his uncle. The appellant was aged 16
    at the date of decision.


 9. Mr Kotas accepted there was a self-direction with regard to  s117B  but
    noted there was no reference to immigration  control  or  other  public
    interest factors, such as recourse to public funds, in the analysis  of
    proportionality.  Adoptions of this type were specifically excluded  by
    the Immigration Rules. It was not a trivial matter that the Rules  made
    a distinction with regard to different types of adoption.  This  should
    have been a matter of  weight  in  the  respondent's  favour,  being  a
    feature of immigration control.

10. In reply, Mr Eteko submitted the FTTJ had considered the best interests
    of the children when making her assessment of proportionality: the FTTJ
    had given weight to the fact  of  adoption.   She  had  considered  the
    welfare of the child.  The fourth question under Razgar [2004] UKHL  27
    encompassed the public interests factors in s117A-D of the 2002 Act. He
    submitted  that  the  proportionality  assessment  had  been  conducted
    appropriately.

Discussion - Error of Law

11. Whilst the FTTJ has correctly identified the  relevant  legislation  in
    her paragraph 20 in that she refers to s117B of the 2002  Act  and  the
    need to have regard to  the  public  interest  considerations  in  that
    section, she has not made  any  reference  to  consideration  of  those
    factors in weighing the proportionality  of  the  interference  arising
    from the decision (her paragraphs 25 and 26).   Her  analysis  is  very
    brief and her decision based largely on a finding that "the only ground
    on which  the  appellant  does  not  satisfy  paragraph  352D  is  that
    adoptions within the Congo are not officially recognised under  UK  law
    and therefore he is not considered to be the child of the  sponsor  for
    the purpose of this family reunion  provision".   She  refers  to  this
    being "wholly outside the appellant's control". There is no mention  at
    all that the Rules have been drafted with the  UK's  obligations  under
    Article 8  in  mind  and  for  the  purpose  of  maintaining  effecting
    immigration control, a public interest factor identified in s117B.


12. Whilst the FTTJ referred at paragraph 19 to the guidance in  Ullah  and
    Do [2004] UKHL 26 she did not take into account in  her  analysis  that
    Lord Bingham made it clear that, when considering the qualification  of
    the right under Article 8(2) the balance is heavily weighted in  favour
    of the decision being proportionate and  indicated  that  decisions  in
    pursuance of immigration control will be proportionate in "all  save  a
    small minority of exceptional cases".  Whilst she rightly refers to the
    need to balance the interests of society (ie the public interest)  with
    those of the individual (paragraph 20) she has failed to carry out that
    balancing exercise because there is no reference to the public interest
    factors in play, contrary  to  s117A  and  B.   For  this  reason,  the
    decision contains a material error of law.

13. It is submitted that the FTTJ failed to consider the best interests  of
    the appellant. I agree with Mr Kotas that there is no reference, in the
    FTTJ's analysis, to those interests.  This is contrary to the  guidance
    in Mundeba (s.55 and para 297(i)(f))  [2013]  UKUT  88(IAC)  where  the
    Tribunal held that (i) the exercise of the duty by the Entry  Clearance
    Officer to assess an application under  the  Immigration  Rules  as  to
    whether there are family or other  considerations  making  the  child's
    exclusion undesirable inevitably involves an  assessment  of  what  the
    child's welfare and best interests require; (ii) Where  an  immigration
    decision engages Article 8 rights, due regard must be  had  to  the  UN
    Convention on the Rights of the Child. An entry clearance decision  for
    the  admission  of  a  child  under  18  is   "an   action   concerning
    children...undertaken  by...administrative  authorities"  and   so   by
    Article 3  "the  best  interests  of  the  child  shall  be  a  primary
    consideration"; (iii) Although the statutory duty under s.55 UK Borders
    Act 2009 only applies to children  within  the  UK,  the  broader  duty
    doubtless explains why the  Secretary  of  State's  IDI  invites  Entry
    Clearance Officers to consider  the  statutory  guidance  issued  under
    s.55.


14. Whilst it could be inferred the FTTJ considered  the  appellant's  best
    interests were  addressed  by  reuniting  the  "family",  there  is  no
    analysis as to how such a  conclusion  was  reached,  contrary  to  the
    guidance in AA (Nigeria) 00106 UKUT 2016.

15. In Azimi-Moayed & Ors (decisions affecting  children;  onward  appeals)
    [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC)  the Tribunal held that (i) Duties to have regard
    as a primary consideration to the best interests of a child are so well
    established that a judge should take the point for him or herself as an
    obvious point to be considered, where the issue arises on the evidence,
    irrespective of whether the appellants or the advocates have  done  so;
    (ii) Although in some cases this may require a judge to explore whether
    the duty requires further information to be obtained or inquiry  to  be
    made, the judge primarily acts on the evidence in the case. Where  that
    evidence gives no hint of a suggestion that the welfare of the child is
    threatened by the immigration decision in question, or that the child's
    best interests are undermined  thereby,  there  is  no  basis  for  any
    further judicial exploration or reasoned decision on the matter.

16. In the  present  case,  there  is  no  evidence  to  suggest  that  the
    appellant's welfare, well-being or development has been  undermined  by
    the immigration decision.

17. With this legal guidance in mind, I find  the  FTTJ  erred  in  law  in
    failing to consider the best interests of the appellant; that error  is
    material, being fundamental to an assessment of the proportionality  of
    any interference with his Article 8 rights. The FTTJ has merely assumed
    that, there being family life, any  interference  is  disproportionate.
    She has not made an assessment of the quality of that family  life  and
    the impact of the decision on the best interests of the appellant.

18. In summary, I set aside the FTTJ's findings on Article  8  because  she
    has failed to consider the public interest  factors  in  s117B  and  to
    consider the best interests of the appellant.

19. There is no challenge to the  findings  of  fact  of  the  FTTJ  and  I
    preserve her findings for that reason. I also preserve her finding that
    the appellant does not fulfil the criteria in the Immigration Rules for
    family reunion, as this is not challenged by the appellant.

20. When I indicated to the representatives at the hearing that I  proposed
    to set aside the decision because it contained material errors  of  law
    and that I would remake it, Mr Eteko told me, for the first time,  that
    the sponsor had telephoned him that morning to  say  she  was  ill  and
    could  not  attend  the  hearing.  He  did  not  immediately  seek   an
    adjournment. When I asked him, he said there was no medical evidence to
    support any submission that the sponsor  was  too  ill  to  attend  the
    hearing.  Mr Eteko then asked for an adjournment  on  the  ground  that
    evidence of "economic circumstances" in the UK was required because  it
    "may be relevant". He did not elaborate.  I refused the application for
    an adjournment because the sponsor had been made aware, from the notice
    of hearing (which was served on her personally), that if  a  party  did
    not attend the hearing "the Tribunal may determine the  appeal  in  the
    absence of that party"; there was no medical evidence  to  support  the
    application  for  an  adjournment  and  there  was  no  information  or
    submission to suggest that the sponsor would be  available  on  another
    date, if the matter were to be adjourned. Furthermore, the reference to
    "economic circumstances" was vague and unspecified. It  was  not  clear
    what evidence was to be produced or  what  it  would  address.  In  any
    event, the appellant had had sufficient time to produce  such  evidence
    for the hearing before the FTTJ and before me.   The  appellant  was  a
    minor and it was in the interests of  justice  for  the  matter  to  be
    decided expeditiously and this could be done  justly  on  the  evidence
    before the FTTJ, particularly as the findings  of  the  FTTJ  had  been
    preserved. Importantly, also, I  could  only  consider  evidence  which
    pertained to  the  circumstances  of  the  appellant  at  the  date  of
    decision, 12 August 2014, nearly two years ago.  For these  reasons,  I
    proceeded with the hearing.

Submissions - Article 8


21. I heard the submissions of the two representatives  on  Article  8.   I
    invited  Mr  Eteko  to  make  submissions   as   to   the   appellant's
    circumstances,  given  the  requirement  to   show   that   they   were
    sufficiently compelling as to merit consideration outside the Rules (SS
    (Congo) and Ors [2015] EWCA Civ 387 and Sunassee [2015] EWHC 1604).  Mr
    Eteko said the appellant had never known his mother; had  been  adopted
    from birth; had lived with the sponsor until 2004 [sic] when  she  left
    and came to the UK. He submitted that family life had  continued  after
    her departure; the  sponsor  had  contributed  to  the  upkeep  of  the
    appellant;  there  had  been  communication  between  them.   He   also
    submitted that there was family life  between  the  appellant  and  his
    siblings in the UK. He noted that the sponsor had fled from Congo,  was
    a refugee and the only place where family life could  continue  was  in
    the  UK.   There  was  no  evidence  that  the  appellant  was   living
    independently. The appellant considered himself part of  the  sponsor's
    family.


22. Mr Kotas, for the Entry  Clearance  Officer,  noted  that  I  would  be
    confined to the facts at the date of decision when  the  appellant  was
    aged 14. He submitted that the starting point was to make  findings  on
    the appellant's best interests.  The appellant had been separated  from
    the sponsor for seven years. Contrary to the sponsor's initial evidence
    the appellant had been left with the sponsor's brother,  not  a  family
    friend. He had spent 14 years growing up in his own country, under  the
    care of his uncle. The appellant was considered  to  be  part  of  this
    family (paragraph 24 of the decision). It  was,  he  said,  significant
    that the sponsor had not been able  to  name  the  appellant's  school,
    bearing in mind she was said to be responsible for his upbringing.  The
    sponsor had not even turned up for the hearing before me. There was  no
    medical evidence to support her  claim  to  be  ill.  Her  absence  was
    surprising given the gravity of the issues to  be  decided.  There  was
    scant information in the sponsor's witness  statement  to  support  the
    proposition that the best interests of the  child  were  so  compelling
    that they required the appellant to be reunited with the sponsor.   The
    evidence did not go so far as to suggest  that  his  interests  lay  in
    coming to the UK. Family life could continue as it had  to  date,  with
    remittances being sent to the appellant  for  his  upkeep.  Significant
    weight should be given to the fact that the adoption was not recognised
    under the Rules. This was not a factor in favour of the appellant,  but
    in favour of the public interest, namely immigration control. His  best
    interests were not undermined by his being  required  to  stay  in  the
    Congo. The decision to refuse entry clearance  was  proportionate  when
    considering immigration control.


23. Mr Eteko referred to the bond between parent and child; family life had
    continued at a distance.  The evidence of the appellant's  sibling  was
    credible, according to the FTTJ. Family life had continued  during  the
    separation of the sponsor and appellant.  The  child's  best  interests
    could not be served by his remaining in Congo. He had to live with  one
    or both of his parents. He should  join  the  family  in  the  UK.  The
    sponsor could not return to Congo to visit the  appellant;  she  was  a
    refugee.

Discussion - Article 8

24. The FTTJ found the  appellant  had  been  brought  up  by  the  sponsor
    following the death of his biological mother shortly after  his  birth.
    The sponsor then had two children of her own, one  of  whom  is  Juvani
    (who gave oral evidence with the sponsor at the FTT hearing).  Juvani's
    evidence is that the appellant and himself, as brothers, were left with
    their uncle when the sponsor came to the UK in 2007, seven years before
    the date of decision. The sponsor sent  funds  to  the  Congo  for  the
    maintenance of the appellant and Juvani.


25. The FTTJ concluded that the appellant had been  officially  adopted  by
    the sponsor in 2004 in the Congo.  However,  as  is  accepted  by  both
    parties, that adoption is not recognised under the Hague Convention  or
    the Immigration Rules.

26. The sponsor made an earlier application  for  family  reunion  for  the
    appellant and Juvani in 2010 when she referred  to  them  both  as  her
    sons, failing to mention the appellant was adopted. The  FTTJ  accepted
    both the appellant and Juvani  believed  themselves  to  be  biological
    brothers and the sons of the sponsor.

27. The FTTJ notes the appellant "has continued to  live  with  the  person
    referred to as Berthin - who, according to Juvani, is  an  uncle  being
    his mother's brother although the sponsor says he is a family  member".
    The sponsor continues to send remittances for the appellant and regular
    contact is maintained with the appellant.  That said,  the  FTTJ  notes
    neither the sponsor nor Juvani could name the school  attended  by  the
    appellant.   The  FTTJ   considered   this   did   not   "significantly
    undermine[s] the evidence that the appellant is still considered a part
    of this family". Whilst I  do  not  derogate  from  that  finding,  the
    evidence indicates that the nature  and  quality  of  the  family  life
    between the sponsor, Juvani  and  the  appellant  is  not  particularly
    close, given the sponsor's inability to name  the  appellant's  school.
    Were the sponsor closely involved in the daily life of the appellant, I
    would expect her to be  able  to  provide  such  detail  to  the  FTTJ.
    Furthermore, it is notable that  the  sponsor's  witness  statement  is
    extremely brief. She explains the family relationships and  that,  when
    she left Congo she "entrusted [the appellant] and Juvani  Mupene  to  a
    close family  member  Mr  Berthin  Ngwele  but  they  were  financially
    assisted by me".  She relates her experiences  of  applying  for  entry
    clearance for the two children in 2010.  There is no other evidence  as
    to  the  nature  of  her  relationship  with  the  appellant   or   his
    circumstances in Congo.  The evidence is  therefore  extremely  sparse.
    Similarly, Juvani's evidence is limited although he does refer to being
    in contact with the appellant "via  whats  up  [sic],  Viber  and  text
    messages".  There is no evidence  to  suggest  that  the  appellant  is
    living in difficult circumstances. He is living in the  same  household
    as that in which he lived when the  sponsor  and  (later)  Juvani  left
    Congo.  There is no evidence to suggest that the appellant  is  missing
    the sponsor or Juvani or even wishes to be reunited with them.  Indeed,
    there is no evidence at all from the appellant himself  notwithstanding
    he was of an age at the date of application and appeal  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to make his wishes known.  The inference  from  the  oral
    evidence is that the appellant is attending school in Congo, albeit the
    witnesses were unable to provide the name of the school.  There  is  no
    evidence to suggest that he is living  in  straightened  circumstances.
    On the evidence, whilst the  appellant  has  a  family  life  with  the
    sponsor (his de  facto  adoptive  mother)  and  Juvani  (his  de  facto
    adoptive brother), his family life  also  encompasses  Berthin  Ngwele,
    with whom he has lived since the sponsor's  departure  for  the  UK  in
    2007.  Berthin Ngwele is described in the appellant's application  form
    as his legal guardian. Thus he has considerable responsibility for  the
    upbringing of the appellant. This is consistent with the sponsor  being
    unable to name the appellant's school.


28. Paragraph 352D of the Rules sets out the requirements to be  met  by  a
    person seeking leave to enter the UK in order to join a parent who is a
    refugee in the UK. These are that the  applicant  is  the  child  of  a
    parent who is currently a refugee granted  status  as  such  under  the
    immigration rules in the UK, is under 18, is not leading an independent
    life, is unmarried and has not formed an independent  family  unit  and
    was part of the family unit of the person granted asylum  at  the  time
    that the person  granted  asylum  left  the  country  of  his  habitual
    residence in order to seek asylum.   Under paragraph 6  of  the  Rules,
    "Parent" is defined as "an adoptive parent but only where a  child  was
    adopted  in  accordance  with  a  decision  taken  by   the   competent
    administrative authority or court in a country  whose  adoption  orders
    are recognised by the United Kingdom".


29. I consider first whether there are compelling circumstances such as  to
    warrant consideration of the appeal outside the Rules (SS  (Congo)  and
    Sunnassee).  The FTTJ has found "the only ground on which the appellant
    does not satisfy paragraph 352D is that adoptions within the Congo  are
    not officially  recognised  under  UK  law  and  therefore  he  is  not
    considered to be the child of the  sponsor  for  the  purpose  of  this
    family reunion provision".  I had specifically invited the  appellant's
    representative to make submissions identifying  those  aspects  of  the
    appellant's  circumstances  which  merited  consideration  outside  the
    Rules.  His submissions are set out above.   Most  of  the  matters  he
    raised were capable of being considered under  paragraph 352D,  eg  the
    sponsor being a refugee; the appellant having lived  with  the  sponsor
    prior to her departure from the DRC, the financial contribution to  his
    upkeep and the continuation of family  life  at  a  distance.   I  have
    considered the impact of the appellant's relationship with his siblings
    in the UK but the evidence on this is not significant. There is contact
    between Juvani and the appellant but no evidence from the appellant  on
    the issue or the impact of his separation  from  the  sponsor  and  her
    children in the UK.  The  mere  fact  of  keeping  in  contact  is  not
    sufficient to demonstrate a close bond such as to amount to  compelling
    circumstances requiring consideration outside the Rules.


30. The appellant has not therefore demonstrated his circumstances  are  so
    compelling as to merit  consideration  outside  the  Rules.   For  that
    reason, his appeal on Article 8 grounds must fail.

31. Even if I were to consider the matter outside the Rules, I  would  find
    for  the  following  reasons  that  the  degree  of   interference   is
    proportionate to the respondent's legitimate objective  of  immigration
    control.

32. In SS (Congo) Richards LJ said what is  in  issue  in  relation  to  an
    application for leave to enter is more in the nature of  an  appeal  to
    the state's positive obligations under Article 8 referred to  in  Huang
    at para. [18] (a request that the state grant the  applicant  something
    that they do not currently have - entry to the United Kingdom  and  the
    ability to take up family life there), rather than enforcement  of  its
    negative duty, which is at the fore in LTR  cases  (where  family  life
    already exists and is currently being carried on in the United Kingdom,
    and family life or any private life established in the  United  Kingdom
    will be directly interfered with if the  applicant  is  removed).  This
    means that the requirements upon the state under  Article  8  are  less
    stringent in the LTE context than in the LTR context.


33. In SM & Ors (Somalia) [2015] EWCA Civ 223 Bean LJ said it was far  from
    clear that the refusal of entry clearance to the family  reunion  child
    appellants constituted serious interference with their family  life  at
    all. The mother had left them in the care of her half brother for  some
    four years and maintained regular contact with them. Bean LJ said  "The
    case is quite different from the more typical one where the status  quo
    before the refusal of entry clearance or the proposed removal was or is
    a united family... the trauma of  breaking  up  a  family  and  thereby
    rupturing family ties may be significantly greater than the  effect  of
    not facilitating the reunion of a  family  whose  members  have  become
    accustomed to living apart following a decision by part of  the  family
    to live elsewhere".

34. In Shamin Box [2002] UK IAT 02212  the  Tribunal  said  that  in  entry
    cases, Adjudicators should not treat the Article 8 question as "one  of
    whether there had been an unjustified interference with  the  right  to
    private and family life", but should consider whether there had been an
    unjustified lack of respect for private and family life; and  that  the
    focus should be on whether, in the light of the positive obligations on
    the UK to facilitate family reunion, there has been a failure to act in
    the particular circumstances of the  case.  Nonetheless,  the  Tribunal
    said  that,  in  interference  and  lack  of  respect  cases,   similar
    principles applied. In conducting the necessary balancing exercise,  it
    remains relevant that a State does not have  a  general  obligation  to
    respect an immigrant's choice of country of residence. It also  remains
    relevant to consider whether there are insurmountable obstacles to  the
    family enjoying family life elsewhere.  That approach appears  to  have
    been endorsed as the correct approach and  echoed  in  other  decisions
    including Sen v Netherlands [2003] 36 EHRR 81  in  which  the  European
    Court said that the Dutch government's refusal to grant entry clearance
    to minor children of Turkish immigrants was, on the facts of that case,
    a breach of its  positive  obligations  under  Article  8.  In  Mostafa
    (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 112 (IAC) (McCloskey  J)  it
    was held that the decision in Shamin Box [2002] UKIAT 02212  is  to  be
    followed and that the obligation imposed by Article 8 is to promote the
    family life of those affected by the decision.  In  Konstatinov  v  The
    Netherlands (Applic 16351/03) the European Court of Human rights  dealt
    directly with  the  State's  obligations  to  admit  to  its  territory
    relatives of persons residing there.  The Court said that the essential
    object of Article 8 was to protect the individual from arbitrary action
    of  state  authorities  and  there  might  in  addition   be   positive
    obligations inherent in effective "respect" for family life. In Muse  &
    Ors (Fadumo Nur Ali) v Entry Clearance Officer [2012] EWCA Civ  10  the
    Claimants were five  Somali  nationals  currently  living  in  Ethiopia
    seeking to join a sponsor in the UK. The Court of Appeal said  that  it
    was common ground that the  UT  was  wrong  to  sideline  the  question
    whether the sponsor could reasonably  be  expected  to  live  with  the
    Claimants in Ethiopia as unimportant on the  ground  that  this  was  a
    refusal of entry rather than a removal case. That said, each  case  had
    to be considered on its own facts. It was relevant that the  trauma  of
    breaking up a  family  and  thereby  rupturing  family  ties  might  be
    significantly greater than the effect of not facilitating  the  reunion
    of a family  whose  members  had  become  accustomed  to  living  apart
    following a decision by part of the family to move elsewhere (paras  20
    - 23).

35. I bear in mind, as a primary consideration, the best interests  of  the
    appellant. He is living in a stable home  environment  with  his  legal
    guardian, where he has lived for the seven years, without the  sponsor,
    prior to the date of  decision.  There  is  no  evidence  of  difficult
    circumstances, either practical or emotional. He is  supported  by  his
    uncle and (financially at least) by his mother.  This  is  a  situation
    which is able to continue. He is being educated  in  the  language  and
    environment with which he is familiar. There is no suggestion that  his
    development has been hampered by his separation from the sponsor or her
    children; he was aged 7 when she left and is  likely  to  have  limited
    memories of their life together. His formative years  have  been  spent
    living with his  legal  guardian.   Whilst  his  best  interests  might
    include regaining personal contact and living with the sponsor and  her
    children, it is also in his best interests for him  to  remain  in  the
    stable environment in which he has  grown  up  and  with  which  he  is
    familiar and where he is thriving, albeit separated from his  de  facto
    mother. He lives with his legal guardian who has responsibility for his
    health, well-being and welfare and who is trusted  by  the  sponsor  to
    bring him up appropriately.  Contact with the sponsor can be maintained
    and the appellant can visit the sponsor and her children in the UK.


36. There is no indication as to the wishes of the appellant  himself  (who
    was aged 14 at the date of decision).

37. The quality of the family life enjoyed by the  appellant,  the  sponsor
    and Juvani is not, on the evidence,  particularly  close:  neither  the
    sponsor nor Juvani was able to name  the  appellant's  school,  a  fact
    which suggests a degree of emotional  and  practical  distance  between
    them (irrespective of the geographical distance).  Were the parties  to
    be a close family unit, I would expect the sponsor, at least,  to  have
    been able to give details of the appellant's school. The fact  she  was
    unable to do so suggests that their family life is of limited  quality.
    His family life encompasses not only his relationship with the  sponsor
    and her children but also his relationship with his legal guardian with
    whom he had been living for seven years prior to the date of  decision,
    since the age of 7.

38. The Immigration Rules have been drafted to reflect the UK's obligations
    under Article 8 and this is a factor of relevance to the maintenance of
    immigration control, a public interest factor  specifically  identified
    in s117B.  There is no evidence the appellant speaks English; he is not
    financially independent.   There is no evidence that he wishes to  come
    to the UK or that he would integrate with British society if he were to
    live here.

39. Of particular concern in this case is the paucity of the evidence  with
    regard to the quality of the appellant's family life with  the  sponsor
    and her children.  It is extremely thin and I give  significant  weight
    to  the  fact  there  is  no  evidence  from  the  appellant   himself,
    notwithstanding he was aged 14, nearly 15, at the date of  application.
    He was two days away from his sixteenth birthday at the date of hearing
    and capable of writing a statement or letter  about  his  circumstances
    and wishes in the Congo (albeit only relating to his  circumstances  at
    the ate of decision). Yet he did not do so.  There is  no  evidence  to
    suggest that his circumstances in Congo are  anything  but  stable  and
    supportive.

40. Taking the evidence and the public interest as a whole, I am  satisfied
    that, even if Article 8 were engaged by the  decision,  the  degree  of
    interference with the appellant's right to respect for his family  life
    is justified and proportionate as against the  respondent's  legitimate
    objective of immigration control, as reflected in paragraph 352D of the
    Rules, bearing in mind the appellant's best interests.

Decision

41. The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve
    errors of law, as set out above.


42. I set aside the decision.

43. I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it on  human  rights
    grounds.


A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
Dated: 8 August 2016



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Fee Award
The FTTJ made a fee award. I set that award  aside:  the  Appellant  is  not
entitled to a fee award, the appeal having been dismissed.


A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge                                        Dated: 8
August 2016













