
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/11804/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 25th January 2016                 |On 26th January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                     Entry Clearance Officer, Islamabad
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     N M
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Lemer, Counsel instructed by SAJ Law Chambers


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of Pakistan date of birth 29th July  1993.
    On the 6th August 2015 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Eban) allowed his
    appeal against a decision to refuse to grant him entry clearance.   The
    Entry Clearance Officer in Islamabad (ECO) now has permission to appeal
    against the First-tier Tribunal's decision[1].

    Background and Matters in Issue

 2. The basis of the Respondent's application for entry clearance was  that
    he should be permitted to join his parents and  elder  brother  in  the
    United Kingdom. He had remained in Pakistan when they had come  to  the
    UK in September 2013 in order to claim asylum. By  the  23rd  May  2014
    they had been recognised as refugees, and on the 14th July 2014 he made
    an application to join them.

 3. The decision to refuse entry clearance is dated 18th August  2014.  The
    ECO correctly observed that the Respondent was no longer  a  minor.  He
    was aged 20 at the date of the application and so could  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 352D(ii) of the  Immigration  Rules,  wherein
    the provisions for refugee family reunion are expressed.  In respect of
    Article 8 the ECO considered the "particular circumstances" advanced in
    the application and found no exceptional reasons to justify a grant  of
    entry clearance outside of the Rules: "you are not handicapped and  you
    have not been disadvantaged here to date". This decision was upheld  by
    an Entry Clearance Manager on the 12th November 2014 who suggested that
    if the Respondent wished to see his parents they could visit him  in  a
    third country.

 4. When the appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal  the  ECO  did  not
    attend. The Tribunal heard oral evidence from the Respondent's  parents
    and his brother.

 5. There being no dispute that  the  Respondent  could  not  succeed  with
    reference to the Rules, the  appeal  proceeded  on  Article  8  grounds
    alone.

 6. Noting that the Respondent was still young and that he had not made  an
    independent life for himself the Tribunal found that  he  continued  to
    have a family life with his parents.  Having regard to the guidance  in
    AG (Eritrea) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ  801  it  found  Article  8  to  be
    engaged.  The decision was one lawfully open to  the  ECO  to  take  in
    pursuit of the permissible aim of the maintenance of the economic well-
    being of the country  by  the  consistent  application  of  immigration
    control.

 7. Turning to the  question  of  whether  the  decision  to  refuse  entry
    clearance was in  all  the  circumstances  proportionate  the  Tribunal
    listed the factors relevant to the Respondent.  Those  which  might  be
    said to be in his favour included:

           . He was aged 20 at the date of the application

           . That the Respondent's parents and brother have been recognised
             as refugees

           . He is alone without his close family, with whom he  has  lived
             all his life

           . His family are not able to return to Pakistan to be  with  him
             because they  have  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  in
             Pakistan

           . The Respondent is a practising Ahmadi from a well-known family
             of Ahmadis and as such is vulnerable in a very hostile society

           . His parents desperately want to be reunited with him

           . There is evidence that he is suffering from depression

           . There is evidence that his mother is suffering from depression

    Factors listed which might  be  said  to  support  the  ECO's  position
    included:

           . The Respondent could visit his family in the UK

           . He is at an age where he might be expected to get  a  job  and
             establish his own independent life

           . He has no connection to the UK  apart  from  his  parents  and
             brother

           . He has spent his whole life in Pakistan and is  familiar  with
             the language and culture

           . There is no reason why his family cannot continue  to  support
             him financially in Pakistan

 8. Having made those findings  the  Tribunal  set  out  its  reasoning  as
    follows:

         "This is not a case of mere preference  as  to  which  country  the
         appellant and his parents and elder brother reside in. In this case
         there are parents  and  an  elder  brother  who  cannot  return  to
         Pakistan, and  a  twenty  year  old  who  has  not  yet  formed  an
         independent life without his family. In my view  the  circumstances
         of this particular case point firmly towards an  outcome  favouring
         family reunion, which would be in accordance with the spirit of the
         Refugee Convention.  The  ordinary  considerations  of  immigration
         control, such as the need to show  maintenance  without  additional
         recourse to public funds, are waived in cases concerning the  close
         family members of refugees. In this case  the  appellant  does  not
         meet the requirements of the family reunion rules because he was 20
         when he made his application and not under 18. I am very  conscious
         that article 8 does not give me a general  discretion  to  dispense
         with  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  however  the
         combination of circumstances  behind  this  case  are  sufficiently
         serious and compelling and compassionate to require admission. This
         is a family which has been split  up  because  of  persecution.  As
         such, I do not give decisive weight to the issue of maintenance  of
         the economic well being  of  the  country  in  the  proportionality
         balancing exercise.

         Looking at all  the  circumstances  and  balancing  the  respective
         interests of the parties, I find that the decision to refuse  entry
         clearance amounts to a disproportionate  interference  with  family
         life ..."

 9. The ECO's grounds of  appeal  are,  in  summary,  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal has erred in:

          i) Failing to have regard to applicable principles in respect  of
             family life, in particular whether family life can be said  to
             exist between the  sponsors  and  the  adult  Respondent:  see
             Kugathas [2013] EWCA Civ 31

         ii) Failing to give adequate reasons for the  finding  that  there
             are exceptionally compelling features in this case.

10. Judge Grimmett of the First-tier Tribunal  granted  permission  in  the
    following terms: "it is arguable that  in  allowing  the  appeal  under
    Article 8 the Judge erred in assessing the  situation  at  the  day  of
    application, when the Appellant was nearly 20, rather than at the  date
    of the hearing when he was 22  and  had  been  living  apart  from  his
    parents for two years".

    Error of Law

    Preliminary Issue

11. At the outset of the hearing Mr Kotas distanced himself from the  terms
    of the grant of permission. He agreed that Judge Grimmett  appeared  to
    have  granted  permission  on  a  point  of  law   which   was   simply
    misconceived: this being an entry clearance appeal  the  relevant  date
    for review was the date of decision, that being the 18th  August  2014.
    The fact that the Appellant was 22 by the date of the  appeal  was  not
    relevant at all.  He maintained however that following this guidance in
    Ferrer (limited appeal grounds; Alvi) [2012] UKUT 00304 (IAC) he should
    be permitted to pursue all grounds argued:

         "Where the First-tier Tribunal judge nevertheless intends to  grant
         permission only in respect of certain of the  applicant's  grounds,
         the judge should make this abundantly plain, both  in  his  or  her
         decision under rule 25(5) of the Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
         (Procedure)  Rules  2005  and  by  ensuring  that  the   Tribunal's
         administrative staff send out  the  proper  notice,  informing  the
         applicant  of  the  right  to  apply  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  for
         permission to appeal on  grounds on which the  applicant  has  been
         unsuccessful in the application to the First-tier Tribunal."

    Although the grant of permission did not refer to the other grounds, it
    had not made it abundantly clear that they were excluded.

12. Mr Lemer opposed this submission. He submitted that Judge Grimmett  had
    plainly only granted permission in respect of one matter;  that  matter
    having been conceded in the Respondent's favour, the appeal  should  go
    no further.

13. I found that the ECO  was  entitled  to  plead  all  grounds.  Although
    neither the Kugathas nor the public interest point merited a mention in
    the grant of permission, Judge Grimmett  had  not  made  it  abundantly
    clear that they were being excluded.   I  therefore  proceeded  on  the
    basis that Ferrer permission had been given in respect of all grounds.

    Ground 1: Family Life

14. It was the ECO's case that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in failing
    to have regard to the applicable principles in assessing the nature  of
    this family life, and further that on the facts as found was  wrong  to
    have found Article 8 engaged.  The First-tier Tribunal appears to  have
    assumed  that  there  is  a  family  life  because  of  the  biological
    relationship and there are "no findings of  any  dependency".   In  his
    oral submissions Mr Kotas pointed to  the  "voluntary"  nature  of  the
    separation between parents and son,  a  submission  underpinned  by  an
    assertion that when his family fled to the UK in  2013  the  Respondent
    elected to stay behind at university.

15. There is no  merit  in  this  submission.   The  Tribunal  was  clearly
    cognizant throughout that this young man is no  longer  a  minor,  that
    being  the  reason  for  refusal  under  the  refugee  family   reunion
    provisions in the Rules.   The Tribunal directed  itself  to  the  most
    authoritative statement of the law as  it  relates  to  Article  8  and
    "adult children", the dicta of Sir Stanley Burnton LJ in Singh  v  SSHD
    [2015] EWCA Civ 630.  That guidance is in  essence  that  there  is  no
    requirement of exceptionality  in  assessing  whether  an  adult  child
    maintains a family life with  his  parents,  but  that  there  must  be
    something more than the ordinary ties of love  and  devotion.  In  this
    case the Tribunal was plainly satisfied that  this  was  the  case.  It
    found as fact (contrary to the suggestion  in  the  grounds)  that  the
    Respondent was not leading an independent life  and  that  he  remained
    entirely financially dependent on his father. There  being  no  'bright
    line' between minority and majority he remained  part  of  this  family
    unit.  He had no other close family in Pakistan. As a practising Ahmadi
    he was, like his parents  had  been,  "vulnerable  in  a  very  hostile
    society". That  was  no  doubt  one  of  the  factors  leading  to  the
    depression suffered by both mother  and  son  and  the  fact  that  the
    separation is causing great distress  to  all  concerned.   As  Stanley
    Burnton LJ notes in Singh, "it all depends  on  the  facts".  On  these
    facts, the First-tier  Tribunal  was  entitled  to  conclude,  for  the
    reasons it gives, that Article 8 was engaged.

16. As to the point that the Tribunal had failed to weigh  in  the  balance
    the "voluntary" nature of the separation,  this  sits  rather  uneasily
    with the  fact  that  mother,  father  and  brother  were  all  granted
    international protection; this amounts to an acceptance that they  were
    forced to leave Pakistan for their own safety.  I can see no reason  to
    interfere with the Tribunal's finding that "this is a family which  has
    been split up because of persecution".

    Ground 2: Article 8 'outside of the Rules'

17. The complaint made by the ECO is that the features  identified  in  the
    determination are not capable of amounting, even if taken cumulatively,
    to sufficiently serious and compelling factors so as to warrant a grant
    of leave to enter outside of the Rules.

18. It is with substantial justification that Mr Lemer  characterised  this
    submission as a disagreement with the outcome of the appeal.

19. The Tribunal began its deliberations by properly directed itself to the
    reason for refusal, that being that the requirements of the appropriate
    immigration rule, paragraph  352D,  were  not  met.  The  reasoning  on
    Article 8  proportionality  thereafter  contains  no  misdirection.  At
    paragraph 16 the determination identifies the task at hand: "I have  to
    balance the private interests of the appellant and his  family  on  the
    one hand against the public interest in the maintenance of the economic
    well-being  of  the  country  by  means  of  effective  and  consistent
    immigration control on the other".   Careful  regard  has  had  to  the
    weight to be attached to the  public  interest  at  paragraph  17.  The
    factors weighed in the balance in the  proportionality  assessment  are
    set out with  clarity  and  cannot  be  reduced  to  the  fact  of  the
    biological relationship. The cumulative factors which  led  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to allow the appeal under Article 8 were  the  fact  that
    this family have  been  split  up  because  of  persecution,  that  the
    application would have succeeded but for the Respondent's age, that  he
    is alone in Pakistan with no close family, that he has not  established
    an independent life and remains part of  this  family  unit,  that  his
    whole family are refugees in the UK, that he himself  is  a  practising
    Ahmadi who is "vulnerable in a very hostile society", that his  parents
    are desperately worried about him to the extent  that  his  mother  has
    been diagnosed with depression, and that he is  depressed.    On  those
    facts it was open to the  Tribunal  to  find  that  this  decision  was
    disproportionate, or to put it another way  that  the  outcome  of  the
    decision was, for the Respondent and his family, "unjustifiably harsh".



    Decisions

20. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error  of  law
    and it is upheld.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           26th January 2016

                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission granted by First-tier Tribunal Grimmett on the 2nd December
2015

