
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
OA/11760/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 23 March 2016                    |On 12 April 2016                  |
|                                    |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                             SHAUBO SDIQ IBRAHIM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr C Bloomer counsel instructed by Global House
Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Ms Johnstone Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. The Appellant was born on 1 January 1992 and is a national of Iraq.
3. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal but  in
   order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in  the
   First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against
   a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Morris  promulgated  on  23  June
   2015 which dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the decision  of  the
   Respondent to refuse entry clearance to the  UK  as  the  spouse  of  the
   Sponsor Dara Tofeek Albarzinjc.
4. The refusal decision which is dated  5  August  2014  gave  a  number  of
   reasons:

   a) The Sponsor claimed to  be  exempt  from  the  financial  requirements
      because he was in receipt of DLA but had failed  to  provide  evidence
      that he could maintain and accommodate themselves without recourse  to
      public funds by reference to evidence of housing benefits received.

   b) No recent evidence of accommodation was provided.


The Judge's Decision
5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Morris ("the Judge") dismissed the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
   Rules but allowed the appeal  against  the  Respondent's  decision  under
   Article 8. The Judge:

   a) Set out the factual basis f the Appellants claim and the  reasons  for
      refusing.

   b) Identified the issues in the case.

   c) Set out the documentary evidence before him.

   d) Found that the Appellant did not meet the requirements of Appendix  FM
      at the  time  of  application  as  he  did  not  meet  the  evidential
      requirements  of  Appendix  FM-SE  in  relation  to  the  receipt   of
      Disability Living Allowance.

   e) The Appellant had not established at the time of application  that  he
      would be able to maintain and accommodate himself and  his  dependents
      without recourse to public funds because the account  into  which  his
      DLA was paid was regularly overdrawn.

   f) The Appellant did not provide at the time of application the  evidence
      that there was  adequate  accommodation  without  recourse  to  public
      funds.

   g) He found that there were  compelling  circumstances  in  the  case  to
      warrant a grant of leave outside the Rules by reference  to  case  law
      cited in paragraph 27.

   h) He set out the guidance in Razgar and the five questions he needed  to
      consider.

   i) He considered the best interests of the Appellants child as a  primary
      consideration noting that she had seen her father regularly until  her
      father became seriously ill and wheelchair bound.

   j) He determined that the issue was one of proportionality.

   k) He accepted that the Appellants child was a British  citizen  although
      living with  her  mother  in  Iraq.  He  accepted  that  although  the
      Appellant did not meet the requirements of the Rules at  the  time  of
      the application she met them at the time  of  the  hearing  given  the
      documentary evidence that had been produced. She was entitled to  live
      with her father.

   l) He found it disproportionate  to  expect  the  Appellant  to  have  to
      reapply for entry clearance particularly given  the  Sponsors  serious
      ill health.
6.  Grounds  of  appeal  were  lodged  which  argued  that  the  Judge   had
   misdirected himself in  allowing  the  appeal  under  Article  8  as  the
   relevant date for consideration of the Rules and Article 8 was  the  date
   of the decision; the Article 8 findings were  inadequate;  there  was  no
   reference to paragraph 117B of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act
   2002 and the public interest factors.
7. On 14 October 2015 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cox  gave  permission  to
   appeal.

8. At the hearing I heard submissions from Ms Johnstone  on  behalf  of  the
   Respondent that :

   a) If the Appellant was now able to meet the requirements  of  the  Rules
      she should make a fresh application.

9. On behalf of the Appellant Mr  Bloomer submitted that :

   a) The approach of the Judge was clear and well reasoned.

   b) The Appellant had set out a good case under Article 8.

   c) There was evidence that he received DLA because  he  suffered  from  a
      serious spinal tumour and was in receipt of housing  benefit.  It  was
      therefore  clear  that  he  would  be  exempt   from   the   financial
      requirements of Appendix FM.

   d) The Judge directed  himself  as  to  all  of  the  relevant  case  law
      including SS Congo.

   e) The Judge heard submissions as to proportionality which was the  issue
      in the case and accepted counsel's submissions.

   f) The conclusion he reached was one that was open to him.

10. In reply Ms Johnstone on behalf of the  Respondent  submitted  that  the
   Judge failed to consider the proportionality of the  Appellant  making  a
   fresh application.

Finding on Material Error

11. Having heard those  submissions,  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made no material errors of law in what  was  a  thorough,  well-
   structured and carefully reasoned decision.

12. The Appellant in this case made an application on 8 May 2014  for  entry
   clearance as a spouse underpinned by a claim  that  her  husband  was  in
   receipt of DLA at the time of the application and  therefore  exempt  for
   the financial provisions of Appendix FM and in receipt of housing benefit
   and able to accommodate his wife and child  without  recourse  to  public
   funds. The Judge found that the Appellant did  not  meet  the  evidential
   requirements of the Rules  which  require  evidence  submitted  with  the
   application in accordance with Appendix FM-SE. While  there  was  clearly
   some dispute before him as to what evidence was submitted, the  Appellant
   claiming that in fact the documents she claimed had been  submitted  with
   the application, the Judge came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  required
   documents had not been submitted at the time of application.

13. The Judge,  having  concluded  that  the  Appellant  did  not  meet  the
   requirements of the Rules went on to consider Article 8 outside the Rules
   as he had been urged to find that in  this  case  there  were  compelling
   circumstances in relation to the Sponsors health supported by a number of
   letters from those treating him  why  he  should  find  that  there  were
   compelling circumstances why a grant  of  leave  outside  the  Rules  was
   warranted. The Judge had before him clear and  persuasive  evidence  that
   the Sponsor having previously enjoyed good health and worked developed  a
   spinal cord tumour and underwent  radiotherapy,  chemotherapy  and  major
   spinal cord surgery which had not been successful. There were letters  in
   the  bundle  from  The  Christie  NHS  Trust  going  back  to  late  2012
   cataloguing the very serious nature of his condition and  the  impact  it
   had on his mobility essentially leaving him in a wheelchair. All this was
   unchallenged.

14. The Judge self directed himself appropriately as to  the  relevant  case
   law citing SS Congo  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387  in  relation  to  compelling
   circumstances and  the  guidance  given  in  Razgar  [2004]  2AC  367  at
   paragraphs 27 and 28. He also made  clear  that  the  Appellant  and  her
   husband had a child who was a British citizen living with her mother  her
   rights were a primary consideration and who was entitled to enjoy  family
   life with her father who could no longer travel to see her.  He  accepted
   that the Sponsor had been able to see his daughter regularly  before  the
   onset of his illness and that family life existed.

15. He recognised that the issue was one of proportionality and  essentially
   two arguments were placed before him to suggest that in the circumstances
   of this case were sufficiently compelling that a grant of  leave  outside
   the Rules was warranted: the Sponsors health and the fact that  while  he
   may not have produced the mandatory evidence in relation to the Rules the
   facts were as he claimed them to  be  in  relation  to  DLA  and  Housing
   Benefit and that he received both.

16. Thus he noted the argument of the Appellants  representative  that  even
   if the Appellant could not meet the requirements of the Rues at the  time
   of the application that on the basis of the documents before the Tribunal
   she did at the date of hearing. I am satisfied that as it was argued  the
   Judge was in error to accept this argument because in an out  of  country
   appeal the date of the assessment was the date of decision AS (Somalia) &
   Anor v ECO, Addis Ababa & Anor v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 149. However  I  am
   satisfied that this made no material difference to the  outcome  of  this
   case because the evidence produced at the hearing in fact considered of a
   number of letters dating back to 28 February 2013 and leading up  to  the
   date of the application and indeed decision from the DWP  that  confirmed
   that the Sponsor received the highest rate of DLA and was also in receipt
   of Employment Support Allowance and Housing Benefit so it would have been
   open to the Judge to conclude on the basis of this  evidence  that  while
   the Appellant may not have produced  the  necessary  documents  with  his
   application such documents did exist to show that he met the requirements
   of the Rules at the date of application.  As was  said  in  Adjei  (visit
   visas - Article 8) [2015] UKUT 0261 (IAC) the Tribunal may need  to  look
   at the extent to which the claimant is said to have failed  to  meet  the
   requirements of the rule because  that  may  inform  the  proportionality
   balancing exercise that must follow. If he could have met  the  Rules  it
   was open to the Appellant to argue as she did that  the  public  interest
   was not served by refusing entry clearance.

17. The Judge  therefore  took  that  into  account  in  the  assessment  of
   proportionality as he was entitled to do. He also at  paragraph  35  took
   into account the Sponsors 'self evident' serious and debilitating  health
   problems which was  evidenced  by  numerous  letters  from  the  hospital
   unchallenged by the Respondent which showed he had care needs  that  were
   having to be met by friends and would benefit greatly from  the  presence
   of his  wife  and  child  according  to  his  consultant  oncologist  and
   Consultant Neurosurgeons in letter that the Judge had before him. I  find
   that it the particular circumstances of this case it was  therefore  open
   to the Judge to find 'compelling circumstances'- individual interests  at
   stake covered by Article 8 "of a particularly pressing nature" so  as  to
   give rise to a "strong claim that compelling circumstances may  exist  to
   justify the grant of LTE [Leave to Enter] outside the rules" (SS Congo)

18. In the particular circumstances of this case it was also open to him  to
   find as he did at paragraph 34 that it was 'disproportionate  to  require
   the Appellant to commence the whole process  again."  Given  the  finding
   about his financial circumstances  and  accommodation  and  the  Sponsors
   pressing need for support I am satisfied that it was open to the Judge to
   conclude that temporary separation to enable an  individual  to  make  an
   application for entry clearance was disproportionate and while he did not
   cite caselaw to that effect his approach was entirely in accordance  with
   R (on the application  of  Chen)  v  SSHD  (Appendix  FM  -  Chikwamba  -
   temporary separation - proportionality) IJR [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC).

19. I remind myself of what was said in Shizad (sufficiency of reasons:  set
   aside) Afghanistan  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)  about  the  requirement  for
   sufficient reasons to be given in a decision in headnote  (1):  "Although
   there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of the  conclusions  on
   the central issue on which an appeal is determined,  those  reasons  need
   not be extensive if the decision as a whole makes sense, having regard to
   the material accepted by the judge."

20. I was therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as  a
   whole set out findings that were sustainable  and  sufficiently  detailed
   and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

21. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

22. The appeal is dismissed.

Signed                                                              Date
7.4.2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

