
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/11572/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 26th March 2014                              |On 17th April 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                               iftikhar ilahi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer - Islamabad
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Mahmud, Counsel instructed by Magna Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Pakistan born on 1st  January  1947.
    He applied for entry clearance to join  his  son,  the  Sponsor  Shahid
    Iftikhar.  That application was refused for  the  reasons  given  in  a
    Notice of Decision dated 30th April 2013.  The Appellant appealed,  and
    his appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal   Monro  (the
    Judge) sitting at Richmond  on  15th  January  2014.   She  decided  to
    dismiss the appeal under the Immigration Rules and on  Article  8  ECHR
    grounds for the reasons given in her Determination dated  25th  January
    2014.  The Appellant sought leave to appeal that decision, and  on  6th
    March 2014 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The application for entry clearance was refused under the provisions of
    paragraph EC-DR.1.1(d) of Appendix FM of HC 395.  The  Entry  Clearance
    Officer  was  not  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  required  long-term
    personal care to perform everyday tasks, nor  that  if  such  long-term
    care was required it could not  be  provided  in  the  Appellant's  own
    country.

 4. The Judge dismissed  the  appeal  because  although  she  accepted  the
    evidence that the Appellant was becoming less able to care for  himself
    due to his increasing age and periods of illness, and that he lived  in
    a small  community  some  distance  from  medical  facilities  and  his
    daughters, nevertheless there was no medical evidence to discharge  the
    burden of showing that the Appellant required long-term  personal  care
    to perform everyday tasks; nor that such care was not available to  him
    in his own country.  The Judge commented that there was no evidence  as
    to  what  public  or  private  care  services  were  available  to  the
    Appellant.  The Judge also dismissed  the  appeal  on  Article  8  ECHR
    grounds.  Applying the decision in Ghising  (family  life  -  adults  -
    Gurkha policy) [2012] UKUT 00160 (IAC), the  Judge  was  not  satisfied
    that the Appellant had a family life with his adult children.

 5. At the hearing, Mr Mahmud argued that the Judge had  erred  in  law  in
    coming to those conclusions.  He referred to the grounds of application
    and submitted that the Judge had not carefully  analysed  the  evidence
    before her and had given insufficient reasons for her  decisions.   The
    Judge had appeared to apply a higher standard  of  proof  by  requiring
    medical evidence.  As regards Article 8, the Judge had failed  to  take
    into account the rights of other members of the Appellant's family.

 6. In response, Ms Everett argued that the Judge had not made any error of
    law.  She had accepted most of the evidence given about the Appellant's
    circumstances but had found that those circumstances did not  meet  the
    requirements of the particular Immigration Rule.  That was  a  decision
    open to the Judge and which was not perverse.  It followed that as  the
    Judge had found no particular dependency between the Appellant and  his
    relatives in Pakistan as regards the Immigration Rules that  she  would
    find that there was no family life  between  the  Appellant  and  those
    relatives.

 7. I found that there was no error of law in the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal which I therefore do not set aside.  The Judge stated  at
    paragraph 13 of the Determination  that  the  appropriate  standard  of
    proof was the balance of probabilities and I am satisfied from what the
    Judge wrote in her Determination that that was  the  standard  applied.
    The Judge did not make it a requirement of the Immigration  Rules  that
    there was medical evidence in support of  the  application.   That  was
    just one factor taken into account by the Judge.

 8. It is true that the Judge's reasons for dismissing the appeal under the
    Immigration Rules are not extensive.  However,  in  my  view  they  are
    sufficient.  The Judge  accepted  much  of  what  was  said  about  the
    Appellant's  circumstances,  but  she   did   not   find   that   those
    circumstances met the requirements of the  relevant  Immigration  Rule.
    As Ms Everett argued, that was a decision open  to  the  Judge  on  the
    basis of her finding of facts.  Finally, as  the  Judge  found  only  a
    limited dependency upon his children by the Appellant, it followed that
    she would find that the first of the questions posed in  Razgar  [2004]
    INLR 349 would be answered in the negative.   There  was  therefore  no
    need for the Judge to proceed further.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005  and  I  find  no
reason to do so.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

