
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/11055/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th November 2015                |On 26th November 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                           Entry Clearance Officer
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             mr muhammad liaqat
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz
For the Respondent:    Mr N Vaughan


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant before the Upper Tribunal is the Entry Clearance Officer.
     The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal is  Mr  Muhammad  Liaqat.   I
    shall simply refer  to  him,  throughout  this  determination,  as  the
    Claimant.  This is the Entry Clearance Officer's appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal in respect of a decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Cox) promulgated on 23rd  June  2015  allowing  the  Claimant's  appeal
    against a decision of 15th  July  2014  refusing  to  grant  him  entry
    clearance to come to the UK with a view to settlement.

 2. There was something of a history to be taken into  consideration.   The
    Claimant is a Pakistani national and was born on  20th  November  1976.
    His application was to enable him to come to the UK to  join  his  wife
    Shazia Kausar, a British citizen and  his  Sponsor,  in  the  UK.   The
    Claimant had previously been married to a  national  of  Pakistan.   It
    appears that that marriage took place in 2000.  At a point in 2007,  by
    which time he says the marriage was dissolved, he decided he wished  to
    come to the UK, ostensibly, as a  visitor.   He  made  the  appropriate
    application which was initially reviewed but, after  an  oral  hearing,
    the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Hindson)  allowed  his  appeal  in  a
    determination promulgated on 18th June 2008.  The Claimant  arrived  in
    the UK in December of 2008 and stayed with his brother  and  sister-in-
    law.  Shortly after that he met  the  Sponsor.   The  two  developed  a
    romantic relationship and, after his period of  leave  to  enter  as  a
    visitor  had  expired,  the  Appellant  overstayed.  The   relationship
    continued.  On 5th January 2012, however,  an  Immigration  Enforcement
    Unit visited the Claimant's brother's home in Huddersfield  and,  after
    seemingly making an attempt  to  evade  the  participating  Immigration
    Officers, the Claimant was arrested.  He then claimed asylum contending
    that he was at risk as a result of a land dispute.  However, he did not
    pursue that application, indeed, in January 2012, having withdrawn  his
    asylum claim, he voluntarily returned  to  Pakistan.  His  relationship
    with the Sponsor, however, continued and on 24th May 2013  she,  having
    also been previously married, obtained a decree  absolute  of  divorce.
    In September 2013 she and her family travelled to Pakistan and, on 26th
    September 2013,  the  two  married  in  that  country.   They  remained
    together until 20th October 2013 when she  returned  to  the  UK.   The
    Sponsor has subsequently visited the Claimant on two further occasions.

 3. The Claimant's application for entry clearance, on  the  basis  of  his
    relationship, was made on 19th  December  2013.   The  Entry  Clearance
    Officer was satisfied that the requirements of the relevant substantive
    Immigration Rule were met.  However,  the  refusal  was  based  on  the
    discretionary refusal ground contained within paragraph 320(11) of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 4.  When  the  appeal  came  before  Judge  Cox,  the  Presenting  Officer
    contended, with reference to paragraph 320(11) that  the  Claimant  had
    inaccurately portrayed  his  marital  status  on  his  entry  clearance
    application form, that he had practised deception on entry to  the  UK,
    that he  had  attempted  to  frustrate  his  arrest/detention  and  had
    submitted a frivolous application for asylum.   As  to  those  matters,
    Judge Cox accepted that the Claimant had not been  truthful  about  the
    circumstances of his earlier marriage by, at the very least, failing to
    mention it in  his  application  form.   However,  the  Judge  did  not
    conclude that the Claimant was still married noting that  the  evidence
    suggested that his first marriage  had  been  of  only  short  duration
    (paragraph 28 of the determination).  The Judge accepted, with  respect
    to the raid on the brother's house, that the Appellant had attempted to
    frustrate his arrest (paragraph  31).   The  Judge  accepted  that  the
    application for asylum was unmeritorious (paragraph 33) and that all of
    those matters amounted to aggravating factors for the purposes  of  the
    paragraph 320(11) assessment.  Having done all of that the  Judge  went
    on to consider what were the positive factors weighing in favour of the
    Claimant.  In this context he accepted, indeed  it  was  not  disputed,
    that  the  Claimant  and  Sponsor  have  "a  genuine   and   subsisting
    relationship" (paragraph 35), that the continued separation was  having
    an adverse effect upon the Sponsor (paragraph 36),  that  although  the
    Claimant had made an unmeritorious asylum claim  he  had  withdrawn  it
    shortly afterwards and had not actively pursued the claim by  attending
    a  substantive  asylum  interview  (paragraph  37)  and  that  he   had
    voluntarily returned to Pakistan within a few weeks of his arrest which
    was a matter the Judge thought he should receive significant credit for
    (paragraph 38).  He then came down in favour of the  Claimant,  albeit,
    noting that the issues were finally balanced.

 5. The grounds of application for permission to appeal contend, in effect,
    that the Claimant's credibility was seriously undermined, that  he  had
    overstayed, that he had given false or incomplete information  pursuant
    to his application,  that  the  asylum  claim  represented  a  "blatant
    attempt to remain in the UK" and that there had not  been  a  "suitable
    balancing exercise" undertaken by the Judge

 6. Those grounds,  in  truth,  represent  disagreement  with  the  Judge's
    findings and conclusions but no more than that.  As  will  be  apparent
    from what I have said above, the Judge did, indeed, conduct a balancing
    exercise.   He  did  recognise  that  the  Claimant's  credibility  was
    compromised and he unflinchingly acknowledged that.   Nevertheless,  he
    concluded that there were other matters which pointed to  a  favourable
    outcome.  The Judge was entitled to  reach  the  view  he  did  on  the
    material before him.  Indeed, when matters came before  me,  permission
    having been granted by a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal,  Mr  Diwnycz
    did not strenuously seek to persuade me otherwise.

 7. In all the above circumstances I conclude that the First-tier  Tribunal
    did not make an error of law and that its decision shall stand.

Conclusions

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve an error of law  and
its decision shall stand.

No anonymity order is made.


Signed        Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.


Signed        Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway
