

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
     (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                 Appeal
                                                       Number: OA/11392/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Promulgated on               |
|On 2 June 2014                                |On 3 June 2014               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                          BIBI HAJI SHAMAILA AHMADI

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISLAMABAD
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Akther, instructed by Malik & Malik Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision promulgated on 29  January  2014
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Monro which refused the appeal against the
    Secretary of State's  decision  dated  25  April  2013  refusing  entry
    clearance as a dependent parent.

 2. The respondent refused  the  application  as  paragraph  E-ECDR.2.5  of
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules was not met. This states:

        The applicant or, if  the  applicant  and  their  partner  are  the
        sponsor's parents or grandparents, the applicant's partner, must be
        unable, even with the practical and financial help of the  sponsor,
        to obtain the required level of care in the country where they  are
        living, because-
        a) it is not available and there is no person in that  country  who
           can reasonably provide it; or
        b) it is not affordable

 3. The respondent found that this paragraph was not met as it had not been
    shown that "Afghan culture is so restrictive that it  is  not  possible
    for you to receive car there."

 4. Judge Monro did not restrict her consideration to paragraph  E-ECDR.2.5
    but also addressed E-ECDR.2.4 which states as follows:

        The applicant or, if  the  applicant  and  their  partner  are  the
        sponsor's parents or grandparents, the applicant's partner, must as
        a result of age, illness or disability require  long-term  personal
        care to perform everyday tasks.

 5. The grounds of appeal did not challenge Judge Monro's decision  finding
    that paragraph 2.4 was not met even though it was  not  a  point  taken
    against the appellant by the respondent in the refusal letter. However,
    Mr Kandola did not object to Ms Akther varying her grounds in order  to
    argue that the First-tier Tribunal  erred in considering paragraph  2.4
    and, in the alternative that it erred in substance in that  assessment.
    I therefore heard submissions on this ground.

 6. In my view no error arises from the consideration of whether  paragraph
    2.4 was met. RM (Kwok On Tong:  HC395  para  320)  India  [2006]  UKAIT
    00039 is authority for R v IAT and another ex parte Kwok On Tong [1981]
    Imm AR 214, stating in the head note that

        "Kwok On Tong is still good law and  an  Immigration  Judge  cannot
        allow an appeal  on  the  ground  that  the  decision  was  not  in
        accordance with the Immigration Rules  unless  satisfied  that  the
        requirements of the Immigration Rules were (or are, as appropriate)
        met."

 7. Nothing in the determination or in Ms  Akther's  submissions  suggested
    that the parties were not in a position to deal with paragraph  2.4  of
    the Immigration Rules before the First-tier Tribunal.

 8. I also did not find that anything could turn on the First-tier Tribunal
    judge referring at [18] to an unreported case  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
    which considered the meaning of "personal care" in  paragraph  2.4.  Ms
    Akther accepted that she was unable to maintain that the  case  or  its
    ratio had not been  before  the  parties  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing. It appeared to me that the  discussion  of  what  amounted  to
    "personal care" set out at  [18]  was  uncontentious.  It  cannot  mean
    medical care as suggested by Ms Akther. If that is what  was  intended,
    then the Immigration Rules would say so. The  inclusion  of  the  words
    "everyday tasks" in paragraph 2.4 indicates that the personal  care  is
    in connection with getting up, dressed, washed, fed and  so  on,  those
    being "every day tasks".

 9. It was my view, however, that Judge Monro did err in  stating  at  [19]
    she "heard no evidence that the appellant requires intimate  or  bodily
    contact from a carer." There clearly was such evidence before her.  The
    Appendix 1 application form stated at 1.11  that  "I  require  physical
    care and support". The letter dated 21  January  2013  from  the  legal
    representatives accompanying the application stated:

         "Mrs Ahmadi has been living alone and she is finding  it  extremely
         difficult to carry out  basic  domestic  duties  such  as  cooking,
         washing, bathing herself, heating water as  there  are  no  regular
         power or gas facilities in place."


    The letter also stated that she "becomes breathless with  small  amount
    of movement" and "she requires continuous support  and  care  which  is
    unavailable in her home  country."  It  also  states  "[p]rior  to  her
    younger daughter  getting  married,  the  Applicant  had  been  heavily
    reliant on Aisha to physically care for her on a daily basis" and  that
    "since her daughter's marriage, the Applicant has been unable  to  look
    after herself."

10. It was not my view that the failure to consider the need  for  personal
    could be material, however. This is because the finding of Judge  Monro
    at [25] that paragraph 2.5 was not met as it had not  been  shown  that
    the appellant's daughters could not provide her with personal care  was
    sound so the appeal had to fail in any event.

11. The appellant relied on a number of submissions as to there  being  no-
    one to provide personal care for her in  Afghanistan.  The  Appendix  1
    application form stated at 1.14 that the appellants daughters:

        "...are married and live  far  away  ...  and  leading  independent
        lives. Other extended family members &  friends  are  not  able  or
        willing to provide me with care or take responsibility for me."


12. It goes on at 1.16 to state that:


        "My sponsor has tirelessly tried to arrange for someone to care for
        me. But it has been difficult due to cultural and religious reasons
        and individuals personal family commitments."

13. The legal representative's letter stated on page 2 that:

        "The Applicant's daughters both live in rural areas far  away  from
        their mother and have their own family responsibilities and are not
        permitted to leave their families on a regular basis  to  care  for
        their mother. Similarly, it is not possible for  the  Applicant  to
        live with her daughters as cultural restrictions do  not  permit  a
        mother to live with her daughters after their marriage."







14. On page 3 the letter stated that:

        "The Sponsor and his brother have persistently tried to arrange for
        friends and distant relatives who live nearby to the  Applicant  to
        care for her in their absence; however this has been problematic as
        no individual has been able to visit their mother on a daily  basis
        to give her the support she in dire need of because it has not been
        possible due to their own personal family commitments.


        It has also been difficult  for  the  Applicant's  sons  to  employ
        someone on a permanent basis to care for her due to  religious  and
        cultural reasons, as only a  female  is  permitted  to  look  after
        another female if she is not part of her family,  furthermore,  the
        female members  of  a  family  are  not  permitted  to  work  in  a
        stranger's house. Therefore,  it  has  proved  impossible  to  find
        someone to care for the Applicant."

15. It goes on at 1.16 to state that


        "My sponsor has tirelessly tried to arrange for someone to care for
        me. But it has been difficult due to cultural and religious reasons
        and individuals personal family commitments."

16. It remains the case that these were submissions or assertions made  for
    the appellant and there was no country evidence to  support  the  claim
    that for cultural reasons she could not live with  her  daughters  even
    though she might be in need of assistance and that, also  for  cultural
    reasons, no one else could  provide  her  with  personal  care  if  her
    relatives could not. That was why the respondent did not find paragraph
    2.5 was met and why it is my conclusion that the finding of Judge Monro
    to the same effect was sound.

17. For these reasons I do not consider that the First-tier  Tribunal  made
    an error in law.  The appellant's appeal is accordingly dismissed.


Signed: [pic]                                         Date: 2 June 2014
UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT










