
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/11604/2012
                                                               OA/11611/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 21st June, 2013                            |On 18th July 2013            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

                        Gabriel Paulo Gargantos Evora
                       Robie Francisco Gargantos evora
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Ficklin, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Clive Dewison


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellants are nationals of the Philippines and they are  brothers.
     Their mother, is Jeny Josielyn Gairgantos , ("the sponsor") a  citizen
    of the Philippines, who has indefinite leave to remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The appellants sought entry to settle in the  United  Kingdom
    with their mother under paragraph 297(1) of  Statement  of  Changes  in
    Immigration Rules, HC 395, as amended ("the immigration rules").   This
    application was refused by the respondent Entry  Clearance  Officer  on
    22nd May, 2012.  The appellants appealed that decision and their appeal
    was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Katherine  E  Gordon  at  North
    Shields on 12th February, 2013.  In her determination,  promulgated  on
    25th February, 2013, she dismissed the appellant's immigration appeals.



2.   There were several challenges to the determination, the first of  which
    was that the judge  failed  to  consider  the  best  interests  of  the
    appellants and their rights under Article 8 of the European  Convention
    for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.   It  was,
    in my view entirely properly, conceded by Mr  Dewison  that  the  judge
    should have had regard to the United Nations Convention of  the  Rights
    of the Child, in respect of this  appeal,  involving  as  it  does  the
    admission of children under the age of 18, however, the judge failed to
    do that.

3.   There were five other challenges in respect of the decision made  under
    the Immigration Rules.  I was addressed at some length  by  Counsel  in
    respect of all the challenges, and afterward by Mr Dewison.  Mr Dewison
    accepted the error in respect of the first challenge, as  a  result  of
    which Counsel withdrew the challenges to the decision  made  under  the
    Immigration Rules.  I indicated to the parties' representatives that  I
    was minded to exercise my powers under Section 12(2)(b)(ii) of the 2007
    Act and remit the appeals for hearing afresh  before  a  Judge  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  other  than   Judge   Katherine   Gordon.    Both
    representatives agreed with this course.

4.   I am satisfied  that  this  is  a  case  which  falls  squarely  within
    paragraph 7 of the Senior  President's  Practice  Statement  given  the
    length of time the parties would have to wait  for  the  matter  to  be
    relisted before me in North Shields or Field House, and that  it  could
    conversely be heard relatively speedily by the First-tier Tribunal.  In
    view of the overriding objective informing the onward conduct  of  this
    appeal, I have decided that the appeal should be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal for hearing afresh before a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,
    other than Judge Gordon.

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
