
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/11849/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:   Columbus House,       |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|Newport                           |                                |
|On: 1 August 2016                 |On: 11 August 2016              |
|                                  |                                |


                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS

                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            LUTHFA SALINA KHANOM
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                                  DECISION


 1. This is an appeal by the Entry Clearance Officer against  the  decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Clarke in which he allowed the  appeal  of
    Luthfa Salina Khanom,  a  citizen  of  Bangladesh,  against  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer's decision to refuse entry clearance as the dependent
    adult daughter of the Sponsor Dewan Monowar Ghazi, on  Article  8  ECHR
    grounds. For the sake of clarity, I will refer to  Ms  Khanom  as  'the
    Applicant'.




 2. The Applicant applied for entry clearance on 9 July 2014 along with her
    mother Somsun Nessa Khatun. Both applications were refused by the Entry
    Clearance Officer on 22 August  2014.  The  Applicant  and  her  mother
    exercised their right of appeal against the decisions and  the  appeals
    were heard  together  before  Judge  Clarke  on  23  October  2015  and
    dismissed by virtue of the Immigration Rules but allowed on  Article  8
    ECHR grounds. The Entry Clearance Officer  applied  for  permission  to
    appeal against the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision in  respect  of
    the Applicant but not in respect of her  mother.  The  application  was
    granted on 23 May 2016  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Astle  in  the
    following terms

          The grounds argue that the Judge erred in failing to resolve areas
          of conflict with regard to family life between the Sponsor and his
          adult daughter.


          The Judge was satisfied as to the biological relationship  between
          the Sponsor and  his  daughter  but  her  representative  accepted
          (paragraph 41) that she could not meet  the  requirements  of  the
          Rules. In considering Article 8 outside them the Judge found  that
          family life existed between them. It is arguable that this finding
          (paragraph 52) is at odds with his finding  that  there  were  not
          more than emotional ties (paragraph 58). Permission  is  therefore
          granted.




 3. At the hearing before me Mr Richards appeared for the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer and there was no appearance on  behalf  of  the  Applicant.  Mr
    Richards relied on the grounds of appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  and  I
    reserved my decision.




Decision


 4. Following the hearing but before preparing this decision a  letter  was
    received from the Sponsor dated 28 July 2016. The  pertinent  paragraph
    of the letter, copied to the Home Office Presenting Officer's  Unit  in
    Cardiff, reads as follows:


       I write to inform the court that the Entry Clearance officer has  now
       granted Ms Khanom the entry clearance visa  for  2.5  years.  I  have
       attached a copy of both visa papers received from Dhaka. In light  of
       this, there is no need for a further hearing on the  same  matter.  I
       will not attend court on 02.08.2016.




 5. The copy document attached shows the post reference 3603883 and  is  an
    Entry Clearance valid from 12 July  2016  to  21  April  2019  endorsed
    "Leave to enter outside of the rules".


 6. It is clear in these circumstances that the Entry Clearance Officer has
    acted upon the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the  appeal
    and that the intention of the Entry  Clearance  Officer,  although  not
    communicated to Mr Richards, was to seek  permission  to  withdraw  the
    appeal against the First-tier Tribunal's decision. I  consent  to  such
    withdrawal.



Conclusion

 7. The appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  has  been  withdrawn  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer.


 8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.








Signed:                                                  Date:

J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
