
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/11220/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 10 March 2016                         |On 24 March 2016                  |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup
                                   Between

                                 Shipa Begum
                        [No anonymity direction made]

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      The Entry Clearance Officer Dhaka

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr J Holt, instructed by John Barkers Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Shipa Begum, date of  birth  2.7.96,  is  a  citizen  of
    Bangladesh.

 2. This is her appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Wilson promulgated 3.6.15, dismissing on immigration and  human  rights
    grounds her appeal against the decision of the Entry Clearance  Officer
    to refuse entry clearance to the United Kingdom as  the  child  of  the
    sponsor Mr Geda Miah, a British citizen settled in the UK.   The  Judge
    heard the appeal on 20.5.15.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Nicholson granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    1.9.15.

 4. Thus the matter came before me on 10.3.16 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 5. For the reasons set out below I found such error of law in  the  making
    of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal as to required the  decision
    of Judge Wilson to be set aside and remade.

 6. The application made on 25.5.14 for entry clearance was  considered  by
    the Entry Clearance Officer  under  paragraph  E-ECC  of  Appendix  FM,
    erroneously referred to in the first decision of 2.7.14  as  EC-P  1.1.
    The second decision, dated 14.8.14, which was in the form of a  review,
    refused the application on the basis that the appellant  did  not  meet
    the income threshold requirements of Appendix FM-SE and  the  specified
    evidence requirements.

 7. In granting permission to appeal,  Judge  Nicholson  pointed  out  that
    whilst neither the grounds of appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal,  nor
    those to the Upper Tribunal referred to  it,  the  provisions  for  the
    entry of children under Appendix FM relate to the children  of  persons
    with limited leave, not  to  the  children  of  British  citizens.  The
    application should have been considered by the Secretary of  State  and
    the First-tier Tribunal under paragraph 297 of the  Immigration  Rules.
    That provision was not drawn to the attention of Judge Wilson.

 8. The preamble to Appendix FM states that this route is for those seeking
    to enter or remain in the UK on the basis of their family life  with  a
    person who is a British citizen, is settled in the UK, or is in the  UK
    with limited leave. However, the section of Appendix FM in relation  to
    family life as a child states, "This route is for a child whose  parent
    is applying for entry clearance or leave, or who has limited leave,  as
    a partner or parent. For further provision on a child seeking to  enter
    or remain in the Uk for the purpose of their family life see Part 8  of
    these Rules."

 9. Whilst the appellant's mother did have limited leave at the time of the
    decision, the application was made on  the  basis  of  the  appellant's
    relationship  to  her  father,  a  British  citizen.  The  preamble  to
    paragraph 297 explains that it sets out the requirements for indefinite
    leave to enter the UK as the child of a parent, parents or  a  relative
    present and settled  or  being  admitted  for  settlement  in  the  UK.
    Obviously, the appellant's father is and  was  at  all  material  times
    settled in the UK.

10. In the circumstances, the debate about the  financial  threshold  under
    Appendix FM and whether the specified evidence  requirements  had  been
    met was in error of law. The requirements under paragraph  297  do  not
    include a specific financial threshold but the lower  one  of  adequate
    maintenance.

11. It follows that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  was  in
    error of law and cannot stand.

12. In setting aside that decision and in the remaking of the decision,  Mr
    Holt pointed out that since this  appeal  was  lodged,  the  appellant,
    along with her four siblings, has made a further application for  entry
    clearance under Appendix FM. This  application  was  also  refused,  on
    30.10.15,  but  on  different  grounds  to  the  2014   decisions.   In
    particular, the financial threshold was not  relied  on  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer.

13. It is unfortunate for the appellant that  it  is  now  approaching  two
    years since she made her application for entry  clearance.  However,  I
    cannot see a way to remake the appeal by  simply  allowing  it  on  the
    basis that  either  the  financial  requirement  is  that  of  adequate
    maintenance, or on the basis  that  the  financial  threshold  was  not
    relied on in the later decision. Paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules
    includes other features such as adequate accommodation and whether  the
    child, who has now reached her majority, is living an independent life;
    although those issues should have been decided  on  the  basis  of  the
    circumstances prevailing at the date of the refusal decision. Those are
    matters  that  have  not  necessarily  been  considered  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer.

14. It seems to me that the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer was not
    in accordance with the law and that the appropriate course is to remake
    the decision in the appeal by allowing it to the  limited  extent  that
    the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer was not in accordance  with
    the law and that it remains for the Entry Clearance Officer to  make  a
    decision in accordance with the law.

Conclusions:

15. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

     I set aside the decision.

                    I re-make the decision in the  appeal  by  allowing  the
                    appeal on the limited basis only that  the  decision  of
                    the Entry Clearance Officer was not in  accordance  with
                    the law and it remains for the Entry  Clearance  Officer
                    to make a decision in accordance with the law.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated        21 February 2017



Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.


Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a fee award.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The decision on the application remains outstanding.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated        21 February 2017

