

                                [pic]

 Upper Tribunal

 (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

 Appeal Number: OA/12990/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



 Heard at Field House
                  Decision and Reasons Promulgated
 On 14 August 2015
                    On 19 August 2015



                                   Before



                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA

                                   Between

                  THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (DHAKA)

         Appellant


                                     and


                               MRS SHIPA BEGUM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)


                                                                  Respondent


 Representation:


 For the Appellant:    Mr M K Hasan, Kalam Solicitors
 For the Respondent:   Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                        DETERMINATION AND REASONS


    1. The Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) appeals the decision of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge C Newberry, promulgated on 16 December 2014,  allowing
       an appeal against a decision to refuse the respondent leave to  enter
       the United Kingdom as a partner.






 Background

    2. The respondent married Mr Mohamed  Ala  Miah  (the  sponsor),  on  16
       December 2011.  The first wife of the sponsor died of a brain  tumour
       on 14 June  2011.  The  sponsor  has  two  children  from  his  first
       marriage, who were aged 3 and 8 at the time of  the  ECO's  decision.
       The sponsor gave up employment in order  to  care  for  his  children
       following the deaths of his late wife and mother-in-law in July 2012.

    3. The respondent's application was  refused  on  23  April  2013  under
       paragraph EC-P.1.1(d), with reference to E-ECP.3.1.  In  essence,  it
       was not accepted that the  sponsor  was  exempt  from  the  financial
       requirements as defined in E-ECP3.3. The ECO noted that  the  sponsor
       was  unemployed  and  in  receipt  of  Income  Support,   bereavement
       benefits, Child Benefit and Tax  Credits  but  commented  that  these
       could not be taken into account to assess his financial circumstances
       and they did not exempt him from the said requirements.

    4. In appealing the ECO's decision  the  respondent  stressed  that  the
       sponsor used to be employed but had now become the carer of two minor
       children; that the ECO ought to  have  exercised  discretion  in  the
       respondent' favour given that others  in  receipt  of  benefits  were
       exempted from  the  financial  requirements;  the  decision  was  not
       therefore in accordance with the law and under Article 8 ECHR it  was
       disproportionate to expect the sponsor and  his  children  to  go  to
       Bangladesh to continue family life. In addition, it was said that the
       ECO ought to have considered section 55 of the  Borders,  Citizenship
       and Immigration Act 2009 in relation to the sponsor's children.


    5. An Entry Clearance Manager (ECM)  reviewed  the  decision  to  refuse
       entry on 14 May 2014, however the original decision  was  maintained.
       The ECM remarked that the  sponsor  was  not  in  receipt  of  Carers
       Allowance or any other applicable benefit, which  would  qualify  him
       for exemption from  the  financial  requirements.  The  ECM  was  not
       satisfied that discretion was applicable in this case. In relation to
       Article 8 ECHR, the ECM considered that this  was  incorporated  into
       the Rules. It was said that the parties would have been  aware,  when
       they entered into the marriage, that the respondent  would  not  have
       had an automatic right to settle  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The  ECM
       considered  that  family  life  could  continue  with   the   sponsor
       travelling to  Bangladesh,  as  he  had  previously,  through  modern
       methods of communication or the sponsor  joining  the  respondent  in
       Bangladesh. With regard to section  55  of  the  2009  Act,  the  ECM
       remarked that the ECHR could not be used to cure defects when a claim
       could not succeed under the Rules.

    6. At the hearing before the FTTJ, the  sponsor  gave  evidence  and  in
       adopting his witness statement, it emerged  that  his  mother-in-law,
       who had assisted him with the children, died on 29 July 2012 and  his
       father-in-law on 5 June 2014.  There was  also  documentary  evidence
       before the FTTJ, which  stated  that  the  sponsor  was  "going  into
       depression"  and  was  in  receipt  of  substantial  assistance  from
       Coventry City Council's Children and Young Peoples Directorate.

    7. The FTTJ considered there to be arguably good  grounds  for  granting
       leave outside the Rules on the basis that the sponsor's children were
       British citizens who were therefore entitled  to  the  benefits  this
       brought; the sponsor was in receipt of public funds  because  he  was
       unable to work while caring for his children;  that  the  family  had
       suffered misfortune and that the presence  of  the  respondent  would
       enable the sponsor to resume work.





       Error of law
    8. The grounds of application  argue  that  the  FTTJ  made  speculative
       findings regarding whether the sponsor would no longer be on benefits
       if the respondent were in the United Kingdom. Reference was  made  to
       the ratio in MM (Lebanon) [2014] EWCA Civ 985 and section 117B(3)  of
       the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended). It was
       submitted that the FTTJ had attempted to impose his own view  on  the
       income threshold and this was the kind  of  free-wheeling  Article  8
       assessment error criticised in Gulshan  (Article  8  -  new  Rules  -
       correct approach)[2013] UKUT 640 (IAC). It was  also  said  that  the
       FTTJ had failed to engage with the seriousness test identified in  VW
       (Uganda) [2009] EWCA Civ 5.


    9. An issue of timeliness arose because the FTTJ's decision was sent  to
       the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  on  16  December  2014,  however  the
       application was not received until 2 January 2015. FTTJ De Haney, who
       refused permission on 13 February 2015, decided that the  application
       was in time.

   10. Upper Tribunal Judge Storey granted permission to appeal on the basis
       that it was arguable that the FTTJ's assessment failed to have regard
       to the public interest reflected in the Rules and that failure to  be
       able to meet the financial requirements was a relevant factor  to  be
       taken into account on  the  side  of  the  public  interest.  It  was
       arguably not for a judge to substitute his or her own notion of  what
       is the "net" economic effect of a grant of  entry  clearance  on  the
       benefit system. On the issue of timeliness, the  UTJ  commented  that
       the issue may need to be looked at more closely in  light  of  recent
       guidance in SSHD v SS (Congo) & Ors [2015] EWCA Civ 387.

   11. The respondent sent a response to the grant of permission in which it
       was argued that the grounds of application were merely a disagreement
       with the findings of the FTTJ and that his conclusions were  properly
       open to him.

   12. At the hearing before me, Mr Avery began to  address  the  timeliness
       issue, however I indicated my view that the application was  in  time
       as indicated by the FTTJ who refused permission. Mr  Hasan  indicated
       that he was not going to take the point and even it was out of  time,
       the delay was minimal.

   13. The ECO's appeal was received on 2 January 2015 and were it  not  for
       the definitions contained in paragraph 1(4) of the Tribunal Procedure
       (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014  it
       would have been out of time by 3 days. However the said  Rule  states
       as follows;

      "working day" means any day except-
      (a) a Saturday or Sunday, Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday
under
      section 1 of the Banking and Financial Dealings Act 1971; and
      (b) 27th to 31st December inclusive.

   14. As 27 to 31 December 2014 were not working days  and  the  1  January
       2015 was a bank holiday, the deadline for submitting the  application
       was 5 January 2015 and therefore it was in time.

   15. Mr Avery expanded on the grounds of application with reference to  SS
       (Congo) & Ors. In addition, he asked me to note [25]  of  the  FTTJ's
       decision where he remarks on the sponsor's misfortune, with Mr  Avery
       submitting that sympathy was not a relevant factor in  an  Article  8
       consideration. In essence, he submitted that the conclusions  of  the
       FTTJ on the sponsor being able to work, were he to be joined  by  the
       respondent, were speculative and unsustainable on the evidence.

   16. Mr Avery asked me to note, from the form P60's  in  the  respondent's
       bundle, the very low level of the sponsor's earnings before  he  gave
       up work to care for his children. Furthermore, Mr Avery  argued  that
       the FTTJ failed to take into account the income requirements  of  the
       Rules in his proportionality assessment.


   17. Mr Hasan submitted that the FTTJ  had  the  opportunity  to  look  at
       evidence and hear oral evidence of sponsor.  He  had  given  a  well-
       reasoned judgment. At [3] of the decision, there was mention  of  the
       failure to meet the income requirements and at [4] a summary  of  the
       evidence heard by the FTTJ.  Mr Hasan argued that the  FTTJ  had  not
       fallen into speculation because at [8] he had set out  the  sponsor's
       evidence that he could not work. The low earnings history was  before
       the FTTJ. Mr Hasan informed me that when the sponsor's wife  was  ill
       he was claiming Carers Allowance and was not permitted to  work  more
       than 16 hours per week. He  did  not  refer  me  to  any  documentary
       evidence to support this claim. Mr Hasan asked me to  note  that  the
       issue of the sponsor's previous  income  was  not  a  ground  in  the
       permission application or grant. It was argued that there was  family
       life between the respondent and the sponsor's children  and  that  at
       [21-22] the FTTJ had found that to be the case. Mr Hasan argued  that
       there were "exceptional  circumstances"  in  this  case  and  if  the
       respondent could  not  succeed  nobody  could.  The  sponsor  had  no
       prospect of resuming employment until the children were 18 as a  sole
       parent.


   18. In reply, Mr Avery argued that being a single parent  should  not  be
       sufficient to amount to exceptional circumstances and  that  children
       are not a trump card.

   19. After hearing submissions, I announced that I had  found  a  material
       error of law in the FTTJ's decision. While the FTTJ set out the ECO's
       decision at [3] in the decision and it was not in  dispute  that  the
       sponsor was not exempt from the financial requirements,  he  did  not
       attach any weight to the public  interest  considerations  which  are
       reflected in the Rules in reaching his  proportionality  findings  at
       [24] onwards. I have had regard to what was said in SS (Congo) &  Ors
       at [32];

       "Accordingly, a court or tribunal is required to give the new Rules
       "greater weight than as merely as a starting point for the
       consideration of the proportionality of an interference with Article
       8 rights."

   20. Furthermore, the FTTJ  was  not  entitled  to  speculate  as  to  the
       reduction  of  the  burden  on  United  Kingdom  taxpayers  were  the
       respondent to be granted entry in the absence of  any  evidence  that
       this would be the case. In this, I have had regard to  the  sponsor's
       very modest income when he was last in work.

   21. In addition, it was not for the FTTJ to substitute his  own  view  of
       the effect of a grant of entry clearance in this  case,  in  view  of
       what was held in MM v others at [151], as follows;

       "the Secretary of State's judgment cannot be impugned. She has
       discharged the burden of demonstrating that the interference was both
       the minimum necessary and strikes a fair balance between the
       interests of the groups concerned and the community in general.
       Individuals will have different views on what constitutes the minimum
       income requirements needed to accomplish the stated policy aims. In
       my judgment it is not the court's job to impose its own view unless,
       objectively judged, the levels chosen are to be characterised as
       irrational, or inherently unjust or inherently unfair. In my view
       they cannot be. "

   22. Accordingly, I find that the FTTJ was not  entitled  to  conclude  at
       [24] that the entry of the respondent would result in "a net gain  to
       the State."

   23. The decision of the FTTJ is therefore set aside.

   24. Mr Hasan told me that he had no objection to my proceeding to  remake
       the decision, as there was no  further  evidence  to  be  adduced.  I
       accordingly heard brief further submissions from the representatives,
       which were in the same vein as their earlier arguments and I reserved
       my decision on the substantive appeal and now give my reason.

   25. For clarity, I will now  refer  to  the  parties  by  their  original
       designations in the First-tier Tribunal.

   26. There was no significant dispute of fact in  this  appeal  and  those
       facts are as set out in [2] above. In addition,  as  of  11  December
       2012, the sponsor had been assessed by the council,  following  which
       referrals had been made to Relate for bereavement counselling for the
       sponsor's daughter, Coventry City Council for  help  with  employment
       and finances  and  Orbit  housing  with  regard  to  repairs  to  the
       sponsor's  home.  While  evidence  before  the  First-tier   Tribunal
       referred  to  depression,  there  was  no  medical  evidence,   which
       indicated that the sponsor had been diagnosed with any form of mental
       illness.

   27. It is non-contentious that the appellant did not meet  the  financial
       requirements of the Immigration Rules because  the  sponsor  was  not
       exempt from the requirements and he was in receipt of state benefits.
       The appellant argues that an exception should be  made  so  that  she
       could be granted  leave  to  enter  outside  the  Immigration  Rules.
       Indeed, this was the basis of the application  to  the  ECO  and  the
       appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

   28. I therefore consider the appellant's human rights claim in line  with
       the test in Razgar. The appellant had been married to the sponsor for
       around a year at the time the application was made. The  sponsor  and
       his  children  travelled  to  Bangladesh  during  November  2011  and
       returned to the United Kingdom in January 2012. The appellant is step-
       mother to the sponsor's children. The sponsor told the previous judge
       that he married so that he could have support and his children "could
       get a mother." I therefore accept that there is a family life between
       the respondent, the sponsor and his children  that  is  deserving  of
       respect. However, the appellant has spent very little time  with  the
       children overall, no more than two months  out  of  their  lives  and
       there was little evidence before me of any strong  bond  between  her
       and the sponsor's children. The respondent's decision does amount  to
       interference in the proposed family life being  carried  out  in  the
       United Kingdom. I accept that it is  not  reasonable  to  expect  the
       sponsor's British children to permanently relocate to  Bangladesh  in
       order for family life to be carried out there  and  consequently  the
       only realistic venue for this family to be  reunited  is  the  United
       Kingdom. It is not  in  question  that  the  ECO's  decision  was  in
       accordance with the law. I also find that it was necessary,  in  that
       the interference was in pursuit of one of the legitimate aims set out
       in Article 8(2).

   29. In accordance  with  section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
       Immigration Act 2009, I have considered the  best  interests  of  the
       sponsor's children. Those children are British citizens and were aged
       3 and 8 at the time of the decision. Therefore they were  of  nursery
       and school age and thus had embarked upon the early stages  of  their
       education in the United Kingdom. The children lost  their  mother  to
       cancer in 2011 and the sponsor married the appellant later that year.
       It appears likely that they met  the  appellant  during  the  2-month
       period when they were visiting Bangladesh between 2011  and  2012.  I
       consider that it is in the best interests of the  sponsor's  children
       to continue to reside in the United Kingdom,  the  country  of  their
       birth with their father who has consistently  cared  for  them  alone
       since June 2011.  Their  was  little  evidence  before  me  regarding
       whether it is in the children's best interests for the  appellant  to
       be granted entry clearance given their limited contact with her since
       the sponsor married her; however, in view of the practical  care  she
       might render to the sponsor and the children, I am prepared to accept
       that it is.

   30. In determining the proportionality of the ECO's decision, I have  had
       regard to the public interest considerations set out in section  117B
       of the 2002 Act. In terms of section 117B(1), I have attached  weight
       to the fact that the appellant could not meet the requirements of the
       Rules in considering that the maintenance  of  effective  immigration
       controls is in the public interest. The  appellant  has  produced  an
       English language certificate with her  application  and  therefore  I
       accept that she is able to speak English. With  regard  to  financial
       independence in (3), I have attached significant weight to  the  fact
       that the sponsor was not working and that the financial  requirements
       of the Rules were not met. In MM & Ors it was held that  "appropriate
       weight had to be given to the judgment of the Secretary of State"  in
       relation to the level of the income requirements.

   31. I have carefully considered the  arguments  put  on  the  appellant's
       behalf regarding the possibility  that  her  arrival  was  likely  to
       reduce reliance on public funds for the family unit because she could
       look after the sponsor's children. However,  there  was  no  evidence
       before me to indicate that the sponsor  had  ever  earned  sufficient
       sums to support the family unit without  recourse  to  public  funds,
       which he is of course entitled to and the sponsor would be  under  no
       obligation to begin work were leave to enter to  be  granted  to  the
       appellant outside the Rules.


   32. I have attached significant weight to the sponsor's circumstances and
       the best interests of his children. I accept that they are  deserving
       of sympathy, however I find that these circumstances and interests do
       not lead to the conclusion that the appellant should be exempted from
       the need to meet the requirements  of  the  Rules.  The  relationship
       between the appellant and sponsor together with his children did  not
       commence until the marriage, which  took  place  in  late  2011.  The
       appellant has applied to come to the United Kingdom in order to  take
       up family life. The family life which was established  following  the
       marriage between the appellant and sponsor took place at a time  when
       it was known that the appellant did not have a  right  to  come  here
       that is under conditions of "known precariousness" as said in [37] of
       SS (Congo) & Ors. The sponsor, who only came to live  in  the  United
       Kingdom in 2000 himself, would also have been aware that he  was  not
       working  and  therefore  was  not  in  a  position  to  maintain  the
       appellant. I take into consideration the fact that Article 8 does not
       confer an automatic right of entry and that the said Article  imposes
       no general obligation on a state to facilitate the choice made  by  a
       couple to reside in it.  As  indicated  above,  the  sponsor  is  not
       financially independent and the arrival of the appellant is  unlikely
       to change that situation. While it is in the best  interests  of  the
       sponsor's children to remain in the United Kingdom and  possibly  for
       the appellant to join them here, their best interests do  not  amount
       to a trump card. I accept that  family  life  could  not  take  place
       elsewhere owing to the best interests of the  children,  however  the
       fact that family life involving the appellant could not realistically
       be carried out elsewhere does not entitle the appellant to be granted
       leave to enter the United Kingdom.


   33.  Considering all the relevant  issues,  I  do  not  accept  that  the
       interests of the parties in this case are of such a  pressing  nature
       that a good claim for leave to enter can be established  outside  the
       Rules. I do not consider that the assistance, which could be provided
       by the appellant in assisting the sponsor in caring for his  children
       amounts to compelling circumstances, which require the grant of leave
       to enter. I  have  had  regard  to  the  fact  that  the  sponsor  is
       effectively a single parent. The sponsor's evidence, set out  at  [8]
       of the FTTJ's decision was that it was "impossible" for him to  work,
       as there was no one to care for the children while he did. However at
       the time of the ECO's decision the eldest child was in school  and  I
       do not accept that it is impossible for lone parents to work and care
       for their children  simultaneously,  without  family  assistance.  It
       remains open to the sponsor to find employment and  arrange  paid-for
       care for the children so that he may be in a position to sponsor  the
       appellant at a future time.

   34. I therefore consider that the obstacles to the family being  reunited
       in the United Kingdom amount to no more than mere difficulties  which
       resulted from their choice to marry at a time when the sponsor  could
       not financially maintain the appellant. I therefore conclude that the
       refusal  of  entry  to  the  appellant  was  not  a  disproportionate
       decision.


   35. I accordingly allow the Secretary of State's appeal.

   36. The decision of the FTTJ is  set  aside  and  I  substitute  a  fresh
       decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal against the refusal of her
       application under Appendix FM, on human rights grounds.


 Decision


  1) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the
     making of an error on a point of law


  2) The decision of the FTTJ to allow the appeal is set aside.

  3) I substitute a fresh decision to dismiss the respondent's appeal
     against the refusal of her application for entry clearance to the
     United Kingdom as a partner.

 No application for anonymity was made and I could see no reason to make
 such a direction.


 Signed     Date: 16 August 2015


 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara




 -----------------------
Appeal Number: OA/12990/2013






7



