
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
OA/12380/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly         |Decision and Reasons           |
|On 21 July 2016                        |On 01 August 2016              |
|                                       |                               |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between

                              IMEN BEN OTHMANE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: No attendance
For the Respondent: Mr G Harrison Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.

3. In  a  decision  dated  8  September  2014  the  Respondent  refused  the
   Appellants application for entry clearance to the UK as the partner of  a
   British Citizen Navid Anwar (the Sponsor) The Appellants  appeal  against
   that decision was  allowed  under  Article  8  but  dismissed  under  the
   Immigration Rules by First-tier Tribunal Judge De  Haney  in  a  decision
   promulgated on 10 April 2015. That decision was set aside by Deputy Upper
   Tribunal Judge Rimington on 5 May 2016 as she found that  the  Judge  had
   erred in law in his assessment under Article 8.

4. The matter was adjourned for a re hearing.  The Sponsor  did  not  attend
   the appeal nor was there a representative at court as  the  Tribunal  had
   received a letter dated 14 July 2016 from Just  Law  who  had  previously
   represented the Appellant indicating that they were no longer instructed.
   I am satisfied that due notice of the appeal was served upon the  Sponsor
   at the address that was given. I am therefore satisfied that having  been
   served notice of the hearing and not attended it is in the  interests  of
   justice to proceed with the hearing in the  Sponsor's  absence  as  I  am
   entitled to do by virtue of paragraph 38 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper
   Tribunal) Rules 2008.

5. At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr  Harrison  on  behalf  of  the
   Respondent that he relied on the reason for  refusal  letter,  the  Entry
   Clearance Managers Review dated 1 December 2014 and the points raised  by
   Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington in her error of law decision.

6. While there was no attendance by any party on behalf of the  Appellant  I
   took into account all the documents that had previously been relied on in
   so far as they were relevant to the issues in the case.

Law

7. In relation to claims under Article 8 these are addressed by Appendix  FM
   and paragraph 276ADE of the Rules and the Secretary of State's  Guidance.
   If an applicant does not meet the criteria set  out  in  the  Rules  then
   guidance issued by the Secretary of State in  the  form  of  instructions
   provides in effect, that leave to  remain  outside  the  rules  could  be
   granted  in  the  exercise  of  residual   discretion   in   'exceptional
   circumstances' which are defined in the guidance and must be exercised on
   the basis of  Article  8  considerations,  in  particular  assessing  all
   relevant factors in determining whether a decision is proportionate under
   Article 8.2.

8. It is now generally accepted  that  the  new  Immigration  Rules  do  not
   provide in advance for every nuance in the application of  Article  8  in
   individual cases. At para 30 of Nagre, Sales J said:


   "30.     ... if, after the process of applying the new rules and  finding
       that the claim for leave to remain under them  fails,  the  relevant
       official  or  tribunal  judge  considers  it  is  clear   that   the
       consideration under the Rules has fully addressed any family life or
       private life issues arising under Article 8, it would be  sufficient
       simply to say that; they would not have to go on,  in  addition,  to
       consider the case separately from the Rules. If there is no arguable
       case that there may be good grounds for  granting  leave  to  remain
       outside the Rules by reference to Article 8, there would be no point
       in introducing full separate consideration of Article 8 again  after
       having reached a decision on application of the Rules."

9. This was also endorsed by the Court of Appeal in Singh and  Khalid  where
   Underhill LJ said (at para 64):


   "64.     ... there is no need to conduct a full separate  examination  of
       article 8 outside  the  Rules  where,  in  the  circumstances  of  a
       particular  case,  all  the  issues  have  been  addressed  in   the
       consideration under the Rules."



10. More recently the Court of Appeal  in  SS  Congo  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387
   stated in paragraph 33:


   "In our judgment, even though a test of exceptionality does not apply  in
   every case falling within the scope of Appendix FM, it is accurate to say
   that the general position outside the sorts of special contexts  referred
   to above is that compelling circumstances would need to be identified  to
   support a claim for grant of LTR outside the new Rules in Appendix FM. In
   our view, that is a formulation which is not  as  strict  as  a  test  of
   exceptionality or a requirement of "very compelling reasons" (as referred
   to in MF (Nigeria) in the context of  the  Rules  applicable  to  foreign
   criminals),  but  which  gives  appropriate   weight   to   the   focused
   consideration of public interest  factors  as  finds  expression  in  the
   Secretary of State's formulation of the new Rules in Appendix FM. It also
   reflects the formulation in Nagre at para. [29], which  has  been  tested
   and has survived scrutiny in this court: see, e.g., Haleemudeen at  [44],
   per Beatson LJ. "

11. Section 117A (2) of the 2002 Act  provides  that  where  a  Tribunal  is
   required to determine whether a decision made under the Immigration  Acts
   would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998  it  must,
   in considering 'the public interest question', have regard in  all  cases
   to  the  considerations  listed  in  section117B  of   the   Nationality,
   Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended by the Immigration Act 2014).
   Section 117 (3) provides that the 'public interest  question'  means  the
   question of whether an interference with a person's right to respect  for
   private and family life is justified under Article 8(2).
12. The S117B considerations are as follows:

         "(1)     The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in
             the public interest.

         (2)      It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English-

             (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)      It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-

             (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)      Little weight should be given to-

             (a) a private life, or

             (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,  that  is
                  established by a person at a time when the  person  is  in
                  the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)       Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a   private   life
             established  by  a  person  at  a  time  when   the   person's
             immigration status is precarious.

         (6)      In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
             the public interest does  not  require  the  person's  removal
             where-

             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom."

Finding on Material Error

13. I have taken into account all of the evidence before me.

14. The Appellant submitted a visa application for entry  clearance  as  the
   partner Navaid Anwar. The Sponsor Mr Anwar is a British  Citizen  and  he
   married the Appellant who is an American citizen on 23  March  2013.  The
   application failed because the application was  not  accompanied  by  the
   mandatory documentation largely it  would  appear  because  the  Sponsors
   salary was not reflected in his bank statements as  he  asserted  he  was
   paid in cash.

15.   I remind myself that the Appellant bears the burden of  proof  in  her
   appeal. Mr Anwar was notified of today's hearing and did not attend which
   is surprising given that  he  attended  the  hearing  in  the  First-tier
   Tribunal. While he is not of course obliged to attend the hearing I  find
   that given that this was an appeal against the refusal of entry clearance
   for his wife to come and join him in the UK his failure to attend  court,
   with no explanation for his absence, must reflect on any decision I  make
   where I have to consider the quality and nature of their  claimed  family
   life and the proportionality of the decision in issue.

16. The Appellant has submitted that her  rights  under  Article  8  of  the
   Convention are engaged. I have determined the issue on the basis  of  the
   questions posed by Lord Bingham in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27


Will the proposed removal be an interference by a public authority with  the
exercise of the applicant's right to respect for  his  private  (or  as  the
case may be) family life?

17. I am satisfied that the Appellant  and  his  wife  have  a  family  life
   because they have been married for  some  3  years.  They  have  a  child
   together Kenza Ryned Anwar who was born on 31 August 2014 and appears  to
   live with her mother in the USA. The  child  is  a  British  Citizen  The
   family meet regularly every two or three months. The parties wish to live
   together in the UK where  the  Sponsor  has  a  successful  business  and
   extended family. I accept that the decision interferes with their  family
   and private life.


If  so,  will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such  gravity  as
potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?

18. I am satisfied that removal would have consequences of such  gravity  as
   potentially to engage the operation of Article 8.


If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

19. I am satisfied that there is in place the legislative framework for  the
   decision giving rise to the interference with Article 8 rights  which  is
   precise and accessible enough for the Appellant to regulate  her  conduct
   by reference to it.


If so, is such  interference  necessary  in  a  democratic  society  in  the
interests of national security, public safety or the economic well-being  of
the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection  of
health or morals, or for  the  protection  of  the  rights  and  freedom  of
others?

20. The interference does have legitimate aims since it  is  in  pursuit  of
   one of the legitimate aims set out in Article 8 (2) necessary in  pursuit
   of the economic well being of the country through the maintenance of  the
   requirements of a policy of immigration control. The state has the  right
   to control the entry of non nationals into its territory  and  Article  8
   does not mean that an individual can choose where she wishes to enjoy her
   private and family life.


If so, is such interference  proportionate  to  the  legitimate  public  end
sought to be achieved?


21. In making the assessment I have also taken into  account  ZH  (Tanzania)
   (FC)  (Appellant)  v  Secretary  of  State  for   the   Home   Department
   (Respondent) [2011] UKSC 4 where Lady Hale  noted  Article  3(1)  of  the
   UNCRC which states that "in  all  actions  concerning  children,  whether
   undertaken  by  ...  courts  of  law,   administrative   authorities   or
   legislative bodies, the best interests of the child shall  be  a  primary
   consideration."

22. Article 3 is now reflected in section 55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship
   and Immigration Act 2009 which provides that, in  relation,  among  other
   things, to immigration, asylum or nationality,  the  Secretary  of  State
   must make arrangements for ensuring that those functions "are  discharged
   having regard to the  need  to  safeguard  and  promote  the  welfare  of
   children who are in the United Kingdom".   Lady  Hale  stated  that  "any
   decision which is taken without having regard to the  need  to  safeguard
   and promote the  welfare  of  any  children  involved  will  not  be  "in
   accordance with the law" for the purpose of article 8(2)".  Although  she
   noted that national authorities were expected to treat the best interests
   of a child as "a primary consideration", she added  "Of  course,  despite
   the looseness with which these  terms  are  sometimes  used,  "a  primary
   consideration" is not the same as "the primary consideration", still less
   as "the paramount consideration".

23. I accept as a starting point that it is  in  the  best  interests  of  a
   child to be brought up by both parents. However I note that the Appellant
   and her British Citizen husband have had a child who is herself a British
   Citizen before they knew that the  Appellant  was  going  to  be  granted
   permission to enter the  UK.  That  was  their  choice,  that  the  child
   therefore would be living with parents who had not yet secured permission
   to live together and given the extent of  the  Appellants  previous  visa
   applications they knew that in order to live together they would have  to
   satisfy the requirements of the Immigration Rules. In the absence  of  Mr
   Anwar or further elucidation from the Appellant I have nothing before  me
   to suggest that the child is suffering in only seeing  her  father  every
   few months.

24. Consideration of the issue of proportionality is also  a  'consideration
   of "the public interest question" as defined by section  117A(3)  of  the
   2002 Act. I am therefore required by section 117A(2)(a) to have regard to
   the considerations listed in section 117B.


25. I accept that the  Appellant  appears  to  be  exempt  for  the  English
   language requirements as she is an American citizen. I  accept  that  the
   Appellant will be supported by her husband who has a business.



26. I note however that the first provision I must take into account in  the
   consideration  of  the  public  interest  is  that  the  maintenance   of
   immigration control is in the public interest. The system of  immigration
   control is underpinned  by  the  Immigration  Rules.  In  this  case  the
   Appellant did not satisfy the Immigration Rules and I am satisfied on the
   basis of SS Congo, and indeed Mostafa (Article  8  and  entry  clearance)
   [2015]  UKUT  0112  that  the  failure  of  the  Appellant  to  meet  the
   requirements of the immigration rules is a weighty consideration. Article
   8 does not create a right for married couples to  choose  to  live  in  a
   Contracting State unless they can meet whatever Rules that State  require
   them to meet. There has been no explanation of why the Appellant made her
   application when it must have been obvious that they  could  not  produce
   the required documents and why therefore they did  not  simply  submit  a
   later application when the Sponsors salary was paid into his bank account
   and could meet the Rules. The financial requirements and the  Immigration
   Rules have been found to be  necessary  and  reasonable  requirements  in
   previous caselaw and the obligation  to  provide  bank  documentation  to
   establish that income is legitimately earned in the way claimed is a fair
   requirement that the Appellant and the Sponsor had to meet.



27. I am satisfied that in this case the application failed to  comply  with
   the Immigration Rules and no compelling circumstances were identified why
   those Rules should not be applied in this case in the  usual  way,  there
   was nothing disproportionate in applying the  Rules  in  accordance  with
   their terms, with the effect that Appellants application failed  and  the
   Appellant would have to make a new one.


28. In determining  whether  the  refusal  would  be  proportionate  to  the
   legitimate aim of immigration control I  find  that  none  of  the  facts
   underpinning the appeal outweigh the legitimate purpose of the refusal.

29. I have considered the  issue  of  anonymity  in  the  present  instance.
   Neither party has sought a direction. The Appellant is an adult and not a
   vulnerable person. I see no reason to make any direction in this regard.


CONCLUSION

30. On the facts as established in this appeal, there  are  no  substantial
    grounds for believing that the refusal would  result  in  treatment  in
    breach of ECHR.

31. I therefore find that the decision of the Respondent  appealed  against
    is in accordance with the law.
Decision
32. The appeal is dismissed.

Signed                                                              Date
31.7.2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell


