
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/12795/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15th September 2015                        |On 2nd October 2015           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                             kanthia kunarartnam
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - CHENNAI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No Appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 30th  April  1934.   He
    applied for entry clearance in order to settle in the UK as  the  adult
    dependant relative of  the  Sponsor,  the  Appellant's  son  Kunaratham
    Thayaparan.  That application was refused by an Entry Clearance Officer
    under the provisions of paragraph EC-DR-1.1 of Appendix FM  of  HC  395
    for the reasons given in a Decision Notice dated 10th  September  2014.
    The Appellant appealed that decision, and his appeal  was  heard  by  a
    Panel comprising  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cheales  and  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Moan (the Panel) sitting at Birmingham on 26th  February
    2015.  The Panel dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules,  but
    allowed it on Article 8 ECHR grounds  for  the  reasons  given  in  its
    Decision dated 16th March 2015.  The Respondent sought leave to  appeal
    that decision, and on 14th May 2015 such permission was granted.

 2. I must first decide if the Decision of the Panel contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.  At the hearing of  that
    issue before me, there was  no  appearance  by  or  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant.  I was informed that this was because the Appellant had died
    on 9th September 2015.  Notwithstanding this development,  Mr  Whitwell
    asked me to decide that the Decision of the Panel should be  set  aside
    in that it contained an error on a point of law as when  deciding  that
    the  Respondent's  Decision  was  a  disproportionate  breach  of   the
    Appellant's Article 8 ECHR family rights, the Panel took no account  of
    the public interest and in particular did not address the  factors  set
    out in Section 117B Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 3. I agreed with this submission of Mr  Whitwell.   It  is  apparent  from
    reading   the   Decision   of   the   Panel   that   when   considering
    proportionality, the Panel took no account of and attached no weight to
    the public interest, and in particular failed to consider  the  factors
    set out in Section 117B of the 2002 Act.  As this amounts to a material
    error of law, the Decision of the Panel  relating  to  the  Appellant's
    Article 8 ECHR rights is set  aside.  The  decision  of  the  Panel  to
    dismiss the appeal under the Immigration Rules has not been impugned in
    the appeal to the Upper Tribunal and remains.

 4. The Decision of the Panel relating to the Appellant's  Article  8  ECHR
    rights does not need  to  be  re-made.   Following  the  death  of  the
    Appellant, there is no extant appeal which needs to re-decided.

Decision

The making of the Decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.  I set aside that Decision as  far  as
it relates to the Appellant's Article 8 ECHR  rights.  To  that  extent  the
appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.  There is no further extant  appeal
to be decided.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for  anonymity  and  following
the death of the Appellant I find no need to do so.



Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
