
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/12478/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 22nd September 2014                          |On 29th September 2014     |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                 master A A
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                      Entry Clearance Officer, tashkent


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Paramjorthy (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Halliwell promulgated on 21st May 2014, following  a  hearing  at
    Newport on 12th May 2014.  In the determination, the judge allowed  the
    appeal of Master A A.  The Respondent Secretary of  State  now  applies
    for, and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  and
    thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is  a  citizen  of  Uzbekistan,  who  was  born  on  19th
    September 2004, and has just reached the age of 10 years, at  the  time
    of this hearing.  He appeals against the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    Entry Clearance Officer dated 10th May 2013, refusing  his  application
    for leave to remain in the UK.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that his father was resident in the  UK  on  a
    two year visa which expired in January 2014.  He had applied  for  ILR,
    but on account of some confusion, it had been decided that he  did  not
    meet the requirements.  His current wife is a British national  and  he
    and his wife live together with  their  daughter  and  baby  son.   The
    Appellant is the child of the father's first wife, who was being looked
    after by the Appellant's paternal grandmother, but could no  longer  do
    so, because of  ill-health.   The  Appellant's  father  had  originally
    entered the UK on a student visa in 2005.  He had made  an  application
    for his first wife and children  to  enter  as  dependants.   That  was
    refused.

 4. Subsequently his marriage broke down.  His first wife, the  Appellant's
    mother, was granted legal custody of the Appellant and his sister.  The
    Appellant's mother moved to Yapan with  her  daughter.   The  Appellant
    himself remained in Kokand city, and was  cared  for  by  the  father's
    mother.  The Appellant's mother worked long  hours  in  Yapan  and  her
    daughter was largely cared for by her own parents who are also elderly.



 5. Initially the Appellant's paternal grandmother was  in  a  position  to
    look after the Appellant, but her health deteriorated over the last two
    years, and she is in need of constant medical attention for  her  heart
    condition.   Given  that   the   Sponsor   has   had   full   financial
    responsibility for his son, an application was made for him to enter to
    join the sponsoring father in this country.

The Judge's Findings

 6. At the outset, the judge observed how the Entry Clearance  Officer  had
    held that the Appellant could not meet the  financial  requirements  of
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules (see paragraph 3).  That being so,
    at  the  beginning  of  the  hearing,  he  raised  with   Counsel,   Mr
    Paramjorthy, the issue whether the requirements of Rule 297 of  HC  395
    were going to be addressed.  The sponsoring father had resided  in  the
    UK under the terms of a two year  spouse's  visa,  having  married  his
    second wife, who was a British citizen.

 7. The determination records that,

         "After a short recess, Counsel for the Appellant confirmed that the
         application under Rule 2 and 7 no longer proceeded,  and  the  case
         proceeded under Article 8 only.  Both  Counsel  confirmed  that  in
         dealing  with  the  financial  requirements,  the  Entry  Clearance
         Officer had confused the papers of two different cases  ...."  (see
         paragraph 4.1).

 8. Thereafter, in addressing himself to the  "applicable  law"  the  judge
    recorded that this was an entry clearance appeal from abroad by  virtue
    of Section 85(5) of the 2002 Act, and although in a normal  case  where
    the Immigration Rules apply, the circumstances appertaining to the date
    of the decision to  refuse  have  to  be  considered,  "as  the  appeal
    proceeds on human rights grounds only this evidential restriction  does
    not apply" (see paragraph 6).

 9. The judge considered the evidence and  observed  that  the  Appellant's
    mother could no longer look after the Appellant, as could  neither  his
    paternal grandmother who was in ill-health.  He had evidence  that,  "a
    medical certificate is produced, and she is struggling to care for  the
    Appellant.  Sometimes the Appellant  is  in  consequence  not  able  to
    attend school, but has to  go  with  his  grandmother  to  her  medical
    appointments".

10. The evidence was that all responsibility for  the  Appellant  had  been
    devolved on the sponsoring father (see paragraph  10).   Currently  the
    Appellant spent his time with his mother at  weekends,  but  was  being
    cared for by his grandmother, who had made the  schooling  arrangements
    (paragraph 17).

11. By the time of the hearing before  Judge  Halliwell,  it  was  recorded
    that, "that situation has now changed" because "the mother has made  it
    clear, as appears from the court papers, and the  evidence  before  me,
    that she cannot care full-time for the Appellant" (paragraph 18).   The
    reference to the "court papers" was a reference to the fact that,

         "The matter was brought before a district judge in Uzbekistan  who,
         having reviewed the case, and heard from a child welfare officer on
         behalf of the Appellant, concluded that there should be a  transfer
         of custody and upbringing from the mother and to the Sponsor.  That
         order was made, just over a month ago,  on  3rd  April  this  year"
         (paragraph 19).

12. The judge then went on to summarise the position by noting  that,  "the
    question  is  therefore  whether  the  wider  Article  8  human  rights
    jurisdiction is engaged on the facts of this case" (paragraph 22).   He
    summarised  the  position  further  by  setting  out  in  six  indented
    subparagraphs the facts that the Appellant was a 9 year old boy,  whose
    care and upbringing had been  transferred  by  a  local  court  to  the
    sponsoring father, thereby removing the present uncertainty as  to  the
    welfare, care, and upbringing of this child.

13. As for the sponsoring father, he was now "substantially now settled  in
    the UK".  This is because he had leave for a  further  two  years  and,
    will in all probability be granted ILR within that time" given that  he
    is  married  for  the  second  time  with  a  British  citizen  spouse.
    Consideration was given to the fact that the  grandmother  had  failing
    health, which was causing the Appellant's  schooling  to  be  disrupted
    "and his day-to-day care hindered, and the fact that his mother is  not
    able to care full-time for him".  The judge  concluded  that  the  best
    interests of the Appellant "would be served by him now coming  to  live
    with his father".

14. Thereafter, the judge applied the five step  approach  in  Razgar  (see
    paragraph 21) before concluding that the balance of considerations fell
    in favour of the Appellant because "there is little  or  no  legitimate
    public benefit to be achieved by prohibiting the Appellant from  coming
    to live with his father here" (paragraph 22).

15. The  appeal  was  thereafter  specifically  allowed  "on  human  rights
    grounds" (see paragraph 22).

Grounds of Application

16. The grounds of application state that the Appellant could not meet  the
    requirements of Immigration Rules as the Sponsor did not  have  settled
    status.  If the judge was to allow the appeal under Article 8,  he  had
    to show that there were exceptional circumstances,  which  he  had  not
    done.  Following the case of Gulshan [2013] UKUT  00640  (IAC)  it  was
    necessary to show that there were compelling reasons for  allowing  the
    appeal outside the Immigration Rules.

Submissions

17. At the hearing before me on 29th September 2014, Mr Kandola,  appearing
    on behalf of the Respondent Secretary  of  State,  submitted  that  the
    judge had fundamentally erred  in  law  by  having  regard  to  changed
    circumstances when he stated (at paragraph 18) that "that situation has
    now changed", in referring to the fact that the  grandmother  could  no
    longer look after the Appellant.  This is because  this  was  an  entry
    clearance application, and in all such  cases,  consideration  must  be
    given to the facts at the date of the decision by the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer.

18. Second, the judge failed to give proper consideration to Gulshan [2013]
    UKUT 00640 when  he  allowed  the  appeal,  because  that  required  an
    expressed finding of exceptional circumstances, which would enable  the
    judge to transfer himself out of the Immigration Rules into  the  realm
    of freestanding Article 8 jurisprudence.  No such case  had  been  made
    out.  Third, given that this was the case, the reference to there being
    "no legitimate public benefit" (at paragraph 22) was misconceived.

19. For his part, Mr Paramjorthy, appearing on  behalf  of  the  Appellant,
    submitted that this was a appeal, not under the  Immigration  Rules  as
    has  been  wrongly  assumed,   but   under   freestanding   Article   8
    jurisprudence.  He had been Counsel at the hearing  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.  He specifically remembers having  been  asked  at
    the very outset whether the Rules  were  engaged,  and  after  a  short
    recess, it had been agreed that the appeal was only proceedings on  the
    basis of Article 8 jurisprudence.  That being so, it was unnecessary to
    make a finding of "exceptional circumstances" because this  was  not  a
    requirement under Article 8 jurisprudence.  Finally,  the  Sponsor  did
    now indeed have indefinite leave to remain, as the judge had predicted,
    and his final summary of facts could not be faulted in this regard.

20. In reply Mr Kandola submitted that  given  that  the  Sponsor  now  had
    indefinite leave to remain, the proper course of  action  was  for  the
    sponsoring father to apply again to have his son join  him  in  the  UK
    when he would  succeed.   However,  the  use  of  Article  8  in  these
    circumstances was misconceived.  The court  order  of  April  2013  was
    simply not foreseeable and it was wrong for  the  judge  to  take  into
    account the changed circumstances at paragraph 18.

No Error of Law

21. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside this decision.  My reasons  are
    as follows.

22. First, this was indeed as Mr Paramjorthy has submitted,  an  appeal  on
    the basis of Article 8 alone.  This  being  so  the  restriction  under
    Section 85(5) of the 2002 Act did not apply and  it  was  open  to  the
    judge to consider the situation as at the date of  the  hearing  before
    him, namely, on 12th May 2014.  This  being  so  the  judge  was  fully
    entitled to have regard to the court order by  the  district  judge  in
    Uzbekistan dated 3rd April 2014, just over a month before he  made  his
    own determination in this case.

23. Second, and in any event, there were  clear  findings  of  "exceptional
    circumstances" by the judge (although they are not referred to as  such
    because the judge was deciding this case on the basis  of  freestanding
    Article 8 jurisprudence only) when he observers  that  the  Appellant's
    grandmother is no longer able to look after him and that the mother can
    also not provide full-time care.  The judge had a  medical  report  (at
    page 36) testifying to the grandmother's  failing  health.   The  judge
    recorded that, "the nature of her condition is such that  it  will  not
    improve, and already the Appellant is missing schooling because of  his
    grandmother's health" (paragraph 18).

24. Similarly, there were exceptional circumstances  in  the  finding  that
    there had been a "transfer of custody and upbringing from the mother to
    the Sponsor" such  that  the  judge  was  able  to  conclude  that  the
    sponsoring father now had "sole responsibility for the  Appellant.   He
    takes  part  daily,  albeit  online,  in  the  Appellant's  upbringing,
    supports him financially, and now has legal custody and decision making
    by order of the local Family Court"  (paragraph  19).   In  short,  the
    ultimate findings of the judge, as summarised  carefully  at  paragraph
    22, were entirely sustainable.

Decision

25. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

26. An anonymity order is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 26th September 2014

