
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/12874/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10 June 2014                               |On 8 July 2014               |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                                LORD MATTHEWS
                  SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                            MS CHRISTIANA EDIALE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss K Anifowoshe of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by Ms Christiana Ediale against  a  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Woolley dated  18  March  2014  refusing  her
    appeal against a decision to refuse a family permit, for  a  period  of
    two months, under  Regulation  7(1)(c)  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 as a family member of an EEA national.

2.   It is common ground that in order to succeed in her  appeal  she  would
    have had to  demonstrate  that  she  was  a  dependent  family  member.
    Permission to appeal was granted principally  on  the  basis  that  the
    judge appeared to consider the matter on  the  basis  that  it  was  an
    appeal against  entry  clearance  refusal  rather  than  an  appeal  in
    connection with a family permit but as the case has gone on it does not
    appear that that is a matter which is of any materiality.

3.   The real issue which was before the judge and on which the  judge  made
    her decision was the question of dependency and before us today Counsel
    argued that there was sufficient evidence which should have enabled the
    judge, in fact driven the  judge,  to  infer  that  the  appellant  was
    dependent on her family  in  this  country.   There  is  evidence  that
    certain payments were sent over to Nigeria.

4.   There is evidence that she is a pensioner, although  the  circumstances
    of that pension are not entirely clear as it pointed out  in  paragraph
    25 of the determination.  There is evidence that she lives in  a  house
    owned by a daughter.

5.   The difficulty the judge had was one  which  was  foreshadowed  in  the
    Reasons for Refusal Letter that, while the appellant  stated  that  she
    was dependent on her son-in-law and daughter, she had not submitted any
    evidence of that.  The refusal letter was dated 16  May  2013  and  the
    judge had found on the information before her that  the  situation  was
    exactly the same, namely that  there  was  no  sufficient  evidence  of
    dependency.

6.   We do not agree with the submissions of Counsel  that  the  judge  must
    have been driven to infer that the  situation  was  one  of  dependency
    merely because certain payments were made.  In our  opinion  the  judge
    was quite  correct  to  indicate  that  she  would  have  expected  the
    appellant to have provided a list of regular outgoings and describe how
    they were made by her family.

7.   The judge indicated that there was a  question  about  the  appellant's
    pension but that matter was not  fully  ventilated  in  evidence.   The
    witnesses, it was said by the judge, were vague as to  how  much  money
    they sent to the appellant and how frequently.  There was no account of
    the appellant's income or her daughter's income or  what  contributions
    she made to her mother.

8.   Mr Eson could not specify the contributions by his wife to her  mother-
    in-law, nor could he state what her  outgoings  in  Nigeria  were.   He
    could not say what her costs were.  There was nothing to  indicate  any
    financial arrangement in relation to her house if there  was  any  such
    arrangement.  There was no statement from  Stephen Draughan  about  his
    role in the money which was sent over and which appeared to be sent  to
    him.

9.   In summary, the judge could have found that the appellant  depended  on
    her family if she accepted such evidence as there was and  if  she  was
    prepared to draw the necessary inference but the judge was not required
    to accept that evidence or draw that inference.  She regarded the  lack
    of supporting evidence of actual need as being significant.  We  cannot
    see that she fell into any error of law in  reaching  that  conclusion.
    One would have thought that in light  of  the  letter  of  refusal  the
    appellant would have been put on notice as to precisely  what  type  of
    evidence she should have presented but she did not do so, and the judge
    cannot be criticised for taking the view that she was not  prepared  to
    make the findings desiderated.  Evidence of payments of  money  is  not
    the same as evidence  of  need  for  the  money  on  the  part  of  the
    recipient.

10.  In these circumstances the appeal is refused.






Signed                                  Date


Lord Matthews
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal

