
AIT-AH-V1
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: OA/12753/2013
                                                               OA/12756/2013
                                                               OA/12760/2013
                                                               OA/12766/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 22nd April 2015                   |On 7th September 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                                   del (1)
                                   jn (2)
                                   cks (3)
                                   dlm (4)
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER NAIROBI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Doerfel of counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, a Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



The parties

    1. DMK was born on 18th December 1967 in Uganda. He first arrived in the
       UK and claimed asylum in 2006 and was  given  ILR  on  18th  November
       2011.

    2. MBK was born on 10th October 1977. She claims to have gone through  a
       ceremony of customary marriage with DMK on 24th March 1996, prior  to
       his departure for the UK on 16th August 2006.

    3. The first appellant, DEL and the second-fourth  appellants,  JN,  CKS
       and DLM (and DDK) were all their children or, it  was  claimed,  were
       treated as children of the family (JN having been born of a  previous
       relationship between MBK and an unknown  father  before  she  married
       DMK).

The Immigration applications

    4. On 24 April 2013 MBK sought entry clearance to the UK as  the  spouse
       of  a  refugee  under  paragraph  352  A  of  the  Immigration  Rules
       ("paragraph 352A").

    5. The other appellants sought entry clearance to the UK on the same day
       on the basis that they are the children of DMK, who they are entitled
       to join, following his grant of  refugee  status  in  the  UK,  under
       paragraph 352D of the Immigration Rules ("paragraph 352D").  However,
       their situations were not identical.  CKS was in full time  education
       but he did not qualify under paragraph 352D as he was not a child  at
       the time of the application, but, according to  his  application,  he
       claimed that the need to maintain close  family  ties  justified  and
       required  the  grant  of  leave.  The  respondent  refused  all   the
       applications on 13th May 2013.

The appeal proceedings

    6. The first appeal against the respondent's refusal of leave  to  enter
       was considered by the Entry Clearance Manager on 23rd  January  2014,
       who decided the ECO's decision to refuse  entry  clearance  had  been
       correct. That  appeal  against  the  respondent's  refusal  of  entry
       clearance came before IJ Britton whose decision  was  promulgated  on
       25th April 2014. However, on 12th August 2014  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
       Reeds found that it contained arguable errors in  that  some  of  the
       fact-findings of the FTT were  flawed.  There  was  a  second  appeal
       before Judge Woolley  ("the  Immigration  Judge")  who,  following  a
       hearing on 22nd December 2014, again dismissed the appeal but made an
       anonymity direction.

    7. The present appeal follows the lodging of grounds of  appeal  on  5th
       January 2015 against the Immigration Judge's decision.  Judge  Pooler
       found the grounds to be at least arguable, noting that in the case of
       JN there was evidence her father was dead which the judge  failed  to
       take account of. There was also case law in relation to section 55 of
       the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 ("section 55")  and
       there may have been a failure to properly consider paragraph 297  (i)
       (f) of the Immigration Rules. That paragraph provides that  a  person
       seeking leave to enter the UK on the grounds of being the child of  a
       parent or relative settled here has to show that  there  are  serious
       and compelling reasons why it is undesirable to exclude that child or
       that there were other considerations which make the exclusion of that
        child undesirable. Additionally there must be adequate  arrangements
       for that child's care. In the case of DLM it  was  thought  that  the
       judge had erred in his assessment of whether or not he formed part of
       the family unit and in DEL's case there was  also  thought  to  be  a
       faulty application of rule 297 (i) (f) of the Rules.

    8. On 20th January 2015 the respondent filed a response under Rule 24 of
       the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 stating  that  the
       latest appeal was opposed on the basis that the determination  was  a
       comprehensive one based on the evidence and the judge  made  findings
       he was entitled to make.

    9. At the hearing I heard  oral  submissions  by  both  representatives.
       There was  no  application  to  adduce  fresh  evidence.  Mr  Doerfel
       submitted that MBK qualified for entry clearance because she was  the
       spouse of a person with ILR, their marriage was  subsisting  and  she
       was rightly successful in her appeal to the FTT. This resulted in her
       being granted entry clearance.  There  had  also  been  a  successful
       appeal by DDK and there was no  challenge  to  that  outcome  by  the
       respondent. In order to preserve the family unit it  was  appropriate
       to grant the children entry clearance to join them, it was submitted.
       That would be either under the Immigration Rules or on the basis that
       there would be a breach of Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on
       Human Rights (ECHR) if they were to be excluded.  A large  number  of
       telephone cards and other materials were provided to corroborate  the
       intense contact between the parties.

   10. With regard to the children:

        a. DEL was aged 10 at the date of the hearing and he was part of a
           family unit with DMK who had travelled here to claim asylum.

        b. DDK also qualified under the same rule (297).

        c. DLM was also under 18 and qualified under that rule.

        d. CKS remained financially and emotionally dependent on his father
           and accordingly should also be allowed to stay, presumably, on
           the grounds that Article 8 would be offended if he were not.

        e. JN ought to be treated as a member of the family of DMK by
           reason of the definition of "parent" in the Immigration Rules.

   11. It was submitted for the respondent that even if errors were found in
       relation to some of the appellants' cases this did not mean I had  to
       allow all the appeals. However, there was no cross-appeal against the
       decision  to  allow  MBK's  appeal  against  the  refusal  of   entry
       clearance.

   12. It was pointed  out  on  behalf  of  the  respondent  that  different
       appellants had different mothers  and  fathers.  As  far  as  JN  was
       concerned, it was accepted that DMK was treated as her father if  she
       could show that her father  was  dead.  However,  as  the  judge  had
       pointed out in paragraph 35 of his decision, there  was  no  evidence
       that JN's father was dead. Accordingly he found  that  this  had  not
       been established to the required  standard  and  concluded  that  her
       application could  not  succeed  under  paragraph  352D  (i)  of  the
       Immigration Rules. This, it was said, was clearly  a  conclusion  the
       Judge was entitled to come to on the evidence placed before him.

   13. The Immigration Judge considered JN's application under paragraph 297
       of the Immigration Rules but concluded at paragraph 36  that  because
       JN was a young woman  in  good  health,  who  was  supported  by  her
       sponsor, no serious or compelling  reasons  made  exclusion  of  that
       child undesirable. Having summarised a number  of  decisions  of  the
       Court  of  Appeal  the  Immigration  Judge  had  concluded  that  the
       requirements of the rule were not met.

   14. DLM's mother was one FN, who was not a member of the family unit.  He
       had no biological relationship with MBK and the  judge  had  analysed
       the nature of that relationship at paragraphs 37-40 of his  decision.
       The judge had referred to the  case  of  BM  (BM  and  AL  (352D(iv);
       meaning of "family unit") Colombia [2007] UKAIT  00055)  and  pointed
       out that the President had there distinguished between cases where  a
       child remained part of the family unit and cases where  he  did  not.
       DLM was not part of the family unit of DMK either for the purposes of
       paragraph 352D (iv) of the Immigration Rules.

   15. CKS was over the age of 18 at the date of the decision. He had formed
       a family life in the UK by virtue of the de  facto  roll  assumed  by
       DMK.  It  appeared  to  be  accepted  that  he  could  not  meet  the
       requirements of the  Immigration  Rules.  Any  consideration  of  the
       application on the basis that CKS's human rights would be  unlawfully
       interfered with should be through the "prism of  the  rules"  it  was
       submitted by Ms Brocklesby-Weller. CKS was an adult  who  could  make
       his own way. It was noted that he had embarked on tertiary education.
       I was urged to consider the public interest considerations in section
       117. The Immigration  Judge  appears  to  have  applied  the  correct
       paragraphs of the Immigration Rules but to  have  concluded  that  he
       could not meet those requirements. In terms of his right  to  form  a
       family or private life in the UK was concerned, the Immigration Judge
       had given proper consideration to the additional factors  in  section
       117 at paragraph 50. When a proportionality  assessment  was  carried
       out it led the judge to the correct conclusion under the ECHR.

   16. In reply Mr Doerfel said that JN was a  child  at  the  time  of  the
       appeal. MBK, her mother, was a part of the family unit. CKS  did  not
       have to show emotional ties to his siblings.  All the siblings had  a
       family  life  together  and  the  Immigration  Judge  erred  in   his
       assessment of the various factors. If maintenance  and  accommodation
       were in issue there is no reason why it should not have been  raised.
       Although I found Mr Doerfel's  submissions  difficult  to  follow  he
       appeared to say that 352D of the rules (requirements to be met  by  a
       child seeking to join a refugee parent) or Article  8  gave  adequate
       grounds for allowing CKS's appeal. Further, it was contended that DMK
       took ultimate responsibility for  all  the  children.  CKS  would  be
       heartbroken by being divided from his siblings.

   17. It was submitted that JN fell within paragraph 352D (i) (child  of  a
       parent who has been granted refugee status). Alternatively  paragraph
       297 (i) (d) of the Rules applied to her case in that one  parent  was
       living in the UK (MBK) and the other  (unknown)  may  well  be  dead.
       Alternatively there were "serious and  compelling  reasons"  why  the
       exclusion of that child would be "undesirable" for  the  purposes  of
       paragraph 297 (i) (f).

   18. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision  as  to  whether  an
       error of law had been established by the  appellants  and,  if  there
       were such an error, what directions should be made and steps taken to
       rectify it.

Conclusions

   19. The appellants rely on the following provisions in support  of  their
       appeals:

        a. In relation to the child appellants-

             i. They claim to be the children of at least one parent who is
                settled in the UK (DMK) and that there are serious and
                compelling family and other considerations which make
                exclusion of those children undesirable and that there are
                suitable arrangements for their care.

            ii. Alternatively, they are  the children of a refugee (DMK) and
                formed part of his family until he left the country of his
                habitual residence (Uganda) to claim asylum in the UK;

        b. In relation to all appellants it was submitted that the
           respondent has an obligation to consider their applications in
           the light of Article 8 and her obligation to respect their right
           to a private or family life in the UK required her to admit all
           the appellants to the UK.

   20. I turn to consider the Immigration Judge's findings by  reference  to
       each child.

   21. The Immigration Judge seems to have found DMK and MBK to be  credible
       witnesses. For the most part he fully  considered  the  evidence  and
       arguments presented to him and reached conclusions he was entitled to
       come to. However, in relation to JN, I agree with Mr Doerfel that  he
       was wrong to say at paragraph 35 of his decision that there  was  "no
       evidence" that her natural father was dead and that  it  was  against
       the weight of the evidence to conclude that DMK was not her  "parent"
       for the purposes of the Immigration Rules since MBK dealt  with  this
       in her witness statement. On the face of it, although that was a bare
       assertion, that JN's father was dead, it does not seem to  have  been
       disputed. As the "child" of a refugee she did therefore qualify under
       paragraph 352 D of the Rules and  ought  to  have  been  given  entry
       clearance. In the circumstances it is unnecessary to  deal  with  her
       claim also to having qualified under paragraph 297  (i)  (f)  of  the
       rules, other than to say that for the reasons given below in relation
       to the other child appellants, I do not accept the criticisms of  the
       Immigration Judge's decision.

   22. In relation to the other child appellants, and in so  far  as  it  is
       relevant in the light of the above conclusion in relation to  JN,  it
       is alleged that the Immigration Judge was not  entitled  to  conclude
       that there were no "serious and compelling family and other  reasons"
       why exclusion of the family would be undesirable. I bear in mind that
       the respondent was required to safeguard and promote the interests of
       the child appellants and this was a primary consideration, but in  my
       view the Immigration Judge had these requirements very much  in  mind
       in his decision and carefully weighed up the balancing considerations
       of the children's welfare with the wider public interest of  properly
       and proportionately applying  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
       Rules. It is noteworthy that in relation to JN he was  not  addressed
       on the paragraph 297 point and concluded that she was a "young  woman
       in good health " who was about to  go  to  college  in  Uganda.  This
       completely contradicted the notion of  requiring  the  respondent  to
       grant her entry clearance for "serious and compelling" reasons.

   23. In relation to the other children, the alleged failure to  carry  out
       an adequate welfare assessment is no more than  a  criticism  of  the
       conclusions of the Immigration Judge. I  am  satisfied  that  he  did
       consider their welfare (see, for example, paragraph 50 on page 34  in
       relation to DEL. It is not part of this Tribunal's remit to interfere
       with decisions of the FTT merely because the Upper Tribunal disagrees
       with the conclusions. The judge had regard to all the case law relied
       on by the appellant in this appeal but concluded it did not alter the
       outcome. In relation to DEL it was not alleged that  his  father  was
       dead (see paragraph 42 of the decision). It was  not  submitted  that
       DMK fell within the definition of his father. It was  submitted  that
       MBK, his natural mother, was being admitted to the UK  and  therefore
       that DEL ought to be admitted at the same time but it seems that  MBK
       had never had sole care of him for the purposes of paragraph 297  (i)
       (e) and the requirements of paragraph 352 D were not met because  DMK
       was not DEL's father.

   24. As far as DLM is concerned, FN is his mother and she, as far  as  can
       be established, remains in Uganda. He was integrated with two  family
       units and was not part of DMK's family unit at the relevant date.  It
       seems on this basis that the Immigration Judge was entitled to reject
       his appeal also.

   25. CKS's claim was not advanced under any Immigration  Rule  but  solely
       under Article 8 of the ECHR. The Immigration  Judge  considered  this
       claim, and all the children's claims, under Article 8 of the ECHR but
       concluded that there would be no  unlawful  interference  with  their
       human rights if they were  not  all  re-united  in  the  UK.  I  have
       considered, particularly in relation to the child appellants and  the
       fact that DDK and, as a result of my findings, JN, are potentially to
       be divided from their siblings,  whether  this  conclusion  is  still
       sustainable. However, I have concluded that since adequate  provision
       for their care is available in  Uganda  and  since  there  are  clear
       requirements which must be met before they may be admitted under  the
       rules, the Immigration Judge had reached the correct conclusion under
       Article  8.  As  Mrs  Brocklesby-Weller  submitted  the   Article   8
       assessment had to be carried out looking through  the  prism  of  the
       rules. The Immigration Judge's consideration of  this  issue  appears
       well-reasoned. His conclusions in relation to Article 8 took  account
       of the wider public  interest  considerations  which  Parliament  has
       deemed necessary under section 117 of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
       and Asylum Act 2002, before any  conclusion  is  reached  under  this
       article.

   26. DLM has not in my view  raised  any  credible  argument  against  the
       conclusions of the Immigration judge in relation to Article 8 and the
       Immigration Judge was entitled to make an objective assessment of the
       likely burden to tax payers consequent on the  admission  of  foreign
       national in to the UK in circumstances where he did not qualify under
       the rules.

Notice of Decision

   27. I find a material error of law in the decision of the FTT in relation
       to JN. The appeal by JN against the refusal  of  entry  clearance  is
       allowed under paragraph 352D of the Immigration Rules.

   28. In relation to all the other appellants their appeals are  dismissed.
       The decision of the First-tier Tribunal and the decision of  the  ECO
       to refuse entry clearance in their cases stand.

   29. The anonymity direction by the FTT is maintained.

   30. No fee award was made by the FTT and I make no fee award.




  Signed    W. E. HANBURY

  Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



  Date      6th September 2015
