


                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                  Appeal Number:
OA/12009/2012



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On 24 September 2013                     |On 22 October 2013        |
|                                         |                          |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, LAGOS

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         Babatunde Oreoluwa Omoniyi

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:          Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:      Ms O Awogbile instructed by Rhema Solutions


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.       This is an appeal by the Entry Clearance Officer, Lagos  against  a
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing an appeal by Mr  Omoniyi
    against the decision made refusing him entry clearance as  a  dependent
    relative under the immigration rules  but  allowing  the  appeal  under
    article 8.  In this determination I will refer to the parties  as  they
    were before the First-tier Tribunal, Mr Omoniyi as  the  appellant  and
    the Entry Clearance Officer as the respondent.

Background

2.       The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born  on  9  September  1985.
    On 12 April 2012 he applied for entry clearance as the dependent son of
    his mother and his sponsor, who is settled in the UK and lives with her
    husband, the appellant's stepfather and  her  children,  his  siblings.
    His application was refused because the respondent  was  not  satisfied
    that  there  were  any  serious  and   compelling   family   or   other
    considerations meriting the issue of entry  clearance.   He  took  into
    account the appellant's claim that the family he used to live  with  in
    Nigeria no longer wish to accommodate him and that he was  living  with
    friends.  However, the appellant was 25 years  old,  had  graduated  in
    Social and  Management  Science  in  2009  and  had  completed  further
    training  in  2010.   He  was  currently  unemployed  but  it  was  the
    respondent's view that there were no compelling reasons why  he  should
    not seek employment in Nigeria and support himself.

The Hearing before the Immigration Judge

3.       The judge accepted that the sponsor was a British citizen  as  were
    her three younger children aged 19, 15 and 13.  Her husband was a full-
    time university student on a mental  health  nursing  course  which  he
    would complete in April  2014.   The  sponsor  worked  full-time  as  a
    teacher in the prison service. Medical evidence was  produced  to  show
    that she had hypertension and a letter from her  Health  Practice  said
    that the stress about the appellant was not assisting this.  There were
    letters from the appellant's siblings emphasising how much they  missed
    him and the two younger children gave evidence to  this  effect  before
    the judge.  There was also a letter from the sponsor's  MP  to  confirm
    that the family were hard working with strong family ties and a  letter
    from a Christian Centre in Nigeria speaking of the appellant's honesty,
    hard work and respect for authority.

4.       The judge accepted  that  when  the  sponsor  and  the  appellant's
    younger siblings came to the UK, he had remained in Nigeria to complete
    his education and at that stage his stepfather stayed there to care for
    him but once he had started his university course his stepfather joined
    the family in the UK.  The judge also accepted that when the  appellant
    was  at  university  family  friends  were   willing   to   offer   him
    accommodation in vacations but once he left, he was  without  work  and
    when he needed full-time accommodation, their  support  dwindled.   She
    accepted that he had had difficulty in finding work  and  that  it  was
    credible that there were individuals in Nigeria who sought to  prey  on
    those who had relatives abroad believing  they  might  have  access  to
    funds and she was in no doubt that his family missed him  and  that  he
    very much wanted to rejoin them.

5.       However, the judge reminded herself  that  in  order  to  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 317 the appellant would have to show that his
    circumstances  amounted  to   the   "most   exceptional   compassionate
    circumstances".  The judged noted that it had not  been  asserted  that
    the appellant was unwell in any way.  He was able to work if  he  could
    find employment.  His family in the UK had been financially  supporting
    him and had not indicated that they could not continue to do  so.   She
    said the appellant  was  in  a  better  position  than  other  Nigerian
    nationals who did not have that family support and that while  she  had
    much compassion for the appellant, he did not meet the  stringent  test
    required by paragraph 317 and the appeal had to be dismissed under  the
    immigration rules.

6.       The judge went on to consider the position under  article  8.   She
    accepted that the appellant had established family life within  article
    8(1) as he was in  regular  contact  with  his  family,  he  was  never
    abandoned but had remained in Nigeria for  his  education  and  it  was
    always intended that the family would be reunited; he was not  married;
    he had lived with his  stepfather  until  2007  and  then  with  family
    friends.  The judge said that he might well be  an  adult  but  without
    close family members in Nigeria, he continued to be very much dependent
    on his family here.  Referring to  the  Tribunal  decision  in  Ghising
    (family life - adults - Ghurka policy) [2012] UKUT 00160 she  concluded
    that the appellant did enjoy family life with  his  mother,  stepfather
    and siblings.  She found that the respondent's  decision  would  be  an
    interference with that family life, was in accordance with the law  and
    pursued the legitimate aim of a fair and firm immigration policy.   She
    then went  on  to  consider  whether  the  decision  was  proportionate
    although  I  note  in  this  context  that  in  [23]  she  referred  to
    considering whether removal would  be  proportionate  rather  than  the
    refusal of entry clearance.

7.       The judge summarised her findings as follows:

         "25.  The appellant and his family have always had the  expectation
             that they would be reunited when he completes  his  education.
             I doubt that his mother would have left him in Nigeria had she
             understood that he might not be able to join her; at the  time
             she came he was 16 and would have been granted entry clearance
             in line with her other children.  She left  him  for  his  own
             benefit that his education, which was at a crucial stage would
             not be interrupted.  I accept that she has been devastated  by
             the decision not to permit him entry to  the  United  Kingdom.
             He would not be coming here to be a drain on  state  benefits;
             he has a degree and the family has made plans for his  future;
             he hopes to work in a shortage occupation. The  fracturing  of
             this  family  for  the  foreseeable  future   would   have   a
             significant impact on every member, it could not  be  expected
             that the  sponsor  and  her  family  here  would  relocate  to
             Nigeria; they are British citizens and their  lives  here  are
             well-established.   There  is  no  benefit   to   society   in
             maintaining the split in this family, and I find the  decision
             is not proportionate."


    On this basis the appeal was allowed under article 8.




Grounds and Submissions

8.       In the grounds of appeal it is argued by the  respondent  that  the
    judge failed to give any or any adequate reasons for finding  that  the
    refusal of entry clearance would be a disproportionate  breach  of  the
    article 8 rights; it was arguable that the appellant had established an
    independent life in the interim period since his  family  relocated  to
    the UK and he  had  found  the  means  of  surviving  by  staying  with
    friends.  Now that he had completed his education no  adequate  reasons
    were given why the family could not continue to support him in  Nigeria
    as they had done in the past.  Even if  the  appellant  enjoyed  family
    life with his family in the UK, there was  no  evidence  that  it  went
    beyond mere emotional ties.  His family in  the  UK  were  of  Nigerian
    origin and there was no evidence that they had severed ties with  their
    country of origin and so family life could be conducted through  visits
    and modern means of communication.

9.       The grounds also argue that the decision was reviewed  in  February
    2013 and that the judge  erred  by  failing  to  consider  the  amended
    Immigration Rules as they apply to entry clearance cases and  that  the
    appellant's situation amounts to a "near miss"  as  considered  in  the
    judgment of the Court of Appeal in Miah  and  Others  [2012]  EWCA  Civ
    261.  The appellant had stayed in Nigeria to complete his education and
    had missed the opportunity to join his family in the UK as a minor  but
    he was now an adult and unable to meet the  requirements  of  paragraph
    317.  As is the case with many graduates the world over, the  appellant
    would be  in  difficulties  finding  employment  and  he  was  not  yet
    qualified to work in a shortage occupation as quoted and  therefore  he
    would not make an immediate impact on the UK economy.

10.     Mr Tufan crystallised these grounds arguing that the judge had  been
    wrong to find that there was  family  life  within  article  8(1).   He
    referred to Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31 and AAO [2011] EWCA Civ 840 and
    in particular  paragraphs  35  and  43  arguing  that  the  appellant's
    position was comparable with the applicant in that case  where  it  was
    held that a finding that there was no family life sufficient to  engage
    the article had been open to the First-tier Tribunal.  In any event, he
    argued that it would not be disproportionate for entry clearance to  be
    refused.  The appellant was healthy and continued to live  in  Nigeria.
    His family had decided to leave him there so that he could complete his
    education.  They would continue to provide  financial  support  and  he
    would be in a better situation than many other Nigerians of his age: he
    was educated and getting help from his family.

11.     Ms Awogbile submitted that the judge's findings  had  been  open  to
    her.  It was not practicable for the sponsor and her family to relocate
    to Nigeria.  The sponsor had been the appellant's sole  carer  when  he
    was a teenager.  She had acted in his best  interests  by  leaving  him
    there to complete his education.  She had thought she would be able  to
    bring him to the UK later and had been misled by what she had been told
    by the Home Office.  The appellant was currently homeless.  It just did
    not make sense for him to be left alone in Nigeria.   She  referred  to
    the Tribunal determinations in MF (Article 8)  [2012]  UKUT  00303  and
    Izuazu (article 8 - new rules) [2013] UKUT 00045  and  emphasised  that
    there was no test of insurmountable obstacles.  The rest of his  family
    were settled in the UK and the family was incomplete without him.   The
    family rights of other family members had to be taken into account  and
    a fair balance struck between the competing interests.  There would  be
    a considerable expense to the family if the appellant had  to  stay  in
    Nigeria.  They would need in effect to run two homes and would have  to
    meet the costs of flights to Nigeria.  In summary, she argued that  the
    judge had taken all relevant matters into account  and  had  reached  a
    decision open to her.

Consideration of Whether There is an Error of Law

12.     The issue for me at this stage of the appeal is whether  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge erred in law such that the decision should  be  set
    aside.  It is argued that the judge erred in law  firstly,  in  finding
    that family life was established and secondly by finding  that  refusal
    of entry clearance would be disproportionate to a  legitimate  aim.   I
    shall deal firstly with the question of family life.   In  Ghising  the
    Tribunal considered the issue of when the child/parent bond  of  family
    life came to an end for the purposes of article 8 (and  was  upheld  on
    this issue by the Court of Appeal in [2013] EWCA Civ 8).  It considered
    the judgment of the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Kugathas   and  accepted  a
    submission that this judgment had been interpreted too restrictively in
    the past and ought to be read in the light of subsequent  decisions  of
    the domestic and Strasbourg Courts and in particular  Eitti-Adegbola  v
    Secretary of State [2009] EWCA Civ 1319 where it  was  recognised  that
    family life may continue between parent and child even  after  a  child
    has attained his majority.

13.     In RP (Zimbabwe) [2008] EWCA Civ 825 Sedley  LJ  had  said  that  it
    would be "unreal" to dispute that  a  20  year  old  appellant  enjoyed
    family  life  with  her  parents  when  she  "had  lived  pretty   well
    continuously with her parents and  siblings  all  her  life"  and  that
    another appellant who was 25 years old enjoyed family life  as  he  was
    "economically and emotionally ... a member  of  his  immediate  family,
    with whom - that his parents and his two sisters  -  are  now  lawfully
    resident here."  The Tribunal also referred to decisions of  the  ECtHR
    which indicated that family life between  adult  children  and  parents
    would readily be found without evidence of exceptional  dependence  and
    to AA v  UK  (Application  No.  8000/08)  where  it  was  held  that  a
    significant factor would be whether or not an adult child  had  founded
    family life of his own.  If he was still single  and  living  with  his
    parents, he was likely to enjoy a family life with them.

14.     The Tribunal summarised its conclusions as follows:

         "62.  The different outcomes in cases  with  superficially  similar
             features emphases to us that the issue under article  8(1)  is
             highly fact sensitive.  In our judgement rather than  applying
             a blanket rule with regard to adult children, each case should
             be analysed on its own facts, to decide whether or not  family
             life exists within the meaning of article 8(1).   As  Wall  LJ
             explained, in the context of family life between siblings:


                            'We do not think that Advic is authority for the
                  proposition that Article 8 of the Human Rights  Convention
                  can never be engaged when the family life it is sought  to
                  establish is that between adult siblings living  together.
                  In our judgment the recognition in Advic that, while  some
                  generalisations  are  possible,  each  case  is   a   fact
                  sensitive and places an obligation  on  both  Adjudicators
                  and the IAT to identify the  nature  of  the  family  life
                  asserted, and to explain, quite  shortly  and  succinctly,
                  why it is that article 8 is or is not engaged in  a  given
                  case.  (Senthuran  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
                  Department [2004] EWCA Civ 950).' "


15.     Applying this approach I am not satisfied that the  judge  erred  in
    law in finding that family life existed between the appellant  and  the
    sponsor,  his  stepfather  and  siblings.   The  judge  identified  the
    background which had led to  the  appellant  remaining  in  Nigeria  to
    complete his education when his mother and siblings moved  to  the  UK.
    His stepfather had remained with him  until  2007  by  which  time  the
    appellant was at  university  studying  sociology.   She  accepted  the
    evidence about the appellant's  situation  that  he  was  homeless  and
    staying  with  friends  and  that  although  he   had   made   numerous
    applications for work, unemployment was high.  He had carried  out  his
    National Youth Service.  His family had continued to provide  him  with
    maintenance and he had not formed his own family.  I am satisfied  that
    the judge's decision there was family life was one that was open to her
    on the evidence and cannot be categorised as irrational or unreasonable
    and that when the determination is read as a whole it is clear that the
    judge gave adequate and sustainable reasons for her  findings  on  this
    issue.

16.     I now turn to the issue of proportionality.  On this  issue  I  find
    that the judge did err in law.  The judge set out her reasons  in  [25]
    and I am satisfied that although she referred to Huang [2007]  UKHL  11
    and set out that the judgment on proportionality  must  always  involve
    the striking of a fair balance between the rights of the individual and
    the interests of the community, she  then  failed  to  carry  out  that
    balancing exercise.

17.     At the end of [25] the judge said, "There is no benefit  to  society
    in maintaining the split in this family and I find the decision is  not
    proportionate".  That  is  not  an  adequate  analysis  of  the  public
    interest in maintaining an effective system of immigration  control  by
    having a known set of rules by which applications are assessed with the
    benefit to society generally in having a known system which is operated
    fairly between all  applicants.   Although  the  judgment  in  Miah  is
    referred to in the grounds, this is not a case where there was in  fact
    a near-miss in the appellant's failure to comply with  the  Rules.   As
    the judge  found,  the  appellant  was  a  long  way  off  meeting  the
    requirement of showing that he was  living  in  the  "most  exceptional
    compassionate circumstances "in Nigeria.  In EB  Kosovo[2008]  UKHL  41
    Lord Bingham said at [10]:
         "10.  In Huang [2007] 2 AC 167, para 16, the House acknowledged the
             need, in almost any case, to give weight  to  the  established
             regime of immigration control:
                            'The authority will wish to consider  and  weigh
                  all that tells in favour of the refusal of leave which  is
                  challenged, with  particular  reference  to  justification
                  under article 8(2).  There will, in almost  any  case,  be
                  certain  general  considerations  to  bear  in  mind:  the
                  general  administrative  desirability  of  applying  known
                  rules  if  a  system  of  immigration  control  is  to  be
                  workable, predictable, consistent and fair as between  one
                  applicant and another; the damage to  good  administration
                  and  effective  control  if  a  system  is  perceived   by
                  applicants   internationally   to   be   unduly    porous,
                  unpredictable or perfunctory; the need to discourage  non-
                  nationals  admitted  to  the  country   temporarily   from
                  believing that they can commit serious crimes and  yet  be
                  allowed to remain; the need to discourage fraud, deception
                  and deliberate breaches of the law; and so on."
    In R (Mahmood) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2001]  1
    WLR 840, para 23, Laws LJ had recognised that


         "Firm immigration control requires consistency of treatment between
         one aspiring immigrant and another.  In a  complex  and  overloaded
         system perfect equality of treatment between  applicants  similarly
         placed will be impossible to achieve, but startling differences  of
         treatment  between  such  applicants,  or  anything  suggestive  of
         randomness or caprice  in  decision-making  must  necessarily  give
         grounds for concern."

19.     It is not suggested that any issues of committing serious crimes  or
    discouraging fraud and deception are relevant in the present  case  but
    the judge failed to consider or to give proper weight to the  need  for
    an established regime of immigration control  in  accordance  with  the
    rules.  I am satisfied  that  this  error  is  such  that  the  judge's
    decision cannot stand and should be set aside.

Re-making the Decision

20.     At the hearing both parties agreed that the  proper  course  in  the
    present case would be for me  to  re-make  the  decision  both  parties
    having made all the submissions they wished  on  the  relevant  issues.
    The circumstances of the appellant and his family have already been set
    out but one factor which weighed with the judge was that the  appellant
    and his family had always  had  the  expectation  that  they  would  be
    reunited when he completed his education and she  doubted  whether  his
    mother would have left him in Nigeria if she had  understood  he  might
    not be able to join her.

21.     The evidence on that issue is set out at [8] where the sponsor  said
    that the Home Office had advised her that when her son had finished his
    education he could come for settlement.  However, I do not accept  that
    the advice was given in a way which could  reasonably be interpreted as
    indicating that the  appellant  would  not  need  to  comply  with  the
    immigration rules.  The judge commented that the appellant would not be
    coming here to be a drain on state benefits and that he hoped  to  work
    in a shortage occupation.  This may well be the case but the hard  fact
    is that employment opportunities are scarce in the UK just as they  are
    in Nigeria.  Further, it is not suggested that the appellant is able to
    meet any of the requirements of the rules for obtaining entry clearance
    to work.  The appellant lost the right to apply as  a  dependent  child
    when he became 18 in September 2003.  His application was made in April
    2012.  He had graduated in management science  in  2009  and  completed
    further training in 2010.  He is well-educated and is likely to receive
    financial support from his family in the UK.  In so far as he might  be
    preyed on by those seeking money, there is no reason why he cannot look
    to  the  authorities  for  protection.   There  are   no   sufficiently
    compelling  features  to  make   the   refusal   of   entry   clearance
    disproportionate in the appellant's circumstances.

22.     Balancing these various  factors,  although  I  can  understand  the
    appellant's wish to join his family and their wish that he  join  them,
    the public interest in maintaining effective  immigration  control  and
    the need to have immigration rules which are applied  consistently  and
    fairly outweighs the interference with the right  to  respect  for  the
    family life of the appellant and his family members.   I  am  satisfied
    that the refusal of entry clearance is proportionate  to  a  legitimate
    aim.

Decision

23.     The First-tier Tribunal erred in law and I set aside  the  decision.
    I re-make the decision dismissing the appeal on  both  immigration  and
    human rights grounds.





Signed
       Date: 21 October 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Latter

