

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/12108/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 21 March 2014                              |On 12 May 2014               |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                              MUHAMMAD IJAZ BUTT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Irwin Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1.  The  Secretary  of  State  appeals,  with  permission,   against   the
    determination of  an  immigration  judge  allowing  an  appeal  by  the
    respondent, whom we shall call the claimant, against the  Secretary  of
    State's decision refusing him further leave to remain.   The  Secretary
    of State's ground of appeal is that the Tribunal have  no  jurisdiction
    to hear the claimant's appeal.

 2. In the First-tier Tribunal Judge Graham dealt  with  the  matter  at  a
    hearing, but in the absence of either party.  She  was  told  that  the
    claimant had  been  removed  from  the  United  Kingdom,  and,  as  the
    Secretary of State points out, that should have alerted her to the fact
    that there was a problem about jurisdiction, because  if  the  claimant
    had an in-country right of appeal and had exercised it,  he  could  not
    have been removed.  No doubt the Secretary of State was not represented
    before the judge because it was thought that  there  was  no  right  of
    appeal.

 3. The position is as follows.   The  claimant  applied,  during  existing
    leave, for further leave to remain.  That application was  refused,  no
    doubt  by  the  division  of  the  Home  Office   dealing   with   such
    applications, on 27 April 2012.  Papers  were  served  indicating  that
    there was a right of appeal, which the claimant purported to  exercise.
    The assertion that there was a right of  appeal  was,  however,  wrong.
    That is because on 24 April 2012 the claimant was arrested and detained
    and served with a decision that he should be removed under s.10 of  the
    1999 Act as a person who obtained his leave by deception.

 4. The latter decision carried no right of  appeal:  it  could  have  been
    challenged by judicial review, but was not challenged.  The  notice  of
    the decision had,  under  s.10(8)  of  the  1999  Act,  the  effect  of
    invalidating all the claimant's leave.  Thus, when his application  was
    refused two days later, the refusal  did  not  cause  him  to  have  no
    further leave, because he had none anyway.  He therefore had  no  right
    of appeal against the refusal: it was  not  an  "immigration  decision"
    within the meaning of s.82(2) of the 2002 Act.

 5. Judge Graham erred in thinking that she had jurisdiction  to  hear  the
    claimant's appeal against the refusal of further leave.  We  set  aside
    her decision allowing  his  appeal.    We  substitute  a  determination
    dismissing his appeal for want of jurisdiction.












                                                              C M G OCKELTON

VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                            Date: 7 May 2014
