
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/12478/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 28 April 2015                          |On 1 June 2015                    |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - TASHKENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  Master AA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms F Allen of Counsel instructed by Aston Bond Law
Firm


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The respondent (hereafter "the claimant") is a  citizen  of  Uzbekistan
born on 19 September 2004.   On  10  May  2013,  the  appellant,  the  Entry
Clearance Officer, Tashkent (hereafter "the ECO")  refused  his  application
for entry clearance as a dependent child of his father, but on 20  May  2015
First-tier Tribunal (FtT) Judge Halliwell allowed his  appeal  against  that
decision.  In allowing the appeal solely on  Article  8  grounds  the  judge
stated that where a person's Article 8 rights were at issue  he  could  look
at circumstances as they stood at the date of hearing,  notwithstanding  the
statutory  restriction  against  doing  so  imposed  by   s.85(5)   of   the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act").  The ECO  was
granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal against  that  allowance,
but in a determination notified on 29 September 2014 Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
Judge (DUTJ) Juss dismissed that application and held that the  decision  of
Judge Halliwell was not vitiated by legal error.

2.   What happened  next  was  that  on  2  October  2014  the  Home  Office
Presenting Officers Unit (POU) sent a letter headed "Application for  review
under rule 45  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008"
stating that the Secretary  of  State  "makes  an  application,  under  rule
45(1)(a), and in accordance with rule 46, for  a  review  of  the  decision,
promulgated on 29 September 2014,  by  DUTJ  Juss".   In  response  to  that
letter UTJ Perkins directed that there be a hearing so  that  the  UT  could
receive representations concerning  this  application  and  whether  in  the
light of it to set aside the decision of DUTJ Juss.

3.   Rules 45 and 46 provide:

         "Upper Tribunal's consideration of application  for  permission  to
         appeal

         45.- (1) On receiving an application for permission to  appeal  the
                  Upper Tribunal may review the decision in accordance  with
                  rule 46 (review of a decision), but may only do so if-

                  (a)   when  making  the  decision   the   Upper   Tribunal
                      overlooked  a  legislative   provision   or   binding
                      authority which could have had a material  effect  on
                      the decision; or

                  (b)  since the Upper Tribunal's decision, a court has made
                      a decision which is binding on the Upper Tribunal and
                      which, had it been made before the  Upper  Tribunal's
                      decision, could have had a  material  effect  on  the
                      decision.

             (2)  If the Upper Tribunal decides not to review the decision,
                  or reviews the decision and decides to take no  action  in
                  relation to the decision or part of it, the Upper Tribunal
                  must consider whether to  give  permission  to  appeal  in
                  relation to the decision or that part of it.

             (3)  The  Upper  Tribunal  must  [provide]  a  record  of  its
                  decision to the parties as soon as practicable.

             (4)  If the Upper Tribunal refuses  permission  to  appeal  it
                  must [provide] with the record of its decision -

                  (a)  a statement of its reasons for such refusal; and

                  (b)  notification of the right to make an  application  to
                      the relevant appellate court for permission to appeal
                      and the time within which, and the method  by  which,
                      such application must be made.

             (5)  The Upper Tribunal  may  give  permission  to  appeal  on
                  limited grounds, but must comply  with  paragraph  (4)  in
                  relation  to  any  grounds  on  which   it   has   refused
                  permission.

                  [Note: Words in square brackets in paragraphs (3) and  (4)
                  were substituted from 1 November 2013 (IS 2013/2067).]

         Setting aside of a decision

         46.- (1) The Upper Tribunal  may  only  undertake  a  review  of  a
                  decision pursuant to rule 45(1) (review on an  application
                  for permission to appeal).

             (2)  The Upper Tribunal must notify the parties in writing  of
                  the outcome of any review and of any rights of  review  or
                  appeal in relation to the outcome.

             (3)  If the Upper Tribunal  decides  to  take  any  action  in
                  relation to a decision following a  review  without  first
                  giving every party an opportunity to make representations,
                  the notice under paragraph (2) must state that  any  party
                  that did not have an opportunity to  make  representations
                  may apply for such action to be  set  aside  and  for  the
                  decision to be reviewed again."

                  [Note: Paragraph (1) was substituted from October 2011 (IS
                  2011/2343).]

4.   "Review" is defined by rule 41 to mean the review of a decision by  the
Upper Tribunal under Section 10 of the  Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement
Act (TCEA) 2007 which provides:

         "10. Review of decision of Upper Tribunal

         (1)  The Upper Tribunal may review a  decision  made  by  it  on  a
             matter in a case, other than a decision that  is  an  excluded
             decision for the purposes of section 13(1) (but see subsection
             (7)).

         (2)  The Upper Tribunal's power under subsection (1) in relation to
             a decision is exercisable -

             (a)  of its own initiative, or

             (b)  on application by  a  person  who  for  the  purposes  of
                  section 13(2) has a right of  appeal  in  respect  of  the
                  decision.

         (3)  Tribunal Procedure Rules may -

             (a)  provide that the Upper Tribunal may not under  subsection
                  (1)  review  (whether  of  its  own   initiative   or   on
                  application under  subsection  (2)(b))  a  decision  of  a
                  description specified for the purposes of  this  paragraph
                  in Tribunal Procedure Rules;

             (b)  provide that the Upper Tribunal's power under  subsection
                  (1) to review a decision of a  description  specified  for
                  the purposes of this paragraph in Tribunal Procedure Rules
                  is exercisable only of the tribunal's own initiative;

             (c)  provide that an application under subsection (2)(b)  that
                  is of a description specified for  the  purposes  of  this
                  paragraph in Tribunal Procedure Rules may be made only  on
                  grounds specified for the purposes of  this  paragraph  in
                  Tribunal Procedure Rules;

             (d)  provide, in relation  to  a  decision  of  a  description
                  specified for the purposes of this paragraph  in  Tribunal
                  Procedure Rules, that the  Upper  Tribunal's  power  under
                  subsection  (1)  to  review  the  decision  of   its   own
                  initiative is exercisable only on  grounds  specified  for
                  the purposes  of  this  paragraph  in  Tribunal  Procedure
                  Rules.

         (4)  Where the Upper Tribunal has under subsection (1)  reviewed  a
             decision, the Upper Tribunal may in the light of the review do
             any of the following -

             (a)  correct accidental errors in the decision or in a  record
                  of the decision;

             (b)  amend reasons given for the decision;

             (c)  set the decision aside.

         (5)  Where under  subsection  (4)(c)  the  Upper  Tribunal  sets  a
             decision aside, the Upper Tribunal must re-decide  the  matter
             concerned.

         (6)  Where the Upper Tribunal is acting under  subsection  (5),  it
             may make such findings of fact as it considers appropriate.

         (7)  This section has effect as  if  a  decision  under  subsection
             (4)(c) to set aside an earlier decision were not  an  excluded
             decision for the purposes of  section  13(1),  but  the  Upper
             Tribunal's  only  power  in  the  light  of  a  review   under
             subsection (1) of a decision under subsection  (4)(c)  is  the
             power under subsection (4)(a).

         (8)  A decision of the Upper Tribunal may  not  be  reviewed  under
             subsection (1) more than once, and once the Upper Tribunal has
             decided that an earlier decision should not be reviewed  under
             subsection (1) it may not then decide to review  that  earlier
             decision under that subsection.

         (9)  Where under this section a  decision  is  set  aside  and  the
             matter concerned is then re-decided, the  decision  set  aside
             and the decision made in re-deciding the matter  are  for  the
             purposes of  subsection  (8)  to  be  taken  to  be  different
             decisions.

             [Note: Subsection (3) in force  from  19  September  2007  (IS
             2007/2709), Remainder  in  force  from  3  November  2008  (IS
             2008/2696).]

5.   Notwithstanding the terms of  the  aforementioned  written  application
made by the Presenting Officer, Mr Deller  joined  Ms  Allen  in  submitting
that because the application had not been an application for  permission  to
appeal but merely an application for review, it had no basis  in  law.  They
both asked that if we were in  agreement  on  this  matter  we  should  give
consideration  to  reporting  this  case  so  as  to   avoid   any   similar
misunderstanding arising in the future.

Application for permission to appeal as a condition precedent

6.   We are in agreement with both representatives about this  matter.  Rule
45 entails that no issue of a review  can  arise  under  45(1)(a)  unless  a
party has first of all made an application  for  permission  to  appeal.  We
base this conclusion on a number of reasons.  First the plain  and  ordinary
meaning of rule 45(1)(a) ("On receiving an  application  for  permission  to
appeal...") and of rule 46(1) ("The Upper  Tribunal  may  only  undertake  a
review of a decision pursuant to rule 45(1) (review on  an  application  for
permission to appeal)"[1].  Such wording admits of no discretion.  Second  ,
the clear purpose behind rule 45, which is to provide a filter mechanism  to
help ensure  that  obvious  errors  based  on  oversight  of  a  legislative
provision or binding authority can be corrected (and set  aside  under  rule
47) without unnecessarily burdening the Court of Appeal. In R (RB) v  First-
tier Tribunal [2010] UKUT 160 (AAC) [2010] AACR 41, a three-judge  panel  of
the Upper Tribunal (Carnwath, LJ presiding) quoted in this regard  paragraph
100 of the explanatory notes to the 2007  Act  dealing  with  the  power  of
review:

    "Sections 9  and  10  provide  powers  for  the  First-tier  and  Upper
    Tribunals to review their own decisions without the  need  for  a  full
    onward appeal and, where the tribunal concludes that an error was made,
    to re-decide the matter. This is intended to capture decisions that are
    clearly wrong, so avoiding the need for an appeal. The power  has  been
    provided in the form of a discretionary power for the Tribunal so  that
    only appropriate decisions are  reviewed.  This  contrasts  with  cases
    where an appeal on a point of law is made, because, for instance, it is
    important to have an authoritative ruling."

The provisions  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
dealing with review are made pursuant to sections 9 and  10.   Third,  there
is the clear purport of rule 45(2) which stipulates that if it  decides  not
to  review,  the  UT  must  proceed  to  give  consideration  to  the  still
outstanding  matter  of  whether  to  give  permission   to   appeal.   That
demonstrates that the application for permission  must  pre-exist  and  must
remain in existence unless a review is undertaken. Fourth we note that  this
is also the view taken by the Administrative Appeals Chamber  of  the  Upper
Tribunal in JS v Secretary of State for Work and Pensions  [2013]  UKUT  100
(AAC) (06 March 2013) at [22].





Absence of any provision for an "application" for review

7.   There is a further difficulty  in  the  way  of  the  letter  from  the
Presenting  Officer  being  considered  as  having  any  lawful  basis.   It
expressed itself as an "application" for  a review.  However,  the  relevant
rules governing  review  of  a  decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  make  no
provision for such an application: the power to review is simply  one  which
it is left open to the UT to exercise of its  own  initiative.  It  is  true
that  s.10 of the 2007 Act contemplates  that the Upper  Tribunal  power  of
review  is  exercisable  in  two  different  ways:  of  its  own  initiative
(s.10(2)(a) or "on application by a person who for the purposes  of  section
13(2)  has  a  right  of  appeal  in  respect  of  the  decision."  However,
s.10(3)(b) states that  Tribunal  Procedure  Rules  may  provide  that  this
review power "is exercisable only of the tribunal's  own  initiative".  That
in our judgement is the effect of rule 45(1). Subparagraph  (d)  of  s.10(3)
further provides that such Rules may provide that this power to  review  the
decision of its own initiative "is exercisable  only  on  grounds  specified
for the purposes of this paragraph in Tribunal  Procedure  Rules".  That  in
our judgment is the effect of rule 45(1)(a) and (b).

Discretion to treat an application  as  an  application  for  permission  to
appeal

8.   Our above analysis is, of course, predicated on there  having  been  no
application for permission to appeal. Neither party sought to  suggest  that
there had been, but we raised that question with them in view  of  the  fact
that the Upper Tribunal  administration  had  responded  to  the  Presenting
Officer's application made for a review by sending a  letter  on  5  January
2015 stating: "The Upper Tribunal acknowledges  receipt  of  an  application
for permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal (or, in Scotland, the  Court
of Session on 2 October 2014)".

9.   Again both parties were of the same  mind.  Both  submitted  that  this
acknowledgement letter could make no  difference  and  did  not  create  any
legitimate expectation that what the UT was faced with as a  matter  of  law
was an application for permission.  We  agree.   The  classification  of  an
application as an application for permission to appeal is  a  judicial,  not
an administrative, matter.

10.   It  remains,  however,  necessary  to  decide  whether  it  would   be
appropriate to exercise our judicial power  to  treat  the  application  for
review as an application for permission. We are required  to  consider  this
by virtue of rule 48.  Rule 48 provides:

    "Power to treat an application as a different type of application

    48.  The [Upper] Tribunal may treat an application for a decision to be
    corrected, set aside or reviewed, or for permission to appeal against a
    decision, as an application for any other one of those things."

11.  We do not consider, in the absence of having heard  proper  submissions
on the matter, that it would be appropriate for us to attempt  a  ruling  on
the general issue of when an application for review should be treated as  an
application for permission to appeal, although  we  can  certainly  envisage
situations where there may be strong reasons to do so - e.g. in the  context
of an application from a litigant  in  person  which  clearly  seeks  onward
appeal but refers erroneously to an application for review. Any such  ruling
would have to bear in mind that  (i) there is  no  prescribed  form  for  an
application for permission to appeal, only a requirement  in  rule  44  that
such an application  be  made  in  writing;  and  (ii)  rule  45  confers  a
discretion and to exercise it  other  than  sparingly  would  undermine  the
clear structure of the Procedure Rules.  The general issue is best left  for
another day.

12.  In relation to the actual application  made  in  writing  by  the  Home
Office Presenting Officer on behalf of the ECO in this case, there might  be
said to be a  strong  argument  in  the  abstract  for  treating  it  as  an
application for permission, consisting of the fact  that  in  our  judgement
the decision of the DUTJ to uphold the FtT decision  manifestly did  involve
the overlooking of both a legislative provision (which at that the  relevant
time was s.85A(2) of the 2002 Act[2]) and binding House of  Lords  authority
(AS (Somalia) & Anor v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2009]
UKHL 32 (17 June 2009)).  Manifestly the DUTJ had erred in considering  that
it was open to  the  FtT  judge  to  decide  the  appeal  on  the  basis  of
circumstances not appertaining at the date of  decision.  We  bear  in  mind
that in JS v Secretary of State for Work and Pensions [2013] UKUT 100  (AAC)
(06 March 2013) a senior panel chaired by Charles J (albeit in  the  context
of the power to review decisions of the First-tier Tribunal, not  the  Upper
Tribunal), having cited R (RB) v First-tier Tribunal [2010] UKUT  160  (AAC)
[2010] AACR 41 in support of the proposition that the  self-evident  purpose
of the review provisions was to avoid the need for an appeal (in  that  case
to  the  Upper  Tribunal)  in  the  case  of  "clear  errors",  added   this
observation:

    "As the panel [in R(RB)] decided, the power of review must not be  used
    in a way that subverts the  appeal  process  and  bypasses  the  proper
    function of the Upper Tribunal. This is consistent with In  the  matter
    of L and B (Children) [2013] UKSC 8 at [17]  and  [19],  in  which  the
    Supreme Court has recently emphasised that the integrity of the  appeal
    process should not be subverted by diverting matters to an  alternative
    process."

13.  However, this observation was based on the premise  that  there  was  a
lawful basis for exercise of a review power; the panel was  not  considering
the exercise of a  discretion  as  a  means  of  creating  a  lawful  basis.
Further, insofar as the panel sought in that judgment to highlight the  need
to ensure that the proper role of an appeal is not  subverted,  we  consider
that in the instant case we should attach very  significant  weight  to  the
following  four  matters.   The  first  is  that,  Mr  Deller,  the   Senior
Presenting Officer representing the ECO at  the  hearing  asked  us  not  to
consider the application made by his Unit  earlier  as  an  application  for
permission to appeal. The second matter is  that  we  were  informed  by  Mr
Deller that if it had been intended to make an  application  for  permission
to appeal that would have been  done  on  the  in-house  form  used  by  the
Presenting Officer's Unit  for  making  an  application  for  permission  to
appeal, namely one identified as an ICD 4246:App to UT for  PTA  to  CoA  or
CoS. In light of that information,  it  is  very  difficult  to  assume  the
application was meant to be  one  for  permission  to  appeal.   Third,  the
letter referred to an application under rule 45, whereas the rule  providing
for an application for permission is rule 44.  Fourthly, it  does  not  seem
to us that decision not to treat it as  such  an  application  affronts  the
interests of justice or the overriding objective as set out in rule 2(3).

14.  Here, whilst there were cogent reasons for considering  that  the  DUTJ
had overlooked a legislative provision (and indeed  binding  authority),  it
was not in dispute that  by  the  date  of  hearing  before  the  First-tier
Tribunal judge (although not the date of decision) the  claimant  was  found
to have shown that denial of entry  clearance  was  contrary  to  his  human
rights.  Onward litigation to the Court  of  Appeal  could  only  result  in
further delay and eventually the  appeal  against  the  ECO  decision  being
dismissed and the claimant being required to re-apply  for  entry  clearance
and pay another fee. We bear in mind in this regard the observations  in  AS
(Somalia) by Lord Hope at  [21]  and  Baroness  Hale  at  [30]  (the  latter
regarding fees). For these reasons we conclude that the  application  should
not be treated as an application for permission to appeal.

Notice of Decision

15.  It is not strictly necessary for us to say anything further  about  the
case except to observe that the legal effect of our decision is  that  there
has been no lawful challenge to the decision of the DUTJ upholding  the  FtT
decision and accordingly the determination of the  FtT  Judge  allowing  the
claimant's appeal must stand.



Signed   Date

-----------------------
[1] We observe that the same precondition for a review is applied  by  rules
34 and 35 of the Tribunal Procedure Rules 2014:
"Tribunal's consideration of an application for permission to appeal to  the
Upper Tribunal
34.  (1) On receiving an application for permission to appeal  the  Tribunal
       must first consider whether to review the decision in accordance with
       rule 35.
   (2)   If the Tribunal decides not to review the decision, or reviews the
       decision and decides to take no action in relation to  the  decision,
       or part of it, the Tribunal must consider whether to give  permission
       to appeal in relation to the decision or that part of it.
   (3)   The Tribunal must send a record of its decision to the parties  as
       soon as practicable.
   (4)   If the Tribunal refuses permission to appeal it must send with the
       record of its decision -
       (a)    a statement of its reasons for such refusal; and
       (b)    notification of the right to make an application to the  Upper
          Tribunal for permission to appeal and the time within  which,  and
          the manner in which, such application must be made.
   (5)   The Tribunal may give permission to appeal on limited grounds, but
       must comply with paragraph (4) in relation to any grounds on which it
       has refused permission.
Review of a decision
35.  (1) The Tribunal may only undertake a review of a decision -
       (a)    pursuant to rule 34 (review on an application  for  permission
          to appeal); and
       (b)    if it is satisfied that there was  an  error  of  law  in  the
          decision.
   (2)   The Tribunal must notify the parties in writing of the outcome  of
       any review, and of any right of appeal in relation to the outcome.
   (3)   If the Tribunal  takes  any  action  in  relation  to  a  decision
       following a review without first giving every party an opportunity to
       make representations -
       (a)    the notice under paragraph (2) must state that any party  that
          did not have an opportunity to make representations may apply  for
          such action to be set aside; and
       (b)    the Tribunal may regard  the  review  as  incomplete  and  act
          accordingly."
[2] From 23 May 2011, what had been s.85(4) became s.85A(2). Section 85A
has since been repealed by Sch 9 Immigration Act 2014 from 20 October 2014.


