
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
OA/12704/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 14th March 2016                        |On 26th April 2016                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before


                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                                   Y M S T
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ACCRA

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Akin-Samuels, instructed by JDS Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State but nonetheless for the purposes of this decision I  shall  refer
    to the parties as they were described before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    that is the Secretary of State as the respondent and  Miss  ST  as  the
    appellant.  The appellant is a citizen of Cameroon aged 16  years  born
    on 9th February 1999 and she appealed against a decision of  the  Entry
    Clearance  Officer  dated  23rd  September  2014  refusing  her   entry
    clearance to join her mother and father  under  paragraph  297  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Majid allowed the  appeal
    in a decision promulgated on 10th September 2015.

 2. At paragraph 11 the judge set out the following

         "11. The dispositive aspects of the case are as follows:

         a)   I have carefully perused the documents to reach the conclusion
             that this case should be handled  by  an  illuminated  use  of
             discretion, remembering that here we are dealing with the  bet
             interest of a 16 year old girl who, as one can appreciate,  is
             vulnerable due to her residence in Cameroon with  two  teenage
             boys.

         b)   The Appellant's aunt used to look after her but in August 2013
             she died and now she is living with a friend of her mother who
             is not willing to commit to the longterm supervision  of  this
             girl.

         c)   In their oral evidence both the Appellant's parents have  said
             that they are very concerned about  their  daughter's  welfare
             and she should be with them.  They are keen to  get  her  into
             school in the UK and to look after her well.

         d)    The  Appellant  is  entitled  in  law  to  claim  benefits  -
             particularly Child Benefit.  For her parents to say to me that
             they will not claim any benefit cannot be accepted by me.  The
             fact the Local Authority has given a  written  assurance  that
             the Appellant could join her  parents  in  the  same  dwelling
             without any increase in the Housing  Benefit  is,  of  course,
             admissible evidence.

         ...

         20.  On 4 February 2011 a five-member bench of  the  Supreme  Court
             (the highest judicial body in the UK) gave its judgment in  ZH
             (Tanzania) v. SSHD [2011] UKSC 4.  It is widely regarded as  a
             landmark decision following the significant judgments from the
             House of Lords on Article 8 ECHR which  have  emerged  in  the
             last few years including in particular Beoku-Betts [2008] UKHL
             39, Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40, and EB (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL  41.
             Reversing the Court of  Appeal  decision,  the  Supreme  Court
             unanimously held that the best interest of the child had to be
             considered  and  given  paramount  weight  as  part   of   the
             assessment of proportionality under Article 8 ECHR.

         21.  In ZH (Tanzania)  [2011]  case  the  Supreme  Court  said  "In
             reaching decisions that will affect  a  child,  a  primacy  of
             importance must be accorded to his or her best interest.  This
             is not, it is agreed, a factor of limitless importance in  the
             sense that it will prevail over all other considerations.   It
             is a factor, however, that must rank higher  than  any  other.
             It is not merely one consideration that weighs in the  balance
             alongside other competing factors.

         ...

         29.  Accordingly, in view of  my  deliberations  in  the  preceding
             paragraphs and having taken into account all of the  oral  and
             documentary  evidence  as  well  as  the  submissions  at   my
             disposal, cognisant of the fact that the burden of proof is on
             the Appellant and the standard of  proof  is  the  balance  of
             probabilities, I am persuaded that the Appellant comes  within
             the law and can benefit from the relevant  Immigration  Rules,
             as amended."

 3. The judge allowed the appeal but this was challenged, with  permission,
    by the Secretary of State on the basis that there  was  an  absence  of
    reasoned findings, there was no indication of balancing the evidence or
    considering the relevant  merits  of  the   different  strands  of  the
    evidence.  There was an entire absence of findings fundamental  to  the
    appeal such as the status of the appellant's parents in the UK and  why
    they could not live with her in Cameroon.  There were no findings as to
    why the appellant's circumstances were different at the date  of  claim
    to the circumstances of August 2013 when the carer died.  There were no
    findings as to why the appellant could not live with the family members
    such as cousins and family.  There were no findings  on  credibility  a
    relevant issue given that the sponsors gave conflicting evidence on the
    family members still in Cameroon.

 4. There was a lengthy summary of the  legal  principles  and  authorities
    from paragraph 16 onwards but the  Tribunal  Judge  had  no  regard  to
    Section 117B(3) of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  and
    had misdirected himself in relation to the best interests of the  child
    and 3.   S55 of the Borders Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 of the
    Borders Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

 5. At the hearing  before  me  Mr  Akin-Samuels  relied  on  his  skeleton
    argument and submitted that the appellant was a young  Cameroonian  who
    was 15 years old at the time of the entry clearance application and her
    mother was an asylum seeker and had since been naturalised as a British
    citizen.  He submitted that paragraph 29  showed  that  the  judge  had
    taken into account all of the oral and documentary evidence but  agreed
    that  he  could  not  point  me  to  specific   findings   within   the
    determination save for a general finding in relation  to  paragraph  11
    that this was the 16 year old girl.

 6. Mr Whitwell emphatically concentrated on the lack of any  reference  to
    EV (Philippines) & Ors v Secretary of State for the
    Home Department [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874  and  the  absence  of  reasoned
    findings.

 7. In conclusion, it is evident that there were no findings regarding  key
    issues in this appeal not least the immigration status of the  parents,
    the prospects of other family members living with the appellant and the
    oral evidence of the parents  with  regards  to  whom,  it  was  merely
    recorded, that "they are keen to get her into school in the UK  and  to
    look after her well."  The judge did not engage with the content of the
    Entry Clearance  Officer's  refusal  specifically  the  income  of  the
    mother, or that the sponsor would be able to maintain  and  accommodate
    the appellant in the United Kingdom.  There was no reference to Section
    117 of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  and  the  legal
    direction that  the  best  interests  of  the  child  should  be  given
    "paramount weight as part of the assessment  of  proportionality  under
    Article 8 ECHR" is simply incorrect.

 8. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside  the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007  and  further
    to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court  proceedings.   This  is
because the appellant is a minor.




Signed                                  Date 21st April 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


.






