
[pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/12293/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24th August 2015                  |On 8th September 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                              TESFIT BOCHRATSEN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Faryl, Counsel instructed on behalf of
                    Beachwood Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms R Petterson, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, with permission appeals  against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Myers) who, in a  determination  promulgated
    on 10th  April  2015  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
    decision of the Entry Clearance Officer to refuse his  application  for
    leave to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  under  paragraph  352AA  of  the
    Immigration Rules as the unmarried partner of a refugee.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Eritrea born on 1st January 1984.  He was
    sponsored by Feven Berhane, who was granted  refugee  status  in  2014.
    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal set out  the  application  made
    under paragraph 352AA of the Immigration Rules  the  application  being
    made on 28th July 2014.  The application referred to spouse/partner  at
    part 3 in family details noting that  his  marital  status  was  as  an
    "unmarried partner" and at part 6 he gave the  Sponsor's  details.   At
    part 8 relating to additional information where the Appellant  is  able
    to set out any other information  to  be  considered  as  part  of  the
    application the following was recorded:-

         "Yes I wish to arrive in UK meet  my  wife  as  soon  as  possible.
         Thank you."

    There was no evidence accompanying the application in  support  of  the
    relevant Immigration Rule which required at 352AA(ii) that the  parties
    have been living together in a relationship akin to either  a  marriage
    or a civil partnership which has  subsisted  for  two  years  or  more.
    There was a letter accompanying the application dated  20th  June  2014
    made by the Appellant's former solicitors but no reference was made  in
    that document to them living together but stated that they met in  2006
    through family and that their engagement had taken place in 2007.   The
    letter makes reference to "our client's partner fled  Eritrea  in  2009
    due to fear of his life and since then our client has not seen him  and
    was not aware of his whereabouts until recently."  This must  refer  to
    the Sponsor  and  not  the  Appellant.   A  statutory  declaration  was
    provided by the Sponsor which again made  reference  to  her  having  a
    partner before she left Eritrea and having met  him  in  2006  and  got
    engaged in 2007.  She refers to him fleeing the country in 2009 and she
    had not seen him since  that  date.   There  is  no  reference  to  the
    relationship that took place between them in Eritrea and  significantly
    details of any life they had together.

 3. The Entry Clearance Officer in a decision made on 11th  September  2014
    was that the application was refused as the Entry Clearance Officer was
    not satisfied that the Appellant  had  lived  with  his  Sponsor  in  a
    relationship akin to marriage which had  subsisted  for  two  years  or
    more.  This was  based  on  the  evidence  set  out  in  the  preceding
    paragraph namely that the letter submitted on his behalf stated that he
    had met his Sponsor in 2006 and  had  got  engaged  in  2007;  he  left
    Eritrea in 2009 and his Sponsor had not been aware of  his  whereabouts
    until recently.  That there had been no  evidence  in  support  of  the
    claim of living together which was relevant to the requirement  in  the
    Rule.  Following the refusal, Grounds of  Appeal  had  been  lodged  in
    which it was stated that he had moved in with the  Sponsor  in  January
    2007.  However the Entry  Clearance  Manager,  reviewing  the  evidence
    noted that notwithstanding that claim made there  was  no  evidence  in
    support of it and the only evidence provided was that from 2014 and was
    un-translated.

 4. The Appellant lodged an appeal against that decision and it came before
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Myers) on 30th March 2015  at  Bradford.
    In a determination promulgated on 10th April 2015, the judge having the
    opportunity of hearing the oral evidence of the Sponsor, dismissed  the
    appeal under the Immigration Rules and on human  rights  grounds.   The
    findings of fact are set out at paragraphs [11  to  16]  in  which  the
    judge  reached  the  conclusion  that  the  Sponsor's  evidence  lacked
    credibility and that whilst the judge found that she was engaged to the
    Appellant before he  and the Sponsor left Eritrea, and also they had re-
    established contact, the judge did not find on the evidence  that  they
    could meet the Immigration Rules because the Appellant  had  failed  to
    discharge the burden upon  him  to  demonstrate  that  they  had  lived
    together in a relationship akin to marriage for a period of  two  years
    or more before leaving Eritrea.  The judge reached a  finding  at  [16]
    that the evidence that they did live together was fabricated  after  it
    became apparent that they did not meet the requirements of  the  Rules.
    The findings make  reference  to  the  evidence  that  was  before  the
    Tribunal and why the judge had reached that decision.

 5. As to Article 8, it had not  been  raised  in  the  Grounds  of  Appeal
    however, the judge considered that issue at paragraphs [17 to  20]  and
    having found that whilst the  couple  were  engaged  before  they  left
    Eritrea they had never actually lived together.  They had not seen each
    other since 2009 and only recently re-established contact.   The  judge
    concluded on the evidence that they were unlikely to  have  spent  much
    time together, he was not the father of the Sponsor's child  and  found
    on the evidence that this was a relationship that was tenuous in nature
    and not longstanding.  At paragraph [19] the judge considered it in the
    alternative that the decision  was  not  disproportionate  taking  into
    account the Section 117 of the 2014 Act and that there was no  evidence
    to support the submission that whilst the Sponsor was a refugee arising
    out of her circumstances in Eritrea, that she was not  unable  to  join
    the Appellant in Israel or for the Appellant to make an application for
    entry clearance as a partner in accordance with the Immigration Rules.

 6. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision and  permission
    was granted by Judge Landes on 6th July 2015.

 7. Thus the appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.  Miss Faryl relied upon
    the written grounds that had been submitted on the Appellant's  behalf.
    As to Ground 1, and she submitted that the judge had accepted that  the
    parties were engaged but had rejected the Sponsor's  oral  evidence  of
    having lived together.  She accepted  that  there  was  no  documentary
    evidence in support of their relationship.  She further  accepted  that
    the letter referred to by the judge which was a covering letter but did
    not make reference to them living together or any circumstances in that
    regard and further, it was accepted that the statutory declaration that
    the judge referred to in the findings of fact also make no  mention  of
    them living together.  However, she submitted the letter was  merely  a
    covering letter and not intended to set out  the  Appellant's  case  in
    detail and furthermore, there was no requirement to set out  the  claim
    in its entirety in a statutory declaration.  She submitted that it  was
    only after the application was refused that the  focus  turned  to  the
    lack of evidence of living together.  She further reminded the Tribunal
    that it was notable that there was no  documentary  evidence  that  the
    parties had become engaged in January 2007 but the judge accepted  that
    evidence but rejected her evidence  of  about  having  lived  with  the
    Appellant.  In this regard she further submitted that the  Sponsor  was
    found to be credible by the Secretary of State and being granted asylum
    without the application being  refused  or  being  required  to  attend
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

 8. As to Ground 2 she referred the  Tribunal  to  paragraph  [12]  of  the
    judge's determination and in particular the inconsistency  as  to  when
    documents linking the Appellant and the Sponsor had been burned and  by
    whom.  Ms Faryl read from her own notes of the hearing as to  what  the
    Appellant had said and paragraph 13 of her statement was  clarified  to
    the extent that it made  reference  to  a  letter  of  confirmation  of
    engagement that had been burned.  The grounds also  make  reference  to
    the Sponsor explaining in her evidence that the statement  was  drafted
    without the benefit of a Tigrinyan interpreter.  She submitted that  it
    was a "red herring" and that it was immaterial as  to  who  burned  the
    documents and when the documents were burned and that the judge  should
    not have given weight to  that  matter  which  was  essentially  a  red
    herring and was immaterial to the issue.

 9. As to Ground 3 it was asserted that the judge  had  made  an  erroneous
    factual finding in that the judge found there was an  inconsistency  in
    the Sponsor's evidence by reference to the interview in which  she  had
    said she was doing military service and this was inconsistent with  her
    evidence that she was living with the Appellant.  However, questions 31
    to 33 of the asylum interview demonstrated that she was living  at  the
    family house and therefore she could  have  been  undertaking  military
    service and living with the Appellant.

10. In her concluding comments, Miss Faryl submitted  that  the  judge  had
    erred in her  approach  to  the  Sponsor's  evidence.   In  the  asylum
    interview she disclosed that she was engaged  to  be  married  and  her
    general credibility was accepted.  Consequently the  determination  was
    unsafe and should be set aside.

11. Ms Peterson on behalf  of  the  Respondent  relied  upon  the  Rule  24
    response and that the judge properly considered the evidence and it was
    open to the judge to make those findings of fact on the  evidence  that
    was before her or in real terms the lack of evidence  that  was  before
    the judge.  The Appellant had never previously claimed to have lived in
    a relationship akin to marriage and there was  no  adequate  supporting
    evidence of such a relationship.  Thus it was  open  to  the  judge  to
    conclude that the Appellant had not discharged  the  burden  of  proof.
    The asylum interview had referred  to  their  engagement  but  did  not
    provide any cogent evidence  that  the  Sponsor  was  living  with  the
    Appellant at the time or  thereafter.   In  her  oral  submissions,  Ms
    Peterson submitted that the first ground was  not  made  out  and  that
    there was no evidence that they had lived together and it was  open  to
    the judge to reject her evidence  for  the  reasons  that  were  given.
    Whilst the judge  made  reference  to  her  military  service,  careful
    consideration of the answers at questions 31 to 32 lends no support  to
    her  claim  that  they  were  living  together  at  the  family   home.
    Consequently she invited the Tribunal to uphold the determination.

Conclusions:

12. The grounds seek to assert that it was wrong of the judge  to  rely  on
    the lack of evidence in the statutory declaration and a letter  written
    by the Appellant's former solicitors because there was  no  requirement
    to set out the claim in the statutory declaration and that  the  letter
    was simply an accompanying letter which was in effect an "introduction"
    and thus the judge's findings were wrong in that  respect.   I  do  not
    accept that submission.  The judge at [11] gave proper consideration to
    the evidence or rather the lack of evidence which was  central  to  the
    sole issue to be determined.  It is accepted on behalf of the Appellant
    the  letter  which  accompanied  the  application  made  no   reference
    whatsoever to the parties having lived together.  The letter dated 20th
    June 2014 refers to the meeting in 2006 and having got engaged in 2007.
     No reference is made to the circumstances of any relationship  between
    that period.

13. It is also accepted that the contents of the statutory declaration  did
    not make any reference to them living together.

14. In my judgment it was entirely open to the judge  to  find  that  those
    documents which had been sent to the Respondent for the purposes of the
    application, failed to evidence the material aspects of her claim  that
    the parties had lived together in Eritrea and that it  was  only  after
    the refusal in which it was made plain, that there was no  evidence  to
    support the Immigration Rules and them having lived together  that  the
    Grounds of Appeal were served in which it was mentioned for  the  first
    time that they had indeed lived together.  It is also not the case that
    the covering letter (at page 96 of the bundle) was a document  properly
    described as an introduction.  I do not find  the  submission  made  by
    Miss Faryl in this respect is borne  out  by  a  consideration  of  the
    document itself.  It is not a short document, it consists of two  pages
    setting out the Appellant's circumstances and there is a  paragraph  in
    the  letter  that  makes  specific  reference  to  the  Appellant.   It
    describes the Sponsor having a partner whom she  met  in  2006  through
    family and that the engagement took place in 2007.  The paragraph  went
    on to mention further details.  Following that there were  two  further
    paragraphs dealing with the relationship but at no time  does  it  make
    reference to them living together at any stage.

15. Furthermore, the statutory declaration which was sent for the  purposes
    of supporting the application which was made on behalf of  the  Sponsor
    and her factual circumstances  and  that  of  the  Appellant,  make  no
    reference to them living together. This is accepted on  behalf  of  the
    appellant.  These are documents which the judge was entitled to view as
    documents in which it was reasonable to expect there to have been  some
    reference to the nature of the relationship and living  together  which
    was the central issue of the  application.   The  evidence  was  wholly
    lacking and in those circumstances the judge's finding at [11] was open
    to the judge to make and that an adverse inference that was drawn  from
    the lack of evidence in this regard  undermined  their  claim  to  have
    lived together.

16. The further grounds also have no merit in my  judgment.   At  paragraph
    [12] the judge makes reference to evidence given  before  the  Tribunal
    (both written and documentary) in which the Appellant purported to give
    an explanation as to why there was a dearth of documentary evidence  to
    support the relationship.  The judge makes reference  at  [12]  to  the
    contents of the statutory declaration. The judge also made a  reference
    to the witness statement at paragraph 13 which was  in  the  bundle  in
    which she stated:-

         "I had a lot of evidence of my relationship  with  Tesfit  such  as
         photographs and evidence of us living together but  due  to  myself
         fleeing the country, I was informed later on by my family that  the
         government is looking for me and my family burned  the  documentary
         evidence which connected Tesfit and I."

    Furthermore, in the  Grounds  of  Appeal  provided  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant at page 3 it  was  referred  to  the  Appellant  meeting  the
    Sponsor in the middle of 2006 and after a couple of months  into  their
    relationship they both moved in together and  got  engaged  in  January
    2007 with the consent of the parents.  I pause to  observe  that  there
    was no evidence from the parents having  given  their  consent  to  the
    engagement and would have been in a position to support their claim  of
    living together.  The explanation given in the Grounds of Appeal  about
    evidence in support is relevant.  The Grounds of Appeal make  reference
    to the Sponsor:-

         "The Sponsor had much of the evidence of the relationship in  terms
         of photographs and living together but due to the  Sponsor  fleeing
         the country in 2012 she was informed later on by  her  family  that
         the government is looking for  her;  her  family  then  burned  the
         documentary evidence which connected them to her."

    Thus in those documents the evidence was consistent as to  the  Sponsor
    having documentary evidence of the relationship and living together but
    that it was burned by her family after she had left.   The  explanation
    however does not explain why the Appellant had no evidence  himself  as
    to them living together.  The statutory declaration  repeats  paragraph
    13 of the witness statement.  The grounds are advanced on the basis  of
    what the judge recorded at paragraph [12] relating to cross-examination
    of the Sponsor in which it was said that she (my emphasis)  had  burned
    the documents while still living in the  family  home  to  prevent  the
    authorities  linking  her  to  him.   As  the  judge  noted  this   was
    inconsistent with the evidence given in her witness statement  and  the
    Grounds of Appeal, that she had  been  informed  that  her  family  had
    burned the documents.  Miss Faryl sought to rely  on  her  notes  taken
    during the hearing (they  had  not  been  provided  to  the  Presenting
    Officer or the Tribunal prior to this hearing).  She  stated  that  the
    Appellant was asked about paragraph 13 of  the  witness  statement  and
    that the evidence that was burned was not of them living  together  but
    destroyed evidence of them being engaged.  The Record of Proceedings in
    the file made reference to  the  Sponsor's  evidence  given  in  cross-
    examination namely that -

         "When we got engaged there was a  letter  of  confirmation  of  the
         engagement signed by both parents and there were photos which  were
         burnt because the soldiers were looking for him."

    She reiterated that she had burnt the documents.

17. Whilst Ms Faryl submits that the evidence was that she  had  burnt  the
    documents herself and they related to the engagement and  therefore  it
    was a "red herring" that does not in my  judgment  negate  the  finding
    made by the judge.  The judge had evidence from  two  separate  sources
    which specifically referred to the evidence of photographs and evidence
    of them living together (not simply the engagement) (see  paragraph  13
    of the witness statement and the Grounds of Appeal) in which both refer
    to  evidence  of  the  relationship  and  living  together.    In   the
    explanation as to why she had no evidence of the  relationship  it  was
    said by her that her family had burned the evidence after she had left.
     The judge was entitled to consider that this was inconsistent with the
    evidence given in cross-examination which was that she had  burned  the
    evidence.  Whilst Miss Faryl submits that she  had  clarified  this  as
    evidence of engagement and not living together, that does  not  explain
    the inconsistency that she has  specifically  referred  to  the  family
    burning evidence of the relationship and not just evidence  as  to  the
    engagement.

18. Furthermore, the judge at [13] was entitled to reject  her  explanation
    for the inconsistency which was that this was the first  time  she  had
    given evidence in Tigrinyan and that she had been able  to  expand  her
    answers.  However, the judge gave adequate and sustainable reasons  for
    rejecting  her  account  observing  that  she  had  made  a   statutory
    declaration for  the  Appellant's  application,  she  had  adopted  her
    witness statement in evidence-in-chief and had signed  the  declaration
    on the statement to confirm it was true and the contents had been  read
    to her.  The judge referred to the evidence given that she had read the
    documents herself but because she was able to speak English and read  a
    little English but only mentioned what she considered to  be  the  most
    important things in the witness statement.   The  judge  rejected  that
    explanation noting that she  had  had  several  opportunities  to  make
    amendments and corrections to her witness statement and  it  was  clear
    from the contents that she was able to make  herself  understood.   The
    judge noted "It beggars belief that her solicitor would record  in  her
    statement that her  family  destroyed  the  documents  after  she  left
    Eritrea if these were not her instructions."  The judge also found that
    it -

         "... beggar's belief  that  she  would  admit  to  include  in  her
         statement that she destroyed some  of  the  documents  while  still
         living at the Appellant's family home because  she  did  not  think
         this was important."

    Thus it was not simply a matter of when and whom  burnt  the  documents
    but the reasons given for doing such.  Those findings were open to  the
    judge when reaching a decision on the credibility of  the  Sponsor  and
    ultimately the Appellant's claim.

19. The judge gave further reasons for rejecting her evidence at [14].   As
    the judge recorded, it had been submitted on her behalf that the Asylum
    Interview Record at questions 57 to 69, that she gave details about the
    Appellant and the details had not  been  included  in  the  answers  to
    earlier questions about marital status and the  spouse/partner  details
    and  therefore,  it  was  submitted  that  the  interview  record   was
    incomplete on the basis that the record must have omitted some  of  the
    answers.  The judge was wholly entitled to reject that account.  As the
    judge found, the fact that the Appellant's details were not included in
    the  questions  about  marital  status  and  the  spouse's  details  is
    consistent with the  Sponsor  having  said  she  was  not  married  but
    engaged.  The answers recorded at questions 57  to  69  of  the  asylum
    interview make no reference to the Appellant living  with  the  Sponsor
    whatsoever and the judge was entitled to reach the conclusion  that  it
    was not the case as submitted that the  questions  from  the  interview
    record were missing or that the record was incomplete.

20. Miss Faryl submitted that the second part of the findings at [14]  were
    factually incorrect (Ground 3).  In this regard she submitted that  the
    judge erroneously found that there was discrepancy by  considering  the
    answers at questions 15 to 19 of the interview.  Those answers set  out
    that she did military service between 2006 and 2008 and then from  2008
    to 2012 when she was housed at a military base called  Betigrish  where
    she did secretarial work.  The judge found that was  inconsistent  with
    her evidence that she had lived with the Appellant at the  family  home
    between 2006 to 2008.  Miss Faryl directed the Tribunal to questions 31
    to 33 of the asylum interview where the Sponsor was asked if,  she  was
    serving at the military base, how did she get to  Asmara  to  meet  the
    agent?.  The reply given by the Sponsor in those questions was that she
    had worked at the base during the day and had returned home to sleep at
    night which was a 50 minutes' drive away.

21. Whilst Miss Faryl is right that in the later  answer  the  Sponsor  did
    clarify that she was able to sleep at the family home and on  the  face
    of it demonstrates that the judge's finding in  this  respect  was  not
    entirely correct, the answer itself  does  not  give  support  for  the
    Sponsor's account that she was living with the Appellant at that  time.
    Nowhere within the interview questions either at questions 31 to 33  or
    before that does the Sponsor refer to living at the  family  home  with
    anyone other than her close family members and there is no reference to
    her living there with the Appellant or a fianc�.

22. Considering the judge's findings in the round, the judge  was  entitled
    to reach the conclusion that on the evidence before the  Tribunal,  the
    Appellant had failed to discharge the burden on him  that  he  and  the
    Sponsor had demonstrated that the Appellant met the  Immigration  Rules
    and that they were living together as required by paragraph 352AA.  The
    burden lay on the Appellant and the judge gave adequate and sustainable
    reasons  for  reaching  the  conclusion  that  the  Sponsor   and   the
    Appellant's evidence had not discharged that burden on the  balance  of
    probabilities.  Whilst Miss Faryl submits that  the  Sponsor  had  been
    found credible in her asylum claim and therefore the judge should  have
    accepted her oral evidence even though there was no other  evidence  in
    support (either from her or from the Appellant himself),  that  ignores
    the fact that the judge had the opportunity of hearing the Sponsor give
    oral evidence and for it to be the subject of cross-examination.

23. In this context  I  remind  myself  of  the  decision  in  Piglowska  v
    Piglowska [1999] UKHL 27 where Lord Hoffmann said:-

         "The appellate court must bear in  mind  the  advantage  which  the
         first instance judge had  in  seeing  the  parties  and  the  other
         witnesses.  This is well understood on questions of credibility and
         findings of primary fact.  But  it  goes  further  than  that.   It
         applies also to the judge's evaluation of those facts ..."

    There is also a quotation from his decision  in  Biogen  Inc  v  Medeva
    Limited [1997] RPC1:-

         "The need for appellate caution  in  reversing  the  trial  judge's
         evaluation of the facts is based upon much more solid grounds  than
         professional courtesy.  It is because specific  findings  of  fact,
         even by the most meticulous judge,  are  inherently  an  incomplete
         statement of the impression which has been made  upon  him  by  the
         primary evidence.  His express findings are always surrounded by  a
         penumbra of imprecision as  to  emphasis,  relative  weight,  minor
         qualification and nuance ... of which  time  and  language  do  not
         permit exact expression, but which may play an  important  part  in
         the judge's overall evaluation."

24. The judge was best placed to consider the credibility  of  the  Sponsor
    but for the reasons  given,  she  found  it  to  lack  credibility  and
    rejected the account that they  had  lived  together.   The  judge  was
    entitled to reach the conclusion that they were engaged  but  that  was
    not an unconditional acceptance as the grounds assert but was a finding
    made by the judge because she was satisfied that that was the only fact
    that the sponsor had been consistent about.  Consequently  the  grounds
    are not made out and do not demonstrate any arguable error  of  law  in
    the judge's determination.  The findings of fact were open to the judge
    to make on the evidence for the reasons given above.

25. As to Article 8, the  grounds  submit  that  the  judge  erred  in  her
    approach to the evaluation of Article  8  on  the  basis  that  it  was
    necessarily informed by her earlier adverse credibility findings.  As a
    result of the decision above namely that  the  judge  was  entitled  to
    reach those adverse credibility findings, it has not been  demonstrated
    that her approach  to  Article  8  was  thereby  flawed  or  in  error.
    Consequently the decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not  disclose
    any error of law and therefore the decision shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose any error  of  law
and the decision shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
