
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/12429/2014
                                                               oa/12413/2014
                                                               oa/12418/2014
                                                               oa/12420/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30th September 2015               |On 30th October 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                            SM (FIRST APPELLANT)
                            A (SECOND APPELLANT)
                            SA (THIRD APPELLANT)
                            SO (FOURTH APPELLANT)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ABU DHABI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr A Moran, Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



The Appellants

1.   The Appellants are citizens of Syria. Their case  is  as  follows:  The
    first Appellant who I shall refer to as the Appellant was born on  20th
    November 1983.   The  second,  third  and  fourth  Appellants  are  her
    children born 1st January 2011, 1st January 2005 and 1st  January  2004
    respectively.  Their father is ZA a  citizen  of  Syria  who  has  been
    recognised in the United Kingdom as a  refugee  ("the  Sponsor").   The
    Sponsor and Appellant are married to each other.

2.   The Appellants appealed against decisions of the Respondent dated  16th
    September 2014 to refuse them entry clearance to the United Kingdom  as
    the spouse of a refugee in the case of the Appellant and  the  children
    of a refugee in the case of the second,  third  and  fourth  Appellants
    pursuant to paragraph 352A of the  Immigration  Rules.   Their  appeals
    were allowed at first instance by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Davies sitting at  Manchester  on  24th  March  2015.   The  Respondent
    appeals with leave  against  Judge  Davies'  decision  and  the  matter
    therefore comes before me to decide whether there is an error of law in
    Judge Davies' determination such that it falls to be set aside and  the
    matter reheard.  If there is no error then  his  decision  will  stand.
    Notwithstanding that, for the sake of convenience I  will  continue  to
    refer to the parties as they were known at first instance.

The Explanation for Refusal

3.   In the application  for  entry  clearance  the  Appellant  and  Sponsor
    stated they had been married since  2002.   The  Respondent's  concerns
    were raised by the Sponsor's immigration history.  He had  entered  the
    United Kingdom as a visitor  in  2004  and  overstayed.   He  had  then
    purported to marry a Polish national and on that basis had been given a
    residence card as the husband  of  an  EEA  national.   The  Respondent
    accepted that the Sponsor had  lived  with  the  Polish  citizen  until
    November 2011.  The  EEA  national  returned  to  Poland  in  or  about
    February 2012 but no evidence of the dissolution of that  marriage  was
    supplied with the Appellants' application for entry clearance. Thus any
    further marriage was potentially bigamous. The Appellant and  Sponsor's
    marriage was  not  registered  until  2009  and  the  children's  birth
    certificates were not registered until some time after their respective
    dates of birth.

4.   The Appellant and Sponsor had kept  in  contact  via  modern  means  of
    communication and the Appellant  had  been  visited  in  Syria  by  the
    Sponsor as indicated by the stamps  in  the  Sponsor's  passport.   The
    Appellant produced photographs  of  her  wedding  to  the  Sponsor  and
    several photographs taken in Egypt where the Sponsor  had  visited  the
    Appellant and the children.   The  Appellant  had  made  five  previous
    applications to visit the United Kingdom between 2006  and  2012  which
    were all unsuccessful.  In none of those applications had she mentioned
    the existence of the Sponsor and  had  named  her  husband  as  another
    person.  The Respondent  was  not  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  had
    demonstrated that she was in a genuine and subsisting marriage with the
    Sponsor as there was a lack of evidence of intervening devotion.

The Proceedings at First Instance

5.   Before the Judge at first instance it was submitted on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent that there was evidence of dishonesty in  the  appeal.   The
    Appellant had lied when making a visa application in 2007 when she  had
    said that her fianc� was  the  Sponsor's  brother  as  opposed  to  the
    Sponsor.  The Respondent urged upon the Judge that he should  find  the
    Appellant was not in a genuine marriage and the Appellant  and  Sponsor
    were not telling the truth about their relationship on the  basis  that
    they had not told the truth previously.

6.   At paragraph 29 of his determination Judge Davies began  his  findings.
    He wrote:

         "It is clear in this appeal that both the Sponsor and the principal
         Appellant have lied in relation to applications they have  made  to
         enter the United Kingdom as visitors.  That is an unfortunate  fact
         but it does not mean in relation to the present appeal that on  the
         basis of their dishonesty the appeal should be dismissed.   I  find
         that although the Sponsor claims to have married a Polish  national
         and on that basis obtained a residence card confirming his right to
         reside in  the  United  Kingdom  that  marriage  was  not  a  valid
         marriage.  It was a bigamist marriage because the Sponsor  who  was
         domiciled in the United Kingdom at the marriage was already married
         to  the  principal  Appellant  and  that  marriage  had  not   been
         dissolved.  It may well be that the Sponsor had never had a genuine
         relationship with a Polish national but had claimed to have married
         a Polish national in order  not  to  be  removed  from  the  United
         Kingdom.  If  that  was  his  intention  he  succeeded  because  he
         obtained, albeit by questionable means, a residence card."

7.   The issue before the Judge was whether he could find  as  a  fact  that
    the Appellant and Sponsor were in a genuine marriage.  At paragraph  31
    the Judge found that to be the case stating:

         "I am able to find on the balance of probability that  the  Sponsor
         and the  principal  Appellant  are  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship of man and wife and that they intend to live  together
         permanently  upon  the  principal  Appellant  being  granted  entry
         clearance to come to the United Kingdom."

8.   The Judge gave his reasons why he came to that finding stating:

         "Evidence of my findings comes from the birth of  the  Sponsor  and
         the  principal  Appellant's  youngest  child  which  I  accept  was
         conceived during a visit the Sponsor made to  Syria.   Despite  the
         births of the two eldest children not being registered at the  time
         I am prepared to accept that they are genuinely the children of the
         Sponsor and the principal Appellant.  Evidence has  also  been  put
         before me to indicate that the Sponsor spent some eight and a  half
         months with his wife and children in  Egypt  and  that  is  further
         evidence of the genuineness of their relationship.  I have read and
         considered in its entirety the skeleton argument submitted  by  the
         principal Appellant's representative which succinctly sets out  the
         basis of the case of  the  principal  and  other  Appellants.   The
         principal Appellant can satisfy me it is  more  probable  than  not
         that she is in a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  her
         Sponsor.  I also find it is more probable than not that  the  other
         Appellants are children of the  Sponsor  and  principal  Appellant.
         Those are the only issues upon which I have  to  make  findings  in
         this appeal because having made those findings it is clear that the
         Appellants are entitled to entry clearance to  the  United  Kingdom
         for family reunion with a  person  who  has  been  granted  refugee
         status.

The Onward Appeal

9.   The Respondent appealed this decision arguing that it was not  open  to
    Judge Davies to dismiss the marriage of the Sponsor to the EEA  citizen
    as an invalid marriage.  Given the credibility  issues  raised  by  the
    Respondent it was not open to the Judge to  make  a  finding  that  the
    marriage between the Appellant and the Sponsor was a valid  one.   Both
    the Sponsor and the Appellant had lied in relation to applications they
    had made to enable the Appellant to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    visitor.   The  Judge's  assessment  was  subjective  and   failed   to
    objectively  consider  the  intention  disclosed  by  the   Appellant's
    actions.  She wanted to come  to  the  United  Kingdom  and  sought  to
    bolster her claim by providing false information.   The  Appellant  had
    employed deception by submitting  false  information.   The  Judge  had
    failed to provide any reason for finding that the two  eldest  children
    were the children of the Sponsor and the Appellant.

10.  The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    Designated Judge Campbell on 1st June 2015.  In granting permission  to
    appeal he wrote that

         "The application is finally balanced but it is  arguable  that  the
         adverse findings regarding deception by both the Appellant and  her
         Sponsor  are  so  clear  that  the  Judge's  favourable  conclusion
         regarding their relationship was insufficiently reasoned."

11.  The Appellants' representative responded to the grant of permission  in
    a reply under Rule 24  on  19th  June  2015.   Under  the  heading  "My
    Findings" the Judge had  noted  he  had  read  and  considered  in  its
    entirety the Appellant's skeleton argument. The inference must be  that
    that he meant he accepted the Appellant's case in full as presented  in
    that skeleton argument.  No adverse credibility findings had been  made
    in respect of the four supporting witnesses who gave  evidence  to  the
    Judge. They had confirmed that as far as they were aware the  Appellant
    and Sponsor  were  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship.   The
    inference must again be that that evidence was accepted in its entirety
    by Judge Davies.

12.  Dealing with  the  specifics  of  the  Respondent's  complaint  in  the
    grounds of appeal the reply noted that the date of marriage between the
    Appellant and Sponsor was stated in their family booklet issued by  the
    Syrian Civil Register Office.  The Judge must have relied on that  date
    to make  his  findings  that  the  marriage  to  the  EEA  citizen  was
    potentially bigamous.  The Judge's finding that the Sponsor lived  with
    the Appellant for eight and a half months in Egypt was evidenced by the
    Sponsor's exit and entry stamps in  his  passport.   Those  dates  were
    never questioned by the  Sponsor  in  the  refusal  notice  or  by  the
    Presenting Officer at the hearing.  The deception in the previous visit
    visa applications was made known to the Judge when he himself had asked
    for copies of the Appellant's previous visit visa  applications  (which
    have not apparently been  supplied  by  the  Respondent  in  the  entry
    clearance bundle).  The Judge having thus made himself  aware  of  this
    issue went on to consider  all  the  evidence  in  the  round  and  was
    entitled to reach the findings he did.  The reason  for  the  delay  in
    registration of the births had been dealt with in the skeleton argument
    to which the Judge referred in his determination.   In  any  event  the
    Appellants had now commissioned a DNA test report to prove  that  their
    family relationship was as claimed.   In  the  event  that  the  matter
    proceeded further the  Tribunal  would  be  invited  to  consider  this
    evidence.  The Respondent could not  show  any  error  of  law  in  the
    determination.

The Hearing Before Me

13.  At the hearing before me the Presenting Officer argued that  there  was
    an absence of reasoning in certain parts of the determination.  In  the
    light of the previous deception the Judge's findings that  the  Sponsor
    was telling the truth about his relationship with the  Appellant  would
    have to be much better reasoned.  Although  Designated  Judge  Campbell
    had referred in the grant of permission to the Respondent's application
    being finally balanced the Respondent's view  was  that  a  finding  of
    error of law should be made in the Respondent's favour.

14.  For the Appellant it was  argued  that  there  had  been  a  very  full
    discussion before the Judge at first instance on  the  implications  of
    the previous deception.  In particular although not referred to by  the
    Judge in his determination there had been  a  full  discussion  of  the
    effect of  paragraph  320(11)  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   Paragraph
    320(11) states that where an applicant has previously  contrived  in  a
    significant way to frustrate the intentions of the Immigration Rules by
    using deception in an application for entry clearance  etc.  and  there
    are other aggravating circumstances such  as  absconding,  not  meeting
    temporary admission/reporting restrictions or bail conditions, using an
    assumed identity or multiple identities, switching nationality,  making
    frivolous applications  or  not  complying  with  the  re-documentation
    process the entry clearance should normally be refused.  Thus paragraph
    320(11) is a discretionary ground.

15.  In this case it was argued that whilst  the  first  part  of  paragraph
    320(11) might have been said to have been met the second  part  of  the
    sub-paragraph was not met as there were no aggravating circumstances as
    referred to in the paragraph.  Mr Moran on  behalf  of  the  Appellants
    reiterated  that  there  was  in  existence  DNA  evidence   to   prove
    relationship an issue which had been taken by  the  Respondent  in  the
    refusal notices.  It was pointless not to concede that there  had  been
    deception in the past but the Judge  had  considered  the  matter  very
    carefully to the extent of hearing the appeal over the  course  of  two
    days (putting the matter back for further enquiries to  be  made).   It
    was open to the Judge to find the reason why the Sponsor  had  been  in
    Egypt for eight and a half months was to be with the Appellant and  the
    Appellant's appeal could not be dismissed  simply  on  the  basis  that
    there had been deception in the past.  The Judge had  to  look  at  the
    situation as it was now.

Findings

16.  The issue in this case is whether the Judge made an  error  of  law  in
    coming to  the  conclusion  that  he  had  before  him  a  genuine  and
    subsisting marriage between a recognised refugee and his wife a citizen
    of Syria.  The Judge found that there was such a genuine and subsisting
    marriage and that the four children of  the  Appellant  were  also  the
    children of the Sponsor.  In those circumstances  given  the  Sponsor's
    status the appeals fell to be allowed.

17.  The principal argument for  the  Respondent  is  that  there  has  been
    deception by both the Appellant and  the  Sponsor  in  the  past.   The
    problem for the Respondent is that that of itself is insufficient.   In
    order that the Immigration Rules are compliant with Article 8 in  cases
    such as this previous deception is not  of  itself  an  automatic  bar.
    Paragraph 320(7A) of the Immigration  Rules  does  provide  that  entry
    clearance  is  to  be  refused  as  a  mandatory  ground  where   false
    representations have been made or false information has been  submitted
    but that is in relation to the application under consideration  not  in
    relation to a previous application.

18.  The Judge found as a fact that false information had not been  supplied
    to him in relation to this application.  That meant that the only basis
    on which the application could be  refused  was  on  the  discretionary
    basis under paragraph 320(11).  The difficulty that gave  rise  to  was
    that the aggravating circumstances which bring paragraphs 320(11)  into
    play were not present in this case.  The Sponsor was not entitled to be
    issued with a residence card on the basis of an alleged marriage to  an
    EEA citizen.  He on his own case was already married to  the  Appellant
    and of course had he made that known to the Home Office  he  would  not
    have been granted the residence card.  He had thus  used  European  law
    for fraudulent purposes.  However his status in the United Kingdom  now
    is  not  dependent  upon  the  Immigration  (European  Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2006 but is on the basis that he is a  recognised  refugee.
    At no point was it argued before Judge Davies that that  status  should
    be enquired into further.  In short the only issue before the Judge was
    whether he could accept what he was now being told by the Appellant and
    the Sponsor as to their relationship.

19.  The Respondent's challenge in this case is thus a  reasons  based  one.
    It is not necessary for a Judge to set out  each  and  every  piece  of
    evidence put before him in arriving at his conclusions.  The Judge  had
    evidence to indicate that the Appellant and Sponsor  were  married  and
    had children together.  I do not take into  account  the  DNA  evidence
    which the Appellant says is now to hand since I am only considering the
    error of law stage.  Nevertheless I consider that the Judge's  findings
    in this case are adequately if concisely reasoned.  Simply because  the
    Appellant and Sponsor had lied in the past did not mean that they  were
    lying now.  At the end of the day the decision on whether the Appellant
    could show on the balance of probabilities she was  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting marriage  was  a  decision  for  the  Judge  to  take.   The
    Respondent's grounds of appeal are in truth no more than a disagreement
    with the result.

20.  The Sponsor had used deception in the past in order to be able to  live
    in the United Kingdom but such  deception  by  one  who  is  ultimately
    recognised as a refugee is in many ways no different to the person  who
    unlawfully smuggles themselves into  the  United  Kingdom  deliberately
    evading immigration controls. If that person is  ultimately  recognised
    as a refugee their conduct, even if it might come within Section  8  of
    the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment  of  Claimants,  etc.)  Act  2004
    (with potential damage  to  their  present  credibility),  is  still  a
    refugee with the rights that go with that status.   I  have  summarised
    above the submissions made to me by the Appellants' representative (see
    paragraphs 14 and 15) and I find that they do meet  the  objections  to
    the Judge's decision taken by the Respondent.

21.  The end result may appear to be somewhat unsatisfactory;  that  someone
    can deceive the system and obtain a benefit.  However that  is  not  to
    look at the matter correctly.  The Sponsor as a recognised  refugee  is
    entitled to bring his wife  and  children  into  this  country  without
    consideration of his financial means by virtue of his  refugee  status.
    The Respondent was evidently prepared to accept that  the  Sponsor  was
    indeed a citizen of Syria and given  the  present  conditions  in  that
    country it is not surprising that the Sponsor  should  be  entitled  to
    refugee status.  His abuse of EEA law  and  the  Appellant's  attempted
    deception of the Respondent by failing to mention that she was  married
    to the Sponsor are not in themselves reasons to dismiss the Appellants'
    appeal.

22.  They were a factor to be taken into account in  assessing  whether  the
    Appellant and Sponsor gave the Judge correct evidence and Judge  Davies
    did that by  indicating  that  he  accepted  the  Appellant's  skeleton
    argument and other matters.  I agree  with  Designated  Judge  Campbell
    that the argument that better reasoning should have been given  in  the
    determination was a finally balanced one. It would have been preferable
    for Judge Davies to have given a more detailed explanation  of  why  he
    found the way he did given the obvious concerns  which  the  Respondent
    had in this case and the need in those circumstances for the Respondent
    to understand why a couple who had over a  period  of  years  practised
    deception on the UK authorities should nevertheless win  their  appeal.
    However for the reasons I have given I  find  that  Judge  Davies  just
    about crossed that threshold and therefore the Respondent  cannot  show
    an error of law in the determination such that it should be set  aside.
    I therefore dismiss the Respondent's appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I uphold the  decision  to  allow  the  Appellants'  appeal
against the Respondent's decision to refuse entry clearance.

Respondent's appeal dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed this 29th day of October 2015

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Judge Davies declined to make a fee award.  In my  view  that  was  entirely
proper given the history of this case and the way that the evidence  emerged
I do not disturb that finding.


Signed this 29th day of October 2015

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft
