
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/12550/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 6 June 2014                                |On 27 June 2014              |
|Prepared 6 June 2014                          |                             |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY

                                   Between

                              ms Mohinder kaur
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Appearances:

For the Appellant:     Mr Ishwar Singh of Rakkani Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Smart, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of India appealed  against  the  Respondent's
    decision to refuse to issue an EEA family permit under the  Immigration
    (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  (the  2006  Regulations)
    particularly Regulation 7.  The matter came before First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Colyer who on 7 February 2014 dismissed the  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's decision.  Permission to appeal that decision was given by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Page on 10 April 2014.

2.    The  first  issue  in  dispute  relates  to  the  description  of  the
    Appellant, as the mother of the UK  Sponsor  and  an  EEA  national  of
    Italy.  The Appellant lives in Italy and has a right to remain given on
    the basis of the Sponsor's, now  in  the  UK,  status  in  Italy.   The
    Sponsor seeks to bring his mother into  the  UK  for  the  purposes  of
    generally caring for her; given that she is some 80 years of age and in
    need of support.

3.   The definition of a family member to which the Appellant  would  belong
    is under Rule 7(1)(c) of the 2006 Regulations that she is  a  dependent
    direct relative in the ascending line.  It is clear that the mother  is
    a direct relative in the ascending  line  but  issue  is  taken  as  to
    whether she is his dependant.

4.   The judge found and it is really undisputed that the Appellant has  not
    been financially dependent upon the Sponsor while she has  been  living
    in  Italy.   It  seems  that  the  Appellant  has  an  Italian  pension
    sufficient to live on and whilst the Sponsor has  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom she has not been financially dependent upon him.  The  Sponsor,
    it is  said,  makes  regular  visits  to  Italy.   Mr  Singh's  primary
    submission is that there is no requirement of financial  dependency  by
    the Appellant on the Sponsor.  The  argument  developed  so  that  even
    though the Appellant has  no  financial  dependency,  assuming  she  is
    required to have one, the dependency can be the care and support of the
    Appellant by other family members.  His further  submission  was  that,
    under Rule 12 of the 2006 Regulations  particularly  Rule  12(1)(b)(i),
    because the Appellant  is  lawfully  resident  in  Italy  there  is  no
    requirement to have any financial dependency or indeed  any  dependency
    on the Sponsor.  It was extremely difficult  to  tie  down  Mr  Singh's
    arguments for they seemed to vary particularly when the  Appellant  had
    previously asserted that she was supported financially by the Sponsor.

5.   It is said, as described by the judge, the main thrust appeared  to  be
    the suggestion that the  Appellant  is  physically  and/or  emotionally
    dependent upon the Sponsor.  There is reference to her needing help for
    her daily requirements like preparing food and washing etc.   There  is
    also an inference that she may have some medical problems.  No  medical
    evidence  has  been  produced.   No  independent  assessment   of   the
    Appellant's physical and emotional needs has been carried out.

6.   The judge found that such evidence as was adduced  was  not  sufficient
    to show financial dependency of any kind.

7.   Further on the limited evidence the wish of the Appellant  and  Sponsor
    to live  together  was  not  appropriate  and  acceptable  evidence  to
    demonstrate sufficient dependency  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Rules.  Cited to the judge were the 2006 version of the EEA Regulations
    also as recited in Mr Singh's skeleton argument, however the problem is
    that those Rules were changed in 2011 so as  to  alter  Rule  12(1)(b),
    delete (i) and to change by insertion Rules 12(1A) and 12(1B)  as  well
    as some  minor  consequential  amendments  elsewhere.   Thus  paragraph
    12(1)(b)(i) did not exist at the relevant time.

8.   I  find  the  judge  considered  dependency  as  at  the  date  of  the
    Respondent's decision and at the date of hearing  in  far  wider  terms
    than simply financial.  The judge on the bare evidence of her  personal
    circumstance carried out  a  holistic  examination  of  the  facts  and
    factors with particular care to the existing and proposed  relationship
    of dependency and present dependency.  The case of  Jia  cited  by  the
    judge shows that dependency is not simply a  calculation  of  financial
    dependency.  A matter repeated in Reyes [2013]  UKUT  314  (IAC)  which
    should have been brought to the judge's attention, as should have  been
    Lim [2013] UKUT 437.

9.   I do not find the change presently to be found in  the  eighth  edition
    of Phelan and Gillespie Immigration Law Handbook assists  the  argument
    because under Rule 12  the  family  member  must  be  joining  the  EEA
    national in the United  Kingdom.   The  family  member  as  defined  in
    Regulation 7 includes  dependants  as  defined  in  Regulation  7.   If
    'dependants' had no material meaning it could simply have been  deleted
    from Regulation 7.  The judge addressed this issue and I  do  not  find
    the reasoning discloses any error of law in the view the  judge  formed
    of Regulation 12.

10.  In the circumstances the judge noted the evidence  of  the  Appellant's
    personal circumstance D&R paragraphs 4-7 and at paragraphs 25,  26  and
    27 addressed the dependency contemplated  and  for  the  reasons  given
    concluded that it was not sufficient in extent or  form  to  amount  to
    dependency under the 2006 Regulations.

11.  The judge went on to consider Article 8 of the ECHR on  a  freestanding
    basis.

12.  There is no challenge in the grounds to the Article 8 decision.   I  do
    not find that the determination discloses any  error  of  law  for  the
    judge followed the correct approach established the bare evidence  that
    was  provided  and  concluded  that  the  Respondent's   decision   was
    proportionate.

13.  I do not find the original Tribunal's decision discloses any  error  of
    law.


Signed                                  Date 23 June 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey



ANONYMITY ORDER
No anonymity order was requested nor do I find  it  appropriate  that  there
    should be one.

Signed                                  Date 23 June 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

