

                                [pic]

 Upper Tribunal
 (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


 Appeal Number: OA/12473/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


 Heard at Field House
                      Decision & Reasons Promulgated
 On 17 July 2015
                          On 27 July 2015



                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL KAMARA
                          DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                  MRS LATHEEFA BEE BEE MUHARIS MOHAMED
RIYAL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

     Appellant

                                     And


                       THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (CHENNAI)

                                                                  Respondent

 Representation:

 For the Appellant:    Mr Mohamed Rizwan Mohamed Lebbe Muharis (the sponsor)
 For the Respondent:   Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                        DETERMINATION AND REASONS


    1. This is an appeal against the decision, promulgated on 19 March 2015,
       of First-tier Tribunal Judge C H O'Rourke (hereinafter referred to as
       the FTTJ).





 Background

    2. On 18 July 2014, the appellant applied for leave to enter the  United
       Kingdom as the adult dependent relative of her son, Mr Mohamed Rizwan
       Mohamed Lebbe Muharis, who is settled in the United Kingdom. She  was
       interviewed in respect of that application on 26 August 2014  and  in
       her  replies  indicated,  inter  alia,  that  she  had   no   medical
       conditions, was healthy and did not need any assistance to carry  out
       day-to-day tasks. The  application  was  refused  because  the  Entry
       Clearance Officer (ECO) noted that the appellant  had  not  submitted
       any evidence, as required by Appendix  FM-SE,  to  suggest  that  she
       required long-term personal care or that she was  unable  to  perform
       everyday tasks. Furthermore, the  ECO  referred  to  the  appellant's
       answers during her interview and noted the appellant's statement that
       she would have nowhere to live once her aunt had sold her house.  The
       ECO commented that this had been the case for a year and there was no
       sign of the sale being completed in the near  future.  The  ECO  also
       noted that the appellant had 8 siblings all living within  a  10-mile
       radius of her current home and that the sponsor was willing and  able
       to provide funds for her living costs in Sri Lanka.


    3. The appellant requested a paper hearing of her appeal. The grounds of
       appeal argued that the appellant met the  requirements  of  paragraph
       317 of the Rules and  queried  why  the  ECO  was  considering  other
       provisions.

    4. The appeal was allocated to the FTTJ for a paper  consideration.  The
       FTTJ found that the appellant could  not  meet  the  requirements  of
       Appendix FM, principally owing to her admissions during her interview
       with the Entry Clearance Officer that she had no medical  issues  and
       did not require assistance to  carry  out  day-to-day  tasks  and  he
       therefore dismissed the appeal on that basis.

       Error of law


    6. The grounds of application for permission to appeal  argue  that  the
       respondent failed to comply with the First-tier  Tribunal  directions
       made on 10 November 2014 to send copies of the evidence  relied  upon
       to the other party within 28 days of receipt of the notice of appeal.
       Specifically, it was said that the respondent had  failed  to  supply
       the appellant with a copy of the interview record. The grounds argued
       that this failure seriously incapacitated the appellant in conducting
       her case.

    7. Permission to appeal  was  granted  on  the  above  basis.  The  FTTJ
       granting permission remarked that it was arguably unfair for the FTTJ
       to dismiss an appeal on reliance on an interview record that may  not
       have been available to the appellant.

    8. The Secretary of State's  response  argued  that  the  FTTJ  directed
       himself  appropriately  and  that  it  was  immaterial  whether   the
       appellant had the interview record as it was clear that the specified
       evidence was not submitted with the application.

    9. At the hearing before us, we heard evidence and submissions  from  Mr
       Mohamed Lebbe Muharis, the appellant's son. He told us  that  he  was
       the appellant's only son and that she did not live with  any  of  her
       siblings. He confirmed  that  the  appellant  was  widowed  10  years
       earlier, that the appellant was aged 57 and that in their family they
       did not live long in that his maternal grandmother died  at  a  young
       age. He said that the appellant was brought up by her aunt  from  the
       age of 15; that the house the appellant and her aunt lived in at  the
       time of the application was sold in January 2015 and  that  aunt  was
       now living with her own children. The sponsor considered it  was  his
       responsibility to care for the appellant now and  told  us  that  she
       could not live with her siblings.

   10. The sponsor told us about the difficulties the appellant faced  as  a
       Muslim woman staying alone, finding a chaperone  or  receiving  money
       sent by the sponsor. With regard to the interview record, the sponsor
       confirmed that the appellant  had  still  not  seen  it  despite  her
       representative in Sri Lanka having asked for it after  the  decision.
       However, he told us that the appellant was truthful in the  interview
       in that she "did not have any massive disabilities." He told us  that
       she had "blood pressure" but he  was  unsure  whether  the  appellant
       suffered from high or low blood pressure. The sponsor was also  aware
       that the appellant had problems with sitting, with one of  her  hands
       and ears, but no major illnesses. In addition, the sponsor's wife was
       now 8 weeks pregnant. The sponsor confirmed that the appellant had no
       need of personal care at the time of the interview.

   11. Ms Fijiwala argued that it was unclear that the interview  transcript
       had not been served and that there was no mention in the  grounds  of
       appeal of a missing interview record. She submitted  that  the  Rules
       could not be met as no Specified Evidence had been submitted with the
       application. The appellant had told the truth  in  her  interview  in
       that she did not require personal care and that  the  house  had  not
       been sold at that time. Ms Fijiwala asked us to note that  there  was
       no appeal or cross appeal in relation to  Article  8  grounds,  which
       were not addressed by the FTTJ.

   12. We accept that the respondent's bundle was posted to the appellant in
       Sri Lanka at the address she provided in her notice of  appeal.  This
       is apparent from the first page of the respondent's bundle, which was
       before the FTTJ.  Nonetheless,  we  have  no  reason  to  reject  the
       appellant's claim that  she  did  not  receive  the  bundle  and  the
       interview record in particular.  However any unwitting error  by  the
       FTTJ in deciding the appeal in these circumstances does not amount to
       a material error of law.

   13. We find that the extracts of the interview record relied upon by  the
       ECO or FTTJ, are not disputed by the appellant.   The sponsor's  oral
       evidence was that the appellant was not seriously  unwell,  that  she
       was not in need of personal care and that she could  manage  her  own
       day-to-day tasks. Indeed, none of  the  specified  evidence  required
       with the  application  had  been  included.  We  find  that  had  the
       interview record been received by the appellant, it is unlikely  that
       she would have had anything  material  to  say  about  its  contents.
       Therefore, the FTTJ's decision would have been identical.

   14. The FTTJ did not consider the appellant's circumstances  outside  the
       Rules. We note that this matter did not form part of the  grounds  of
       application. Given what was said in SS (Congo) & others  [2015]  EWCA
       Civ 387, regarding a need for compelling circumstances  to  be  shown
       for a claim  for  leave  to  enter  to  be  established  outside  the
       Immigration Rules, we are satisfied that had the FTTJ considered  the
       Article 8 claim outside the Rules, the outcome would  have  been  the
       same.

   15. In these circumstances we are satisfied that there are no  errors  of
       law in the FTTJ's determination such that the decision  ought  to  be
       set aside to be remade.









 Conclusions

       1) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not
          involve the making of an error on a point of law.

       2) We do not set aside the decision.

       3) We can see no reason to make an anonymity direction.

     Signed:     Date: 19 July 2015


     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara









































