

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
OA/12355/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On 2 June 2014                           |On 3 June 2014            |
|                                         |                          |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL



                                   Between


                               Mrs SAKHI ROYA
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs P Heidar, Authorised Representative
      (AA Immigration Lawyers)
For the Respondent:    Miss C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
           Tribunal Judge McDade on 15 April 2014 against the determination
           of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Paul  who  had  dismissed   the
           Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Entry   Clearance   Officer's
           decision dated 13 May 2013 to  refuse  to  grant  the  Appellant
           leave to enter under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules  as  a
           spouse  and  also  under  Article  8  ECHR  in  a  determination
           promulgated on 4 February 2014.


      2.    The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan born on  18  February
           1988.   Her entry clearance application had been refused because
           the requirements of Appendix FM and Appendix  FM-SE  as  to  her
           sponsor's finances had not been met.


      3.    Permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  as  sought  by  the
           Appellant was granted because it was  considered  arguable  that
           the judge had made findings on matters not previously raised  in
           the  notice  of  refusal  without  giving  the   Appellant   the
           opportunity to respond.


      4.    Directions were made by the  Upper  Tribunal  in  standard  form
           fixing an error of law hearing.  Notice under rule 24  dated  10
           May 2014 opposing the onwards appeal was  filed  and  served  on
           behalf of the Secretary of State as the Respondent.




      Submissions - error of law


      5.    Mrs Heidar for the Appellant relied on the grounds and the grant
           of permission to appeal.  In summary she submitted that RM (Kwok
           On Tong:  HC 395 para 320) India  [2006]  UKAIT  00039  applied.
           The judge had gone outside the  terms  of  the  refusal  notice,
           raised new issues and so should have adjourned  the  hearing  so
           that the Appellant could provide further  evidence.   The  judge
           had not had regard to all of the evidence, such as the sponsor's
           P60.  In any event the judge  should  have  allowed  the  appeal
           under Article 8 ECHR.  There were  insurmountable  obstacles  to
           the living of family life elsewhere because the  sponsor  was  a
           refugee.


      6.    Mr Avery for the Respondent relied on the rule 24  notice.   The
           judge had correctly found that the sponsor had  not  established
           that he met the income threshold.  There was  no  unfairness  as
           the judge had looked at the evidence presented.  The grounds  of
           onwards appeal were  simply  a  disagreement  with  the  judge's
           decision. Nor was there evidence of any compelling circumstances
           which would have justified allowing the appeal under  Article  8
           ECHR.


      7.    In  reply,  Mrs  Heidar  reiterated  that  the  Entry  Clearance
           Officer's decision had been unfair and the  appeal  hearing  had
           also been unfairly conducted.




      The no error of law finding


      8.    The tribunal indicated at the hearing that  it  found  that  the
           judge had not fallen into error of law.  The  tribunal  reserved
           its determination which now follows.


      9.    Contrary to the submissions advanced on the Appellant's  behalf,
           the refusal notice issued by the Entry Clearance  Officer  dated
           13 May 2013 made it plain that the sponsor's claimed  employment
           and salary were comprehensively disbelieved, in part as a result
           of enquiries made.  Details of the  checks  made  by  the  Entry
           Clearance Officer were provided, which showed that  4  telephone
           calls had been made  in  business  hours  over  2  days  to  the
           Appellant's employer, with no answer.  The Appellant's Notice of
           Appeal dated  3  June  2013  challenged  those  assertions,  and
           offered to provide further supporting evidence  of  the  claimed
           employment.  The issues which the tribunal had to determine were
           thus clear and the scene was set.  The  Appellant  knew  exactly
           the case she had to meet, which is why  the  sponsor's  employer
           was called as a witness.


      10.   The judge helpfully set out those issues at the beginning of his
           determination at [2] and  again  at  [15].   He  summarised  the
           evidence of the sponsor and the sponsor's employer, both of whom
           were cross-examined when the Respondent's case was put.   As  he
           recorded, the judge raised his own concerns with both  witnesses
           and gave the employer  the  opportunity  to  produce  additional
           material. At [15] onwards the judge discussed and  analysed  the
           evidence which had been presented  on  the  Appellant's  behalf,
           which included the post application  P60  which  the  judge  had
           noted at [4] and [6].  Form P60 is created by an  employer,  not
           by HMRC, so there was no reason for the judge to  have  assigned
           it special weight.  The judge explained in  detail  why  he  was
           unable to accept that the sponsor's earnings  were  as  claimed.
           The judge was fully entitled to assess and  weigh  the  evidence
           provided and to draw  conclusions  from  the  absence  of  basic
           information.  All of those conclusions were rational and open to
           him.


      11.   The tribunal finds that the judge conducted the  appeal  hearing
           fairly and that there was no error of law as  submitted  on  the
           Appellant's behalf. It  is  plain  that  the  experienced  judge
           approached the evidence with an open  mind  and  considered  the
           evidence as a whole.


      12.   The judge did not set out the text  of  Appendix  FM-SE  in  his
           determination and there was no requirement for him to have  done
           so.  The relevant law at the date of decision appears in  Phelan
           (8th edition) and is lengthy. (It has since been amended.)   The
           judge plainly had in mind the relevant  evidential  requirements
           which form a mandatory part of the Immigration Rules.


      13.   In the tribunal's view the grant of permission to appeal so  far
           as it suggested there was  unfairness  in  the  conduct  of  the
           hearing was erroneous.  The grant made no mention of the judge's
           approach to the Article 8 ECHR claim.   There was  no  error  of
           law there either.


      14.   The judge provided at [22] an accurate summary  of  the  correct
           approach to Article 8 ECHR in the light of Nagre [2013] EWHC 720
           (Admin), MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192, Gulshan (Article 8 -
           new rules -  correct  approach)  [2013]  UKUT  00640  (IAC)  and
           Shahzad (Art 8: legitimate aim) [2014] UKUT 00085  (IAC).   Only
           if there are arguably good grounds for granting leave outside of
           the Immigration Rules, i.e., in the discretion of the  Secretary
           of State, is it necessary for the First-tier Tribunal to  go  on
           to consider  whether  there  are  compelling  circumstances  not
           sufficiently recognised under them.  Mrs Heidar's submission  to
           the contrary is not supported by current authority.  It was thus
           open to the judge to find at [23] that the Appellant could  make
           a  fresh  entry  clearance  application   compliant   with   the
           Immigration Rules if she wished.


      15 .  In conclusion, the tribunal finds that no error of law was shown
           in the determination, which accordingly stands unchanged.
      DECISION


      The making of the previous decision did not involve the making  of  an
error on  a  point  of  law.   It  stands  unchanged.   The  appeal  remains
dismissed.

      Signed                                 Dated


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell


      TO THE RESPONDENT
      FEE AWARD


      The appeal was dismissed and so there can be no fee award


      Signed                                  Dated


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
