
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/12265/2014
                                                OA/12270/2014, OA/12276/2014
                                                OA/12277/2014, OA/12282/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 20 January 2016                   |On 8 February 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES


                                   Between

                           ADETOUN ALIMAT ADENUBI
                                     DOA
                                     DAA
                                     HTA
                                     HKA
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Uwe-Ezeoke (for Waterdenes Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy (Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS



 1. This is the appeal of Adetoun Alimat Adenubi and her  named  dependents
    identified above against the decisions to refuse their applications for
    entry clearance to join the Sponsor, who is respectively  their  spouse
    and parent.  The  appeals  having  been  dismissed  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, they now appeal to the Upper Tribunal with permission

 2. The First Appellant (though for convenience I  shall  henceforth  style
    her simply as "the Appellant") explained in her witness statement  that
    she had  met  the  Sponsor  in  October  2004  and  their  relationship
    developed from there. At that time he was married with three  children,
    to his first wife, but she was nevertheless impressed by  his  attitude
    to her daughter DOA, then an infant, that  she  contemplated  having  a
    relationship with him. She visited him  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  a
    number of occasions. In June 2005 he visited her in  Nigeria  and  they
    went through a traditional marriage ceremony on 2 June 2005.

 3. His first civil  marriage  in  the  United  Kingdom  having  ended,  he
    subsequently married his second wife and sponsored  her  entry  as  his
    spouse.  The  Appellant  kept  up  a  relationship   throughout   these
    marriages, visiting  him  in  April  2005,  October  2005  (when  their
    daughter DAA was conceived: she was subsequently born 8  August  2006),
    March 2007, June 2008, February 2009,  November  2009,  June  2011  and
    April 2012. The Sponsor visited her in Nigeria  and  during  his  stay,
    their twins HTA and HKA were conceived  in  December  2011;  they  were
    subsequently born 24 August 2012. Their relationship could thus be seen
    as having endured ever since they first met  and  he  had  treated  her
    daughter DOA as his own: she even bore his name as her own  father  was
    not involved in her life.

 4. She had been awarded  a  BA  (Hons)  in  Business  (Finance)  from  the
    University of Wales in January 2012, and  had  submitted  the  original
    certificate with her entry clearance application, which was  eventually
    returned  to  her  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer   following   her
    application's refusal.

 5. There was evidence of social media exchanges between them by way of  an
    August 2004 extract from a Yahoo Account in which the Sponsor describes
    the Appellant as "princess" and enquires after the well-being  of  DOA,
    in messages that include various expressions of affection and intimacy.
    A document sworn at the Lagos Magistrates Court recorded DOA taking the
    [Sponsor]'s surname as from April 2011.

 6. The  First-tier  Tribunal  directed  itself  that  the  claims  of  the
    dependent children would necessarily fail if their mother's appeal  was
    dismissed as there was no viable independent case for  their  admission
    (there  being  no  serious  reasons  for   thinking   their   exclusion
    undesirable and no suggestion that the Sponsor had sole  responsibility
    for them). The principal  issue  that  concerned  it  was  whether  the
    relationship was a subsisting one. In this respect, the history of  the
    relationship caused concern: the Appellant had apparently entered  into
    a traditional marriage with the [Sponsor] only  days  after  his  civil
    marriage to the wife that he then sponsored to come  to  this  country.
    Although it was said that that marriage had broken down quickly it took
    nine years for it to be finally dissolved; and  given  the  failure  of
    that other relationship, then given the  fact  they  had  had  children
    together, it was to be expected that they  would  have  lived  together
    much sooner.

 7. There was no evidence beyond their passport stamps that they enjoyed  a
    life together, and the photographs provided were uncertain as to  their
    date: the 200 or  so  that  she  claimed  to  have  provided  with  the
    application had not been put forward on appeal. The  telephone  records
    that had been produced were for the period running up  to  the  hearing
    rather than that before the application. Witnesses who might have  been
    called, such as the Appellant's uncle in the United  Kingdom  or  other
    friends and relatives, had not been produced. There was  in  general  a
    lack of photographs, emails and other social media contact,  and  other
    sources of potentially corroborative material,  for  example  from  the
    childrens' school or their respective churches, had  not  been  brought
    forward.

 8. As to the  Appellant's  English  language  capability,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was not satisfied that the  original  degree  certificate  had
    been before the Entry Clearance Officer.

 9. Permission to appeal was sought and was granted on 27 November 2015  on
    the grounds, as to English language proficiency,  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had apparently erred as to the availability of the evidence as
    to the Appellant's  (English-taught)  degree  from  the  University  of
    Wales; and as to the question of genuine and  subsisting  relationship,
    it was unclear why little weight had been attached to a volume of email
    messages between the spouses that potentially constituted  evidence  of
    the relationship's subsistence.

10. Before me Mr Uwe-Ezeoke emphasised the extent of the evidence which had
    been before  the  First-tier  Tribunal:  there  had  been  emails,  for
    example, and the Tribunal failed to take account of the large number of
    photographs that had been  provided  with  the  application.  Mr  Duffy
    contended that the Tribunal  below  had  not  necessarily  intended  to
    suggest that there was no such material before it: merely  that,  given
    the length of the relationship, there was a lack of  emails  and  other
    material. Its reasoning would have been no different had  it  expressly
    noted that there were some emails before it.

  Findings and reasons

11. Appendix FM requires at E-ECP.2.6 that "The  relationship  between  the
    applicant and their partner must be genuine  and  subsisting."  Similar
    language was construed in relation to earlier Immigration Rules  in  GA
    ("Subsisting" marriage) Ghana [2006] UKAIT 00046,  where  the  Tribunal
    stated that "the requirement ... that a marriage be 'subsisting' is not
    limited to considering whether there has been a  valid  marriage  which
    formally continues. The word requires  an  assessment  of  the  current
    relationship between the parties and a decision as to  whether  in  the
    broadest  sense  it  comprises  a  marriage   properly   described   as
    'subsisting'."

12.  It  is  quite  clear  that  the  Appellant  and  Sponsor  have  had  a
    relationship of some kind for a very significant period. Their evidence
    by way of witness statements  was  to  just  such  effect.  It  is  not
    disputed that they have had children together in 2006 and  2012.  There
    was some evidence of their ongoing contact by way of photographs before
    the First-tier Tribunal, though it would seem that neither party to the
    appeal provided the Tribunal with those that accompanied  the  original
    application. There were at least some emails  that  expressed  intimacy
    and mutual devotion. It seems to me that, in the light of the  material
    that was before the First-tier Tribunal, it was wrong  to  dismiss  the
    appeal essentially  for  want  of  corroboration,  without  making  the
    clearest of findings on the oral and witness statement  evidence  which
    itself gave a detailed account of the development and maintenance of an
    unconventional but not necessarily implausible relationship.

13. As was pointed out in the grounds of appeal, the guidance to Appellants
    to the First-tier Tribunal expressly counsels against the provision  of
    original documents by post. So it was unsurprising  that  the  original
    certificate was produced only at the hearing. The original  certificate
    had been given to the Entry Clearance Officer, as was asserted  in  the
    original grounds that launched the appeal and again in the  Appellant's
    witness statement. Accordingly the First-tier Tribunal made an error of
    fact of sufficient severity, given the Appellant had done all that  was
    reasonably possible to correctly appraise her of the true situation, to
    amount to an error of law.

14. For these reasons the appeal requires re-hearing. As there is no  solid
    platform of facts upon which the Upper  Tribunal  might  itself  build,
    remittal to the First-tier Tribunal is appropriate.

Decision

The appeal is remitted for hearing afresh in the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed      Date 20 January 2016

[pic]
Judge Symes
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes

