
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/12746/2012
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 19 June 2013                               |On 26 June 2013              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN

                                   Between

                               SAMAIRA SHAHEEN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISLAMABAD

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Aslam, Counsel, instructed by UK Immigration
Legal    Services
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, born  on  10
    August 1989 against the decision of the Respondent dated 6 June 2012 to
    refuse to the Appellant the grant of an entry clearance with a view  to
    settlement as the spouse or civil  partner  of  a  person  present  and
    settled in the United Kingdom,  the  relevant  Immigration  Rule  being
    paragraph 281(i) (a) (ii) of HC 395 (as amended).

2.   This was not the first  time  that  the  Appellant  had  made  such  an
    application for entry clearance in  that  an  earlier  application  was
    refused by the Respondent on 14 June 2011 on the basis that  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer (ECO) was not satisfied that the  Appellant  and  her
    Sponsor would be able to maintain themselves without recourse to public
    funds in accordance with the requirements of paragraph  281(v)  of  the
    Rules.

3.   In support of that particular application, the  Appellant  submitted  a
    certificate from the  College  of  Excellence  confirming  her  English
    language ability and it was apparent by the nature of the refusal  that
    the Appellant's ability to meet the required English language level was
    considered to have been met not least because the certificate  provided
    with that application, was  at  that  time,  from  an  acceptable  test
    provider.

4.   Mindful of the basis of the  refusal  of  that  first  entry  clearance
    application, the Appellant made a  fresh  application  in  relation  to
    which she again submitted the same  certificate  from  the  College  of
    Excellence, when unbeknown to her, the College had  been  removed  from
    the UKBA approved list on 17 July 2011 and was no longer acceptable for
    the purpose of UK settlement applications from that date.

5.   In consequence, the Appellant's fresh application for  entry  clearance
    was refused and in the notice of decision, the Entry Clearance  Officer
    explained that the English language certificate that the Appellant  had
    provided, was, on this occasion, not acceptable and as a result and for
    that reason alone, he was not satisfied  that  the  Appellant  met  the
    requirements of paragraph 281(i) (a) (ii) that states that:

         "(ii)    the applicant provides an original English  language  test
             certificate in speaking and listening from an English language
             test provider approved by the Secretary  of  State  for  these
             purposes, which clearly shows the  applicant's  name  and  the
             qualification obtained (which must meet or exceed level A1  of
             the Common European Framework of Reference)".


    There are exceptions to those requirements but none of  them  met  this
    Appellant's particular circumstances.


6.   The Appellant's appeal against that decision was heard at Hatton  Cross
    on  5  March  2013  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Mace  and  was
    dismissed.  In  giving  her  reasons  for  dismissing  the  Appellant's
    immigration appeal and indeed her appeal on human rights  grounds,  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge properly recognised that  the  issue  in  the
    case was "a narrow one, whether the Appellant met the English  language
    requirement of the Rules". It was observed that no issue had been taken
    with the remaining requirements. Further that  the  Appellant  accepted
    that she had submitted a certificate from  the  College  of  Excellence
    confirming her English language ability  that  she  had  also  used  in
    support of her  earlier  application  which  had  been  refused.   That
    application was refused on grounds for a reason other than her language
    skills.  As the Judge put it "In other words, her ability to  meet  the
    required English language level was found to be met at that time.   The
    certificate provided  was,  at  that  time,  from  an  acceptable  test
    provider".

7.   The Judge recognised that the Appellant had not been  contacted  before
    her application was refused and  informed  that  the  test  certificate
    submitted was from a provider no longer on the list.

 8.    The Judge recorded that submissions were made to her in  relation  to
    the policy of evidential flexibility. It  was  her  understanding  that
    this policy only related to applications under the Points-Based  System
    of which the present application was not one.  The Judge  continued  at
    paragraph 14 of her determination:

         "I consider that the onus is  upon  the  Appellant  to  ensure  the
         document submitted in support of  a  later  application  are  still
         valid.  That would only have required the Appellant to  check  that
         the test provider was still on the approved list.  She  would  have
         then been able to undertake the test with a different provider,  as
         indeed she did do, and submit that with her application".


9.   The Judge noted that the Appellant had now submitted a further  English
    language test certificate  from  a  currently  approved  provider  that
    showed an acceptable score, but pointed out that she was only  entitled
    to take account of evidence relating to circumstances  appertaining  at
    the date of the decision when the Appellant had  not  provided  such  a
    test certificate.


10.  Whilst the Judge understood that no grounds of appeal  were  raised  in
    relation to the Appellant's human rights in terms of Article 8 and  her
    family and private life, the First-tier Judge nonetheless (and  as  she
    saw it for the sake completeness) considered the Appellant's appeal  in
    terms of Article 8 of the ECHR.  In that regard and at paragraph 17 she
    had this to say:

         "In relation to her family life that has existed since her marriage
         with her in one country and her spouse  in  another  ..  there  was
         nothing before me to indicate any time  they  have  spent  together
         since the marriage.  The decision will keep them apart  until  such
         time as a further application is made but that simply maintains the
         situation as it is at present.  Even if the right to a family  life
         is engaged in these circumstances, the Sponsor is in employment and
         there was nothing before me to indicate that he would be unable  to
         visit the Appellant in the meantime.  I am not satisfied  that  any
         interference with the Appellant and the Sponsor's  family  life  is
         disproportionate".


  11. The Appellant successfully sought permission  to  appeal  the  Judge's
      decision and in granting  permission  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Zucker recognised that the sole issue in the  case  was  whether
      the language requirement had been met.  It was noted that the  grounds
      in support of the application argued that the Appellant had obtained a
      certificate that met the requirements of the Rules from a college that
      was at the  time  when  the  certificate  was  obtained,  an  approved
      provider even though subsequently the provider was  removed  from  the
      list.  It was submitted  that  as  such  it  did  not  invalidate  the
      certificate and therefore the Judge had erred in law.  The  Designated
      Judge considered that the point was arguable.


  12. Thus the appeal came before me on 19 June 2013, when my first task was
      to decide whether the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      disclosed an error on  a  point  of  law,  such  that  it  might  have
      materially affected the outcome of the appeal.



The Parties' Submissions

13.  It was submitted by Mr Aslam  that  the  Judge  erred  in  inadequately
    considering the Appellant's Article 8  appeal  as  this  was  an  issue
    raised in the grounds of appeal. I  have  noted  from  the  grounds  in
    support of the application for permission to appeal, that the challenge
    raised to the Judge's consideration of the appeal under Article 8,  was
    that the Appellant had passed a new  English  language  assessment  and
    obtained a TOEIC  certificate  on  18  July  2012  after  the  date  of
    decision, and that in accordance with the principles of  fairness,  the
    First-tier Judge should have allowed the appeal under Article 8.

14.  Mr Aslam relied on the  grounds,  in  particular  that  the  First-tier
    Judge had misdirected herself as to the law.   It  was  said  that  the
    primary submission at the hearing before the First-tier Judge that also
    appeared in the grounds of appeal,  was  that  the  Appellant  met  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules in that  paragraph  281(i)(a)(ii)
    simply required the Appellant to provide an original  English  language
    test certificate in speaking and listening  from  an  English  language
    test provider approved by the Secretary of State for these purposes and
    that the Appellant had obtained such a certificate from the College  of
    Excellence on 25 March 2011 when that college was on the UKBA  approved
    list of providers.  It was submitted that  the  subsequent  removal  of
    this provider from the UKBA list on 17 July 2011  did  not  affect  the
    validity of the certificate as it was issued prior to that date.

15.  It was submitted by Mr Aslam that the requirement did not  specifically
    refer to the date of decision and that as such this omission reinforced
    his argument that the certificate that had originally been submitted by
    the Appellant could still be regarded as  valid  for  the  purposes  of
    compliance with the Rules.

16.  Ms Isherwood firmly disagreed.  She pointed to the  fact  that  it  has
    always been the case that the determinative date in cases of this  sort
    is the date of decision and that at that  date  the  Appellant  clearly
    failed to comply  with  the  requirements  of  the  relevant  Rule.  It
    followed that the First-tier Tribunal Judge was correct as a matter  of
    law, when at paragraph 16 of her determination, she stated that at  the
    date of  the  decision  the  Appellant  had  simply  not  provided  the
    appropriate test certificate  and  that  the  fact  that  she  had  now
    obtained it post-decision was not a matter that  the  First-tier  Judge
    was able to take into account.

17.  I reserved my determination.

Assessment

18.  I appreciate that from the Appellant's point of view, the  decision  of
    the First-tier Judge in dismissing her appeal is in the  circumstances,
    infuriating in the extreme.  The only problem  in  her  case,  properly
    identified by the First-tier Judge in her determination  as  "a  narrow
    one" is that the Appellant failed to  produce  a  certificate  from  an
    approved provider  because  unbeknown  to  her,  the  provider  of  the
    certificate that she had presented in support of her  application  was,
    at the relevant time, no longer approved.

19.  There is no reason to doubt the  Appellant's  sincerity  when  she  did
    this and the First-tier Judge clearly did not do so.   The  Appellant's
    good faith is properly  illustrated  by  her  obtaining  thereafter  an
    English language test certificate from an approved provider.

20.  I find that the problem for the Appellant is that she did  not  satisfy
    the clear and unambiguous requirement of the Rules  and  I  reject  the
    suggestion  that  the  certificate  apparently  properly  submitted  in
    support of an earlier application comes within the requirements of  the
    Rules.  That  clearly   cannot   be   right,   because   any   contrary
    interpretation would involve recognising the validity of a  certificate
    issued by a college that was no longer approved.

  21. However and in an effort to  act  with  scrupulous  fairness  to  both
    parties, I had at the hearing, drawn to their attention the decision of
    the Upper Tribunal in Rodriguez (Flexibility Policy) [2013] UKUT  00042
    (IAC). My first  observation  with  regard  to  the  headnote  to  that
    decision, was  that  the  First-tier  Judge  at  paragraph  14  of  her
    determination was clearly wrong in her understanding  that  the  policy
    related solely to applications under the Points-Based System, not least
    because the second paragraph of  the  headnote  refers  to  "all  other
    applications, to which the policy letter does not apply".

22.  It was on that basis that Mr Aslam further submitted,  that  there  had
    been a failure on the part of the Entry Clearance Officer, to be  aware
    of  and  give  full  effect  to  the  UKBA   caseworker's   "Evidential
    Flexibility" policy document that required inter alia,  that  there  be
    due appreciation of  the  discretionary  powers  enshrined  within  the
    policy to request further information  from  applicants,  in  any  case
    where relevant and by implication, before a final decision was made  on
    the application.   This  was  firmly  disputed  by  Ms  Isherwood,  who
    submitted that even if the decision in Rodriguez demonstrated that  the
    policy extended beyond Points-Based System cases, it  was  confined  to
    UKBA caseworkers whom, as held in Rodriguez, were under  a  public  law
    duty to give effect to their own  policy  in  all  cases  to  which  it
    applied. It followed that the requirements of  the  flexibility  policy
    did not extend to out of country entry clearance applications.

23.   I  have  carefully  considered  this  aspect  of  the  matter  and  on
    reflection I find that the decision in Rodriguez does  not  assist  me,
    because the Entry Clearance Officer had in any  event,  acted  entirely
    rationally and fairly on the material the Appellant chose to produce in
    support of her application.  It  was  not  the  ECO's  fault  that  the
    Appellant did not appreciate that the college was no  longer  approved.
    Indeed  this  was  recognised  by  the  First-tier  Judge  who  in  her
    determination at  paragraph  14,  pointed  out  that  it  was  for  the
    Appellant to check that the test provider on the submitted certificate,
    was still on the approved list and that had she made  that  check  "she
    would have then been able  to  undertake  the  test  with  a  different
    provider  as  indeed  she  (later)  did,  and  submit  that  with   her
    application".

24.  In those circumstances, this is very  far  removed  from  the  paradigm
    example of the Flexibility Rule of one document being  missing  from  a
    sequence of documents by reason of administrative error.

25.  This takes me to a consideration of the further submission on the  part
    of Mr Aslam, that as a matter of fairness, the First-tier Judge  should
    have allowed the appeal under Article 8.  Such a  submission  fails  to
    appreciate  that  the  establishment   of   an   administrative   error
    necessarily underpins the guidance given by the Tribunal in cases  such
    as Patel  and  Thakur  and  it  is  apparent  that  on  the  particular
    circumstances of this appeal, it does not apply here.

26.  I have further concluded  that  this  is  not  a  case  where  refusing
    admission  of  entry  clearance  to   the   Appellant   constitutes   a
    disproportionate interference with her human rights.   Firstly  I  find
    that the First-tier Judge (whilst under albeit the mistaken  impression
    that Article 8  had  not  been  pleaded  in  the  grounds)  nonetheless
    considered this aspect of the appeal and I  have  to  say  that  on  my
    consideration of the particular circumstances of the Appellant  in  the
    present appeal, that even if the First-tier Judge had failed to do  so,
    it would not have established a material difference to the outcome.

27.  The Secretary of State is perfectly entitled to prescribe strict  Rules
    which are an alternative to a decision maker subjectively deciding if a
    person's command of  the  English  language  is  sufficiently  good  to
    satisfy less prescriptive arguments.

28.  Following the grant of permission to appeal, I note that the  Secretary
    of State by letter of 29 May 2013 provided  a  Rule  24  response.   In
    summary it was contended that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  directed
    herself appropriately.  The Rules were clear and unambiguous as to  the
    requirements of the English language test and it fell on the  Appellant
    to demonstrate that she met the requirements of  the  Rules.   I  would
    agree with  those  submissions  for  the  reasons  that  I  have  above
    identified.

29.  The  Rule  24  response  continued  that  given  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant that she now met the requirements of the Rule the  Respondent
    questioned "the purpose of the appeal given that  a  fresh  application
    would appear, on the facts within the determination, to be most  likely
    to be successful".

30.   Although,  for  the  above  reasons,  I  have   concluded   that   the
    determination of the First-tier Judge does not disclose an error  on  a
    point of law, this should not preclude the Appellant if she so chooses,
    from making a fresh entry  clearance  application,  supported  by  what
    would appear to be an English language test certificate  issued  by  an
    approved test provider.

31.  A submission in terms of the principles of fairness was pleaded in  the
    grounds in the alternative, but I find that it cannot be said that  the
    Respondent acted unfairly.  Indeed, in  Patel  (Revocation  of  Sponsor
    licence - fairness) [2011] UKUT  00211  (IAC)  it  was  held  that  the
    Respondent had acted unfairly when she revoked a college's status after
    the application had been made (at a time when it was still an  approved
    Sponsor) but failed to inform the applicant  of  the  revocation.   She
    also failed to give him an opportunity to vary the application. That is
    not the case here.  The requirements had changed and  that  change  was
    advertised before the Appellant made her current application for  entry
    clearance.  The subsequent decision of the Upper Tribunal in Contractor
    (CAS - Tier 4) [2012] UKUT 00168 (IAC) headnote 1 states:

         "1.   UKBA's  announcement  in  March  2011  of  changes   to   the
             Immigration Rules which came into force on 21 April 2011 means
             that in general those  who  stood  to  be  affected  by  those
             changes had adequate time to take appropriate action and hence
             that in general no Patel fairness issues arise".


32.  The difficulty for the Appellant in the present case is  that  she  did
    have time to take appropriate action, but failed to check  whether  the
    test certificate she submitted with her  fresh  application  was  still
    issued by an approved provider.  Her failure to carry  out  that  check
    was nobody's fault but her own.  Indeed as the Entry Clearance  Officer
    pointed out in the Notice of Immigration Decision the  removal  of  the
    College of Excellence from the UKBA approved list, was advertised on 17
    July 2011 and that English Language Certificates from that date were no
    longer acceptable for the purpose of UK settlement applications.

 33.   Mindful of the guidance of the Court of Appeal  in  R  (Iran)  [2005]
    EWCA Civ 982, I find  that  it  cannot  be  said  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal   Judge's   findings   were   irrational   and/or   Wednesbury
    unreasonable such as to amount to perversity.  It cannot be  said  that
    they were inadequate.  This is not a case where the First-tier  Judge's
    reasoning was such that the  Tribunal  was  unable  to  understand  the
    thought processes that she employed in reaching her decision.


34.  I find the Judge properly identified and recorded the matters that  she
    considered to be critical to her decision on the material issues raised
    before her in this appeal.  The findings that  she  made  were  clearly
    open to her on the evidence and thus sustainable in law.

Decision

35.  The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error  on
    a point of law and I order that it shall stand.

Signed                                  Date 24 June 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein
