
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA123092014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd May 2017                       |On 17th May 2017                     |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Mr Minghui Jia
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Lemer, instructed by Charles Russell Speechlys
                    LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State I shall  refer  to
    the parties as in the First-tier Tribunal.  The Appellant is a  citizen
    of China born on 17th November 1990.  His appeal against the refusal of
    leave to enter under  paragraph  321A  of  the  Immigration  Rules  was
    allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge R G Walters in  a  decision  dated
    10th July 2016.

2.   Permission to appeal was sought on the grounds that  the  judge  failed
    to consider the documents in the Respondent's bundle, in particular the
    witness statements of Rebecca Collings and Peter  Millington,  the  ETS
    record of invalidity specific to  the  Appellant  and  the  Appellant's
    interview record. Had the judge considered  these  documents  he  would
    have found, in line with SM and Qadir v Secretary of State for the Home
    Department (ETS - Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT 00229  (IAC),
    that the Secretary of  State  had  discharged  the  initial  evidential
    burden. The judge would then have to consider whether the Appellant had
    rebutted the allegation.  However, the judge heard no evidence from the
    Appellant as to how he took the test or any  details  relating  to  the
    test. The Appellant struggled to remember where he took the test in his
    port interview. All the judge did was to pick up on a passing reference
    from the Home Office file that the Appellant spoke perfect  English  at
    port some two years after the test in question. This  point,  following
    SM and Qadir, was immaterial.

3.   Permission to appeal was initially  refused  by  Designated  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge McCarthy for the reasons given in his decision dated 2nd
    February 2016. The application made to the Upper Tribunal  was  on  the
    ground that Judge McCarthy refused permission on a misunderstanding  of
    the Court of Appeal's judgment in SM and  Qadir  which  reinforced  the
    conclusions of the Upper Tribunal. The judge failed to appreciate  that
    the Secretary of State had satisfied the evidential burden and  it  was
    then for the Tribunal to consider the credibility of the Appellant.

4.   Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?  on  8th
    March 2017 on the grounds that it  was  arguable  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge failed to give adequate reasons for why  he  found  that
    the Respondent had failed to discharge the evidential burden of proving
    that the Appellant had used deception. The very brief findings of  fact
    appeared to rely on the Appellant's knowledge of English  but  arguably
    that in itself did not establish that the Appellant did not use a proxy
    test taker and the judge failed entirely to engage with the  fact  that
    the test was found to be invalid.


Submissions

5.   Ms Isherwood relied on the grounds and submitted  that  the  judge  had
    failed to properly consider the evidence presented by the Secretary  of
    State including the Appellant's interviews at port. The judge  did  not
    assess this evidence in his findings and conclusions. The fact that the
    Appellant spoke perfect English did not mean he had not used  deception
    in obtaining his English language certificate in 2012. Each case had to
    be assessed on its facts and the judge had failed to  demonstrate  that
    he had assessed the Respondent's position.


6.   The judge failed to identify the actual evidence upon which he  relied.
    The judge had erred in law because the  Respondent's  generic  evidence
    met the evidential burden (SM and Qadir).  It  was  therefore  for  the
    Appellant to provide an explanation. The decision failed to follow that
    approach. There was no proper assessment of the  Secretary  of  State's
    evidence and no proper assessment of the approach set  out  in  SM  and
    Qadir.

7.   Ms Isherwood submitted that it was not clear from the decision  whether
    the Respondent  had  discharged  the  evidential  burden  and  why  the
    Appellant had given a credible explanation.  The judge  had  failed  to
    apply SM and  Qadir  and  this  amounted  to  an  error  of  law.   The
    Appellant's current English language ability was not relevant.

8.   Mr Lemer relied  on  his  skeleton  argument  and  submitted  that  the
    judge's conclusion at paragraph 25, that  he  did  not  find  that  the
    Respondent  had  satisfactorily  proved  that  the  Appellant's   TOEIC
    certificate was fraudulently obtained, was one which was  open  to  the
    judge on the evidence before him. It was not material  that  the  judge
    failed to properly demonstrate  the  shift  in  the  evidential  burden
    because there was evidence before him to show that  the  Appellant  had
    satisfied the evidential burden.

9.   Further, looking at the evidence as a whole, the Respondent had  failed
    to discharge the legal burden of showing that the  Appellant  had  used
    deception.  The Respondent argued that even though the Appellant  spoke
    perfect English he may have bribed staff at the centre  where  he  took
    his English language test.  The  judge  specifically  dealt  with  that
    submission and rejected it at paragraph 23.

10.  The Respondent accepted that the Appellant  spoke  perfect  English  in
    2012 and in 2014. Therefore, it was open to the  judge  to  reject  the
    Respondent's case that notwithstanding his English language ability the
    Appellant had used deception in his English language test.   The  legal
    burden  remained  with  the  Respondent  throughout  and  the   judge's
    conclusion that the Respondent had not discharged the  burden  was  one
    which was open to the judge on the evidence before him.


Discussion and Conclusions

11.  The judge's findings and reasons are  brief.  However,  there  is  just
    enough in the decision  to  demonstrate  that  the  judge  adopted  the
    correct approach set out in SM and Qadir. He initially refers to SM and
    Qadir and it appears that he accepts that  the  evidential  burden  has
    been satisfied because he then goes  on  to  consider  the  Appellant's
    position and the explanation provided. It is unfortunate that the judge
    only referred to  the  Appellant's  English  language  ability  in  his
    reasoning.   However,  it  is  clear  that  the  judge   rejected   the
    Respondent's submission  that,  notwithstanding  his  English  language
    ability, the Appellant had used deception.

12.  The judge was unable to hear oral evidence from the  Appellant  because
    he had returned to China, his leave having  been  cancelled.   However,
    the judge relied on the submissions made by  both  representatives  and
    took into account the Appellant's  first  and  second  bundle  and  the
    Respondent's first and second bundle.  In the Appellant's bundle, there
    was a statement from the Appellant in  which  he  denied  cheating  and
    described the ETS TOEIC test, which he took in Barking on  22nd  August
    2012.  There  was  evidence  before  the  judge  which  supported   his
    conclusion that the Respondent had failed to satisfy the legal  burden,
    even though he did not specifically refer to  the  explanation  in  the
    Appellant's statement.

13.  The description given by the Appellant in taking the test coupled  with
    his English language ability not only at his port  interview  in  2014,
    but which was accepted by the Respondent to have been evident  in  2012
    when he took the English language  test,  was  sufficient  evidence  to
    support the judge's finding that the Respondent  had  failed  to  prove
    that the Appellant had fraudulently obtained his English language  test
    certificate.

14.  The judge could have set out the shifting burden and  demonstrated  the
    approach in SM and Qadir more clearly, but it  was  apparent  from  his
    brief findings that he did adopt that approach and was  well  aware  of
    the burden of proof.

15.  Any lack of reasoning did not amount to an error of law  in  this  case
    because the evidence before the judge supported his conclusion that the
    Respondent had failed to prove  deception.  Accordingly,  I  find  that
    there was no material error of law in the judge's decision  dated  10th
    July 2016 and I dismiss the Respondent's appeal.


Notice of Decision

The Respondent's appeal is dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.


              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 15th May 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Frances

