

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/12561/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Centre City Tower    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 14th April 2016                       |On 27th April 2016                |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                                    [P N]

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Vokes, counsel, instructed by Vesey solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. In a decision promulgated on 6th July 2015, First-tier Tribunal  Judge
      Pirotta dismissed the appellant's appeal against the decision  of  the
      Entry Clearance Officer dated 26th September 2014 refusing  him  leave
      to enter the UK. His mother has discretionary leave to remain  in  the
      UK and has two children in the UK, one of whom is  a  British  Citizen
      and the other has discretionary leave to remain for the same period as
      her - until August 2016.


   2. The decision by Judge Pirotta can at best be  described  as  confused.
      She makes no  clear  finding  as  regards  any  applicability  of  the
      Immigration Rules, Mr Vokes agreed that the appellant  does  not  meet
      the requirements of the Rules not least because his  mother  has  only
      discretionary leave to remain in the UK and was not granted  leave  to
      remain with a view to settlement. Although plainly the ability to meet
      elements of the Immigration Rules may be relevant to the assessment of
      the proportionality of the Article 8 decision, this decision  purports
      to address issues of sole responsibility, lapses into consideration of
      what  appear  to  be  issues  of  whether  there  are  compelling  and
      compassionate circumstances such that this 7 year old child should  be
      permitted to come to the UK and fails to make any coherent findings on
      the best interests of the child or the right  to  respect  for  family
      life not only of the child  but  also  the  child's  mother  and  half
      siblings.  There  is  no  consideration  of   established   case   law
      principles.

   3. Mr Diwyncz quite properly conceded that this  decision  simply  cannot
      stand.

          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the  decision  and  remit  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal for rehearing.

     Consequential Directions


    The matter to be remitted to Birmingham IAC First-tier Tribunal  to  be
    heard by a judge other than Judge Pirotta.


    A Vietnamese interpreter required.


    Time estimate 2 hours.


    When listing please liaise with Counsel's clerk - No 8 Chambers


[pic]
                                    Date 14th April 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
