
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/12673/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 9 September 2014                             |On 18 September 2014       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between


                  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                        mr Martin Alpha Lamin Bangura
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms. Lee Ong, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    No appearance.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. No application for anonymity has been made  in  these  proceedings  and
    there is no reason why such an order should be made.

 2. This is a respondent appeal but I shall henceforth refer to the parties
    in the original terms detailed in the determination  of  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Majid following a hearing at  Taylor  House  on  25
    April 2014 resulting in a determination promulgated on 30 April 2014.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of  Sierra  Leone  who  appealed  against  a
    decision of the respondent on 25 April 2014 refusing him leave to enter
    the United Kingdom under the Immigration Rules  HC  395  (as  amended).
    Albeit that the determination does  not  confirm  it,  the  appeal  was
    against a decision under paragraph 297 of the Rules.

 4. Judge Majid's determination allowed the appellant's  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules and under the ECHR.

 5. The respondent was granted permission to appeal by Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Perry.  His reason for so doing are as follows:-

         "1.  The respondent seeks permission to appeal, in time  against  a
             decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Majid)  who,  in  a
             determination promulgated on  30th  April  2014,  allowed  the
             appeal  against  her  refusal   to   grant   the   appellant's
             application for entry clearance as  a  dependent  child  of  a
             person who is settled in the United Kingdom.

         2.   The Tribunal concluded its determination with the words 'I  am
             persuaded  that  the  appellant  merits  the  benefit  of  the
             Immigration  Rules  HC  395  (as  amended)  as  well  as   the
             provisions of the ECHR'.  It is  arguable,  as  the  applicant
             contends, that despite extensive  citation  of  case  law  the
             Tribunal did not explain how or  why  the  appellant  met  the
             requirements of the Immigration Rules.  It is further arguable
             that the  Tribunal  failed  to  explain  why  the  appellant's
             circumstances   were   insufficiently   recognised   by    the
             Immigration Rules (so as to merit a  grant  of  leave  outside
             those Rules) and how in any event such a proposition could  be
             reconciled  with  the  Tribunal's  earlier  finding  that  the
             appellant's circumstances  fell  within  the  compass  of  the
             Rules."

 6. Ms. Lee Ong originally thought that today's hearing was a  resumed  one
    following a decision that a material error existed within Judge Majid's
    determination.  The Tribunal's file does not corroborate that position.
     In fact it shows that the  appeal  was  adjourned  by  reason  of  the
    sponsor being on holiday on the date of  first  listing  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Thus the appeal came before me today.  Accordingly I allowed
    Ms. Lee Ong some time to consider her position and submissions.

 7. She went on to rely on the written grounds which sought  permission  to
    appeal and contended that there is a clear error of law in the  judge's
    determination, including the non-referral to any  specific  Immigration
    Rule, a failure to consider relevant case law  on  sole  responsibility
    and the resulting application of that case law to the  facts  found  in
    the instant appeal.

 8. The sponsor was unrepresented.  He explained that he could  not  afford
    to be represented  at  today's  hearing.   I  assured  him  that  as  a
    consequence he would not be prejudiced and that I would assist  him  in
    dealing with the issues that fell to be considered at today's  hearing.
    I carefully explained to him what those issues are  and  the  procedure
    that had brought about today's hearing.  He was fully aware of how  the
    appeal had come to be allowed, but felt  that  as  the  respondent  was
    represented at the First-tier Tribunal hearing, any issue that she  now
    raised ought to have been dealt with at that stage.

 9. The judge's determination  runs  to  31  paragraphs  and  eight  pages.
    However, there are few paragraphs which contain  material  specific  to
    this particular appellant.  The balance of the determination  comprises
    of observations on issues that need to be considered in an appeal along
    with case law relating to children and Article 8.  There is  no  citing
    of any case law in relation to the issue of sole responsibility.  It is
    not at all clear how this appeal came to be allowed  under  either  the
    Immigration Rules or the ECHR.  There is an inadequate consideration of
    the material aspects of the relevant  Immigration  Rule  along  with  a
    failure to explain why the appeal  should  also  be  allowed  on  human
    rights grounds.

10. As is asserted the judge has failed to make clear in the  determination
    what provision of the Immigration Rules the appellant is able to  meet,
    and in granting leave outside of those Rules the judge has erred in law
    by failing to provide reasons as to why the  appellant's  circumstances
    were not "sufficiently recognised" by the  Rules.   There  is  here  an
    inadequacy of reasoning as  found  by  Judge  Kelly  in  the  grant  of
    permission.   I  find  the  judge  has   materially   erred   and   the
    determination is therefore set aside in its  entirety  and  the  appeal
    will proceed to a de novo hearing.

11. In deciding whether  to  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal under Section 12 of the Tribunal's Court Enforcement Act 2007,
    I can dispose of the appeal in one of two ways, either by remitting the
    case to the First-tier Tribunal  or  by  remaking  the  decision.   The
    choice is regulated by paragraph 7 of Part 3 of the Practice Directions
    of the Immigration and Asylum Chamber of the Upper Tribunal which  only
    contemplates remittal and very limited circumstances.  This is  such  a
    case.  The effect of the cumulative errors detailed above have been  to
    deprive a party - the respondent  (Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department) - before the First-tier Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing,  or
    other opportunity for the parties' case to be put to and considered  by
    the First-tier Tribunal.  The  sponsor  here  wished  to  file  a  full
    witness statement outlining his case.  That has not been  done.   There
    is also the prospect of him once more securing representations.  In all
    these circumstances I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal subject
    to the attached directions.  I do so  with  the  consent  of  both  the
    appellant's sponsor and the respondent's representatives.


Signed                              Date 18 September 2014.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
             DIRECTIONS FOR REMITTAL TO THE FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL


 1. The appeal is to be listed at Taylor House on the first available date.

 2. The time estimate for the hearing is two hours.

 3. No interpreter is required.

 4. In the event of either party  wishing  to  file  and  serve  additional
    evidence this must be done no later than five working days prior to the
    date of hearing.




Signed                              Date 18 September 2014.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
