
[pic]
IAC-TH-CP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/12896/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 13th October 2014                            |On 10th November 2014      |
|Prepared on 16th October 2014                   |                           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                               Mr Dyary Kadir
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer - ISTANBUL
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M. Vidal of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Appellant

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Australia born  on  1st  July  1973.   He
    appealed against a decision made by the Respondent on 9th May  2013  to
    refuse him entry clearance for settlement as the spouse of Ms  Taherahe
    Akbar, a British citizen ("the Sponsor") pursuant to paragraph  281  of
    the Immigration Rules and Article 8 (right to respect for  private  and
    family life) of the European Convention on Human Rights. His appeal was
    dismissed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Bart-Stewart  sitting  at
    Taylor House on 1st April 2014 and the  Appellant  appeals  with  leave
    against that decision.

2.   The Appellant was born in  Iraq  and  has  dual  Iraqi  and  Australian
    citizenship the latter granted to him on 28th March 2001.  The  Sponsor
    was born in Iran and came to the United Kingdom in March 2003.  She was
    granted United Kingdom citizenship in 2012.  The parties' case was that
    they had met in Birmingham in 2006 at a time  when  the  Appellant  was
    visiting his brother and  family  on  a  six  month  visit  visa.   The
    couple's relationship began in 2007 and they started to  live  together
    in 2008.  The Appellant went to Kurdistan to obtain  medical  treatment
    after having to leave the United Kingdom in 2009.

3.   The Sponsor applied for entry clearance  to  Australia  as  the  couple
    planned to marry but this was refused.  They then travelled to  various
    places and the Appellant  tried  unsuccessfully  to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom from various ports.  Each time he was refused leave  to  enter.
    He returned to the United Kingdom in 2010 and joined  the  Sponsor  but
    voluntarily left in 2011.  The couple continued to meet in  Europe  but
    then decided to marry in Denmark which they did on 23rd November  2012.
    The Appellant went to Germany and stayed with the Sponsor's son.   From
    there he travelled to Turkey where he made the application the  refusal
    of which has given rise to the present proceedings.  The Sponsor joined
    him in Turkey for a time.  They have been  in  constant  contact  since
    2012 by telephone and  have  travelled  together  around  Europe.   The
    Sponsor suffers from depression and has support from a social worker.

The First Instance Determination

4.   The Respondent refused the application principally because he  was  not
    satisfied that  the  Appellant  and  Sponsor  were  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship. In interview the Appellant had not  known  the
    Sponsor's address and there was no persuasive evidence  of  intervening
    devotion.  In her determination the Judge placed some emphasis on  this
    last point at paragraph 26 writing:

         "[The Sponsor] said that [the Appellant] went  to  Australia.   She
         moved the next day and two days later he texted to say that he  was
         in Kurdistan.  They later met in Greece, Germany and  they  married
         in Denmark on 23rd November 2012.  After three days they went  back
         to Germany.  The Appellant  stayed  there  with  her  son  and  the
         Sponsor  returned  to  the  UK.   The  Sponsor  has  not  been   in
         employment.  No explanation is given [why]  she  could  not  remain
         longer in Germany with her husband.  Other than the Sponsor  having
         a son who lived in Germany, there is no apparent reason or credible
         explanation given for  hopping  around  Europe,  including  France,
         Dublin, Greece ending in a marriage in Denmark when the Sponsor has
         a family connection in Germany".


5.   The Appellant was interviewed by Immigration Officers on 24th  February
    2011 and said at that time that he  was  living  with  his  brother  as
    opposed to with the Sponsor.  The Judge did not accept the  explanation
    given by the parties for that incorrect answer (if indeed it was).  The
    Sponsor's claim was that the Appellant  had  given  the  wrong  address
    because neither the Appellant nor the Sponsor wanted the Sponsor to  be
    bothered with anyone coming to  the  Sponsor's  house.   As  the  Judge
    pointed out at paragraph 27 if that was the case there was no need  for
    the Sponsor to volunteer other information that he had a fianc�e by the
    name of Tara Alan. An alternative explanation that the Sponsor did  not
    want to attract adverse attention because  her  son  had  been  refused
    entry clearance was rejected by the Judge at  paragraph  28  since  the
    interview on 24th February 2011 was  ten  months  after  the  Sponsor's
    son's application  for  entry  clearance  had  been  rejected  with  no
    outstanding appeal.

6.   The Appellant's representatives had submitted a bundle for the  hearing
    at first instance which ran to 772 pages.  I comment in more detail  on
    that bundle below but suffice to say at this stage that at paragraph 29
    the Judge rejected the  idea  that  the  documentation  in  the  bundle
    supported the proposition that the Appellant  and  Sponsor  were  in  a
    genuine relationship.  At paragraph 29 she wrote:

         "The Appellant's bundle includes a number of  hotel  booking  forms
         for different hotels in Greece in June  2012.   Most  are  for  one
         night.  Although they are for two guests, they are all in the  name
         of the Sponsor with no indication of the name of the  other  guest.
         There are a number of travel itineraries but they are  not  in  any
         order and no attempt  has  been  made  by  the  representatives  to
         demonstrate that  the  Appellant  and  Sponsor  were  in  the  same
         countries at the same time."

7.   The Appellant and Sponsor had said that they  had  married  in  Denmark
    because this would be quicker than marrying in Germany  but  the  Judge
    noticed that the wedding booking form (which was at  page  393  of  the
    bundle) showed that they had paid for a standard  fee  for  two  weeks'
    notice rather than the express fee.  Medical evidence referred  to  the
    Sponsor visiting her  son  in  Germany  but  not  the  Appellant.   The
    Sponsor's daughter's evidence was rejected by the Judge as  not  adding
    anything of significance to the case as she could not  remember  if  it
    was in Birmingham or London where her  mother  ran  a  shop.  This  was
    particularly striking given the  daughter's  claim  to  have  travelled
    regularly to help her mother the Sponsor.

8.   There were a large number of short email messages in the  bundle  which
    were postdecision in a foreign untranslated language.  There was little
    in them expressing terms of endearment or anything which would  suggest
    a close  relationship.   The  Judge  found  there  was  no  documentary
    evidence of the parties having lived together for the period claimed or
    that they had been in a relationship.  She was not satisfied  that  the
    Appellant could show  that  he  and  the  Sponsor  were  in  a  genuine
    relationship and that each intended to live permanently with the other.
     As the parties were not in a genuine relationship the Judge found that
    Article 8 was not engaged and she dismissed the appeal.

The Onward Appeal

9.   The Appellant's grounds of onward appeal  argued  that  the  Judge  had
    focussed too much on the issue  of  credibility.   The  Judge  had  not
    explained adequately how she came to the conclusion  that  the  Sponsor
    had a propensity to mislead.  Nor had she given  adequate  reasons  for
    her adverse credibility finding on the Sponsor's  daughter's  evidence.
    It was irrelevant to find that the Appellant's family  or  friends  did
    not attend the wedding or that the medical report had not  referred  to
    the Sponsor seeing the Appellant in Germany.  The Judge should have set
    out clearly and openly what  evidence  was  considered  in  reaching  a
    finding.

10.  The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Fisher  on  20th  June  2014.   He  refused
    permission to appeal stating there was no merit in the grounds:

         "The Judge had to focus upon the nature of the relationship between
         the Appellant and his Sponsor.  She  gave  reasons  for  concluding
         that their relationship was  not  genuine  and  subsisting.   Those
         findings were open to her on the evidence and cannot  be  described
         as perverse or irrational in any way.  ...  The Judge could not  be
         expected to refer to each page of the 772  page  bundle  lodged  on
         behalf of the Appellant.  She did however make reference to several
         documents  within  it.   She  was  entitled  to   find   that   the
         relationship was not subsisting in the sense set out in  GA  Ghana.
         On that basis she did not need to proceed beyond the first  of  the
         questions set out in Razgar."

11.  The Appellant renewed his application for permission to appeal  on  the
    same grounds which came before Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt on 18th August
    2014.  In granting permission to appeal she wrote:

         "There were clearly difficulties for the Appellant to overcome here
         given  his  somewhat  unusual   history,   involvement   with   the
         authorities in Turkey and the Sponsor's financial situation.  It is
         just arguable however that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  did  not
         take into account what was potentially  material  evidence  of  the
         relationship of the Appellant and Sponsor in the Appellant's bundle
         of materials.  Even if that could not have altered the  application
         under the Immigration Rules, it could have shown that a family life
         existed and an Article 8 assessment would then have followed  which
         went beyond that conducted by the First-tier Tribunal Judge".

12.  On 3rd September 2014 the Respondent  replied  under  Rule  24  to  the
    grant of permission stating it was clear why  the  Judge  rejected  the
    Appellant's account of a subsisting and loving relationship between him
    and the Sponsor.  The Respondent continued:

         "The Appellant frequently sought to enter the UK and clearly did so
         illegally.   Paragraph  6  refers.    The   explanation   for   the
         Appellant's lack of knowledge of his wife's address and the reasons
         for the incorrect name and address of the Sponsor was  rejected  at
         paragraph  27.   There  was  no  adequate  evidence  of  a   loving
         relationship (this not being an arranged marriage).  On  the  facts
         before the Judge it was fully open to  her  to  conclude  that  the
         claimed relationship was not made out  and  in  addition  that  the
         Appellant's character, conduct and associations were such  that  it
         was  not  appropriate  to  grant  entry  clearance.   It  was   the
         Appellant's burden to discharge and the Judge could not be expected
         to carry out a forensic analysis of the Appellant's 772 page bundle
         to try to locate evidence to make out his case.   The  reliance  on
         unreported case law is not in  accordance  with  the  law  and  the
         Tribunal directions.  The grounds are  a  disagreement  with  well-
         reasoned findings."

The Hearing Before Me

13.  In oral submissions Counsel argued that the tone of  the  determination
    stated that the Judge had "raised more than one  eyebrow"  on  conduct.
    Although the parties had paid the regular fee for the wedding the email
    evidence in the bundle showed that there was  a  much  shorter  wedding
    timetable. I queried that point with Counsel. The emails at page 395 of
    the bundle referring to the wedding indicated that as at 15th  November
    2012 the person making the arrangements expected  the  wedding  of  the
    Appellant and the Sponsor to be the Thursday or Friday of the following
    week and there appeared to be no indication  on  the  weddings  booking
    form when the original application  for  the  wedding  was  made.  This
    implied that the Judge had been correct to reject the explanation given
    why the parties should marry in Denmark at all (that it was said to  be
    quicker than in Germany) when they had not sought  an  express  wedding
    but merely the standard one.

14.  Counsel argued that the Judge needed to give more explanation  why  she
    came to the conclusion that there was a  tendency  to  mislead.   There
    were a number of documents in the bundle which were  not  referred  to.
    These would show that the Appellant and Sponsor at or around  the  same
    time were travelling to the same place for example Amsterdam.  At  page
    371 of the bundle there was a  boarding  pass  issued  by  the  airline
    EasyJet to the Sponsor on a flight to Amsterdam 6th July 2010 and a tax
    invoice from a company called United Travel Centre dated 16th June 2010
    to the Appellant for a return ticket  to  Amsterdam.   There  were  two
    money transfers in the Appellant's bundle.  This was money belonging to
    the Appellant held by the  Sponsor  which  she  was  returning  to  the
    Appellant.  There  was  evidence  of  travel  tickets  bought  for  the
    Appellant by the Sponsor.

15.  The Judge had a letter  of  support  written  by  the  partner  of  the
    Appellant's  stepdaughter.   He  had  said  he  was  confident  of  the
    genuineness of the relationship between the Appellant and the  Sponsor.
    He had not attended to give evidence as he had problems with travelling
    but there was enough evidence in the bundle to establish that there was
    a family life between the Appellant and Sponsor.

16.  In reply the Presenting Officer argued that the Judge had given  cogent
    reasons for her adverse  credibility  findings.   The  evidence  in  an
    untranslated foreign language could not be  taken  into  consideration.
    Much of the evidence did not take the case  further.   For  example  at
    page 317 there was a hotel receipt in the Appellant's sole  name.   The
    document referred to at page 339 where it  was  said  the  Sponsor  had
    booked a travel ticket for the Appellant gave an  email  address  which
    could be anybody's as opposed to proving it was  the  Sponsor's.   Only
    one of the money transfer receipts predated the decision the other  was
    postdecision evidence.  There was thus only one remittance  upon  which
    the Appellant could rely.  In response  Counsel  noted  that  the  sole
    issue in the case was the question  of  whether  there  was  a  genuine
    relationship.  There had been no cross  appeal  by  the  Respondent  in
    relation to the  suitability  requirements  of  Appendix  FM.   Counsel
    acknowledged that only some of the large Appellant's bundle was  useful
    while some was not.  There were a lot of telephone records  which  went
    back over a considerable period of time.

17.  I queried with Counsel whether there had been  any  evidence  presented
    to the Judge to explain why the Appellant  and  Sponsor  had  travelled
    around Europe as much as they had.  After taking  instructions  Counsel
    stated that due to the Appellant's visa he was only  able  to  stay  in
    some countries for three months or others for six  months  whereas  the
    Sponsor could travel  to  all  27  countries  of  the  European  Union.
    However  it  was  not  clear  from  the  determination  what  level  of
    examination there had  been  on  the  reason  for  the  various  travel
    arrangements.  The focus in the case had been on the credibility of the
    Appellant and the Sponsor.  The appeal should be allowed.

Findings

18.  The issues in this case were  flagged  up  by  the  Respondent  in  the
    notice of refusal.  The Respondent did not accept  that  the  Appellant
    and  Sponsor  were  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship   and
    particularly pointed to the lack of evidence of  intervening  devotion.
    The response  of  the  Appellant's  representatives  to  the  case  the
    Appellant had to meet was to file at court a chaotic bundle running  to
    772 pages. That was not 772 pages' text, a large number  of  the  pages
    were blank.  The number of pages with text was just over  one  half  of
    the final page number.  The documents between pages 499 and 610 were in
    a foreign untranslated language or were blank.  The Judge had evidently
    done her best with this unwieldy bundle making various comments on  the
    documents such as at paragraph 29 when she wrote:

         "The Appellant's bundle includes a number of  hotel  booking  forms
         for different hotels in Greece in June 2012.  Although they are for
         two guests, they are all  in  the  name  of  the  Sponsor  with  no
         indication of the name of the other guest.  There are a  number  of
         travel itineraries but they are not in any order and no attempt has
         been made by the representatives to demonstrate that the  Appellant
         and Sponsor were in the same countries at the same time".

19.  As First-tier Tribunal Judge Fisher correctly observed the Judge  could
    not be expected to refer to each page of the 772 page bundle lodged  on
    behalf of the Appellant.  Nor as the Respondent's  reply  notice  under
    Rule 24 correctly observed could the Judge be expected to try to locate
    evidence to make  out  the  Appellant's  case  for  him.   It  was  the
    Appellant's case and the burden was on him to show he and  the  Sponsor
    were indeed in  a  relationship  even  if  they  were  conducting  that
    relationship at a distance. What instead happened was that  a  confused
    jumble of hotel receipts,  boarding  cards  and  flight  invoices  were
    muddled up in the middle of a large  bundle  with  no  effort  made  to
    explain what the parties were doing.

20.  It was reasonable for the Judge to expect the  parties'  statements  to
    at least give some form of chronology of how they had travelled  around
    Europe and stayed together (if indeed that was the case)  giving  dates
    and periods with reference  to  the  documents.   That  was  not  done.
    Instead the Appellant relies on the submission that  the  documentation
    shows that the Appellant and Sponsor  were  at  the  same  location  at
    around the same time.  As the Judge  pointed  out  most  of  the  hotel
    booking forms etc. were for one night only (there were some for two  or
    three nights).  Given that the burden of proof was on the Appellant  to
    establish that he and the Sponsor were conducting their relationship in
    this way, the lack of any explanation why  the  Appellant  and  Sponsor
    were travelling to so many different countries was inevitably a  matter
    that the Judge would place weight on.

21.  She pointed out the parties' connection such as it was was  to  Germany
    where the Sponsor's son lived.   If  the  Appellant  and  Sponsor  were
    travelling to other places for a holiday  it  was  reasonable  to  have
    expected some evidence to be produced to show that they had both stayed
    together for substantial periods of time at those locations.  The Judge
    found that there was no such evidence, and nothing that I was  referred
    to in the Appellant's bundle controverted that  finding.   The  Judge's
    findings were open to her on the evidence.

22.  It is axiomatic that a Judge is not obliged to set out each  and  every
    piece of evidence  put  before  him  or  her  when  arriving  at  their
    conclusions.  That the Judge did not mention in terms a statement  from
    a witness who did not attend  to  give  evidence  does  not  of  itself
    undermine the conclusions the  Judge  reached.   Rather  it  serves  to
    illustrate that the challenge made to the Judge's  determination  is  a
    reasons based challenge but amounts to no more than a disagreement with
    the result.  This was a case on which the credibility of  the  evidence
    would be of importance.  Although it might have been  helpful  for  the
    Judge to have set out her findings on the question of  the  Appellant's
    address  in  one  place  in  the  determination  the  thrust   of   the
    determination is clear.  The Appellant did not mention the  Sponsor  in
    his interview but if he  was  withholding  that  information  from  the
    Respondent there was no reasonable explanation why he went on to give a
    completely different account to the Respondent in interview  than  what
    he gave to the Judge at the hearing.  The Judge  was  dealing  with  an
    Appellant who was prepared to mislead the Respondent and approached his
    evidence with some degree of caution as she was entitled to do.

23.  At the time of the refusal the Appellant was detained  by  the  Turkish
    authorities pending  his  deportation  to  Australia  as  he  had  been
    arrested for drug related offences.  That  deportation  was  eventually
    carried out.  The Judge was entitled to look at  the  evidence  in  the
    round and come to an adverse view of the Appellant's credibility  based
    on his immigration history, his history of attempted deception  of  the
    Respondent and the somewhat incoherent case that  he  and  the  Sponsor
    were putting forward as to what their relationship was claimed  to  be.
    The Judge made a finding that there was not a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship between the Appellant and the  Sponsor.   They  knew  what
    case they had to meet but they had failed to meet it.  Since there  was
    no relationship between the Appellant and the Sponsor no  issue  as  to
    Article 8 could arise and the Judge was correct not to proceed with  an
    analysis on an "even if" basis.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not involve the making  of
an error of law and  I  uphold  the  decision  to  dismiss  the  Appellant's
appeal.

Appeal dismissed.

The appeal is dismissed, no question arises as to a fee award.

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.






Signed this 7th day of November 2014


.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft

