
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
     Appeal Numbers: Oa/12459/2014
     OA/12462/2014
      OA/12463/2014
     OA/12466/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                       |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 8 March 2016                              |On 4 May 2016                 |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER

                                   Between


                       entry clearance officer - amman
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                DA AND OTHERS

                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:       Mr John Kingham, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Mariam Cleghorn, Counsel, instructed by Halliday
Reeves Law


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This appeal is not subject to an  anonymity  order  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014.  Neither  party
    has invited me to make an anonymity order pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (SI  2008/2698)  and  I
    have not done so.

 2. The appellant (hereafter the Secretary of State)  appeals  against  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge ) allowing the  respondents'
    appeals against a decision taken on 21 July 2014 to refuse entry to the
    UK under paragraph 352A and 352D of the Immigration Rules.

Introduction

 3. DA is a citizen of Syria born in 1982 and the remaining respondents are
    her minor children. The sponsor is also a  citizen  of  Syria  who  was
    granted refugee status in the UK on 23 April 2014. The sponsor  married
    DA in Syria in 2002. It was an Islamic marriage which was  subsequently
    registered at the Registry Office. In 2006 the sponsor travelled to the
    UK to study  English  on  a  six  month  visa  which  was  subsequently
    extended. The sponsor kept in regular contact with DA and the children,
    sent them money and visited them. The sponsor then met  and  married  a
    Polish woman in an Islamic ceremony in 2008. The sponsor's Polish  wife
    wished a civil ceremony in the UK and so the  sponsor  divorced  DA  in
    Syria and married his Polish wife in a civil ceremony in the UK  on  18
    November 2009. The marriage between the sponsor  and  the  Polish  wife
    ended in divorce in the UK in November 2013  and  the  sponsor  claimed
    asylum. He continues to support the respondents and named them  in  his
    asylum interview on 17 April 2014.

 4. The Entry Clearance Officer  accepted  the  respondents'  identity  and
    nationality but concluded that there was no satisfactory evidence of  a
    current valid and subsisting marriage. DA and  the  sponsor  had  lived
    apart for a lengthy period whilst the sponsor established a new  family
    life in the UK. It  was  not  accepted  that  there  was  a  subsisting
    relationship or that DA intended to live with the sponsor  in  the  UK.
    The dependent children were not part of the family unit of the  sponsor
    when he claimed asylum. The children had been living with their  mother
    since he left for the UK in 2009 and there was no evidence that he  had
    any responsibility for the welfare of the children. The  sponsor  could
    join DA in Lebanon or another safe country nearby.

The Appeal

 5. The respondents appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  sponsor
    attended an oral  hearing  at  North  Shields  on  15  July  2015.  The
    respondents were represented by Ms Cleghorn.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
    heard evidence from a number of witnesses including the sponsor,  three
    of his brothers, his Imam from Middlesbrough  and  his  solicitor  from
    Syria.  The judge found  that  the  relationship  between  DA  and  the
    sponsor was subsisting throughout, their  religious  marriage  was  the
    "real marriage" and that no document  was  required  to  show  that  it
    subsisted. The UK authorities had accepted the civil divorce  in  Syria
    as sufficient evidence that the first marriage was over so at to permit
    the sponsor to remarry. However,  in  Syria  and  the  Middle  East  it
    appeared to be culturally accepted that the religious marriage was  the
    important marriage.

 6. Civil registration of the marriage in Syria  was  unnecessary  and  was
    only to facilitate the education and childcare for the children of  the
    marriage. The civil ceremony was  simply  paying  lip  service  to  the
    religious ceremony which was the important means  of  changing  marital
    status. The civil ceremony was mere paperwork, simply a registration of
    the  religious  event  which  had  already  taken  place.  It  was  not
    surprising that it was relatively easy to obtain  a  civil  divorce  to
    satisfy the authorities in the UK but which in fact made no  difference
    to the marital status of the parties as they  remained  married.  There
    was evidence that the sponsor  was  entitled  to  have  more  than  one
    parallel marriage as he was a Muslim.  The  relationship  with  DA  was
    subsisting throughout the sponsor's second marriage and continued to do
    so after his divorce from the Polish  wife.  The  respondents  and  the
    sponsor could not live as a family as the sponsor was studying and then
    the situation in Syria deteriorated and he could not return  there.  It
    became so bad that DA and the children, having moved to Lebanon to make
    the current applications could not return to  Syria.  The  sponsor  had
    refugee status and was entitled to family reunion.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law  in
    finding that DA and the sponsor were married under  paragraph  352A  of
    the Rules or that the marriage was subsisting at  any  time  after  the
    divorce and second marriage in  September/October  2009.  The  evidence
    clearly indicated that the matrimonial relationship had ceased  as  had
    the formality of marriage. From GA ("Subsisting" marriage) Ghana [2006]
    UKAIT 00046, if there is no legally valid marriage at the time  of  the
    decision then the application never gets off the ground. There  had  to
    be a valid marriage before consideration of its subsisting nature could
    be assessed. The judge also failed to engage with the decision that the
    children were not part of the sponsor's family unit when he left  Syria
    in September 2009 to come to the UK to marry the  Polish  wife,  having
    already applied for divorce to end his marriage in Syria.

 8.  Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
    Nightingale on 16 December 2015 on the basis that it was arguable  that
    the  judge  had  erred  by  failing  to  consider  whether  the   minor
    respondents were part of the family unit when the sponsor left Syria to
    remarry and in finding that DA was still in a legally valid marriage to
    the sponsor when he had in fact entered into a legal  marriage  to  his
    Polish wife in the UK.

 9. Thus, the appeal came before me

Discussion

10. Mr Kingham submitted that this was effectively a  perversity  challenge
    against paragraphs 34-35 of the decision. It  was  irrational  to  find
    that the marriage to the Polish wife was lawful but also that when  the
    marriage was contracted the previous marriage was also valid. If it was
    the sponsor's position that the Syrian civil divorce document  did  not
    reflect lawful reality then he had entered into a bigamous marriage  in
    the UK. In fact, it was clear that the Syrian marriage to DA  had  been
    dissolved. From paragraph 23 of the decision, the Syrian civil  divorce
    document was not produced to the Tribunal. Paragraph 31 of the decision
    refers to remittances to the children but that does not mean  that  the
    marriage is subsisting. Were all of the respondents part of the  family
    unit prior to the sponsor travelling to the UK?  Paragraph  36  of  the
    decision equates  refugee  status  with  family  reunion.  The  sponsor
    claimed to be single in 2006. The decision  should  be  set  aside  and
    remade.

11. Ms  Cleghorn  submitted  that  the  decision  was  well  reasoned.  The
    evidential and legal basis was discussed in some detail.  Paragraph  31
    of the decision reflects the evidence. The real problem is  that  there
    is no such thing as a civil marriage in Syria; just civil  registration
    of a religious marriage. The purpose of the civil marriage is to ensure
    that children are recognised. That is nothing to do  with  validity  of
    the religious marriage. UK law recognises polygamy in  other  cultures.
    If the parties are not married what then for the family?  How  can  the
    parties get married when they are already married? The purpose  of  the
    civil divorce is to identify the dowry.  All  turns  on  the  religious
    aspect. There are Christian marriages and Muslim marriages in Syria but
    no civil marriages - just civil registration. The family are in  Turkey
    and will be in limbo if the marriage is not recognised. The process now
    should be as if the Polish wife had never come into  the  picture.  The
    parties are clearly still married. The  IDIs  do  refer  to  polygamous
    marriages but are not mentioned in the decision. DA is in Turkey and is
    pregnant. The sponsor struggles  to  send  remittances  to  Turkey  and
    further delay would not be appropriate.

12. Mr Kingham submitted in reply that if  the  Syrian  marriage  is  still
    recognised then the sponsor is a bigamist. The civil  divorce  document
    was produced to avoid charges of bigamy. The issue of future remarriage
    is not for further consideration. This was an  entry  clearance  appeal
    and the issue is the circumstances in  existence  as  at  the  date  of
    decision. The problem is that the sponsor contracted a lawful  marriage
    in the UK.

13. I am satisfied that the first  substantial  issue  in  this  appeal  is
    whether the Syrian civil divorce was  effective  to  end  the  marriage
    between DA and the sponsor or whether some form of Islamic divorce  was
    also necessary. The  marriage  to  the  Polish  wife  is  not  directly
    relevant to that issue nor is the  possibility  of  the  sponsor  being
    criminally liable under UK bigamy laws. The issue under paragraph  352A
    of the Immigration Rules is whether DA was, as at the date of decision,
    married to the sponsor and the marriage did not take  place  after  the
    sponsor left Syria in order to seek asylum.  The  respondent  does  not
    suggest that the parties  were  never  married  or  that  there  was  a
    marriage after the sponsor  left  Syria.  The  key  to  this  issue  is
    therefore the effect of the Syrian civil divorce.

14. The judge did not have the benefit of sight of the divorce  certificate
    from Syria and described the failure to produce  that  document  as  an
    "incomprehensible  omission"  at  paragraph   23   of   the   decision.
    Nonetheless, the judge found at paragraph 35 of the decision  that  the
    civil registration was mere paperwork, simply  a  registration  of  the
    religious event that had already taken place. That being the  case,  it
    was relatively easy to obtain  a  Syrian  civil  divorce  in  order  to
    satisfy the authorities in the  UK  but  that  civil  divorce  made  no
    difference to the marital status of the parties as they remain married.
    That finding by the judge was  effectively  a  finding  of  fact  about
    Syrian law. The judge did not make that decision in  a  vacuum  because
    there was substantial evidence regarding the issue  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal; particularly form the Syrian lawyer who  gave  evidence.
    The judge could have drawn an adverse inference from the absence of the
    divorce certificate but chose not to do so.

15. I am satisfied that if DA and the sponsor were married at the  relevant
    time then the  judge  was  entitled  to  find  that  the  marriage  was
    subsisting. There was evidence of financial support,  there  are  three
    children from the marriage  and  there  was  evidence  of  letters  and
    photographs from the children  to  the  sponsor.  The  judge  was  also
    entitled to give weight to  the  witness  evidence  and  there  are  no
    adverse credibility findings against any of the witnesses. The findings
    at paragraphs  31-32  of  the  decision  are  soundly  based  upon  the
    evidence.

16. In relation to whether the parties were married, Mr Kingham  accurately
    submitted that this is a perversity challenge by  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer. There is no reasons challenge. Perversity  represents  a  very
    high hurdle, as set out in paragraph 11 of R (Iran) and others  v  SSHD
    [2005] EWCA Civ 982. The word means what it says and it is a  demanding
    concept.  Perversity  includes  a  finding  of  fact  that  was  wholly
    unsupported by the evidence as well as decisions that are irrational or
    unreasonable in the Wednesbury sense. The judge found at  paragraph  21
    of the decision that the religious law in Syria  relating  to  personal
    status did not intermingle with civil law relating to personal  status.
    Accordingly, there was an anomalous situation, at least from  the  eyes
    of family law in the UK; that two parallel systems are in operation  in
    predominantly Muslim countries. That finding of fact was central to the
    judge's decision regarding the impact of the Syrian civil divorce.

17. One significant difficulty for the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  in  this
    appeal is that there has  been  no  attempt  to  demonstrate  that  the
    findings of fact in relation to the Syrian civil  divorce  were  wholly
    unsupported by the evidence. The grounds of appeal simply  assert  that
    the fact of the divorce and the  second  marriage  indicates  that  the
    matrimonial relationship and the formality of the marriage  had  ceased
    to continue at the relevant time. I find that  assertion  goes  nowhere
    near to establishing that the findings in relation to the Syrian  civil
    divorce were perverse. Establishing perversity would require a detailed
    analysis of the evidence before the judge and submissions as to why the
    decision was wholly unsupported by the evidence. That  has  simply  not
    happened and this appeal does not succeed on perversity grounds.

18. I have considered section 40 of the Family Law Act 2006 which does  not
    feature in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and was not cited to
    me by the parties. However, it is the key provision in  UK  legislation
    relating to the recognition of overseas divorces. Section 40(1)  states
    that  the  validity  of  an  overseas  divorce  obtained  by  means  of
    proceedings shall be recognised if the divorce is effective  under  the
    laws of the country in which it was obtained. That does  not  determine
    the issue in this appeal because the judge still had to decide  whether
    the Syrian civil divorce was effective to end  the  religious  marriage
    between DA and the sponsor. I am satisfied that  it  was  open  to  the
    judge on the available evidence to find that it was  not  so  effective
    and the parties therefore remained in an Islamic marriage throughout.

19. The remaining issue is the  absence  of  any  finding  that  the  child
    respondents were part of the sponsor's family.  The  requirement  under
    paragraph 352D(iv) of the Rules is that the child respondents were part
    of the family unit of the sponsor at the time  when  the  sponsor  left
    Syria in order to seek asylum. I am satisfied that the judge  found  in
    effect that the children were part of the family unit  of  the  sponsor
    throughout - the marriage never ended and the sponsor has  always  been
    financially responsible for DA and the children. The child  respondents
    have clearly never been part of any other family unit. This  ground  of
    appeal therefore wholly lacks merit and cannot succeed.

Decision

20. Consequently, I dismiss the appeal of the Entry Clearance Officer.


Signed   [pic]                      Date 29 April 2016

Judge Archer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
