
[pic]

                                  UPPER TRIBUNAL

                          IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Birmingham
On:  6 June 2013
                                        Decision Promulgated:
                                        On:  7 June 2013


                                   Before

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt


                                   Between

                      Mrs Hasna Hasna Abdillahi Gafaneh

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                    Entry Clearance Officer - Addis Ababa
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Not present
For the Respondent:    Ms Plaess, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


This is an appeal against the determination dated 14 February 2013 of First-
tier Tribunal Judge Colyer which  refused  the  appellant's  application  to
come to the UK to live with her son.

Ms Plaess  conceded  that  the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
disclosed an error on a point of law.  The  appeal  was  determined  on  the
papers. This was because the Tribunal administration had  listed  it  for  a
paper case. This is initially understandable where on  the  second  page  of
the appeal form dated 18 June 2012    the  appellant  ticked  "Papers"  when
asked  at  A.  if  she  wanted  an  oral  or  paper  hearing.  It  is   less
understandable when, immediately below this, at B. she also stated that  her
sponsor  would  be  attending  to  give   evidence   and   also   that   her
representative would be attending. In addition,  in  the  typed  grounds  of
appeal the appellant stated that "I will appreciate if an  appeal  date  ...
be given to me ...", also suggesting that she expected an oral hearing.

In addition, I was provided with a letter dated 13 December 2012  from  J.M.
Wilson Solicitors to the  Tribunal,  stating  that  the  indication  on  the
appeal form that the appellant wanted the appeal dealt with  on  the  papers
was a mistake and that she wanted an oral hearing as the sponsor,  her  son,
wished to give oral evidence. I was also provided with  a  fax  cover  sheet
dated 13 December 2012 showing that this letter was  faxed  successfully  to
the Tribunal in Loughborough. Ms Plaess pointed out that this  document  was
not faxed to the fax number given on the appeal forms. Nothing at  all  hung
on that. The fax number on the appeal forms is  specifically  identified  as
the number to use for the appeal forms. It does not suggest what  should  be
done with any other correspondence. The  letter  of  13  December  2012  was
faxed to the fax number provided on the "Notice of Pending Appeal" dated  19
July 2012 which stated that  "ALL  CORRESPONDENCE  SHOULD  BE  SENT  TO  THE
ADDRESS AT THE TOP OF THIS NOTICE ...". It did not appear  to  me  that  the
appellant's legal representatives could be faulted for using the fax  number
that they did.

I should add for completeness sake that on the morning of the hearing I  was
given a letter indicating  that  the  legal  representatives  would  not  be
attending but that the sponsor would be present. At that point  I  had  only
the fax cover sheet dated 13 December 2012 which showed that  something  had
been sent successfully to the Tribunal on that date but  did  not  show  the
substance of the enclosure. I contacted the legal representatives  in  order
to obtain the substantive letter and they provided it. I informed Ms  Plaess
of what I had done and, in  any  event,  the  representatives  indicated  in
their cover letter dated 6 June 2013 that I had contacted them  to  ask  for
the substantive letter. Ms Plaess did  not  object  to  my  relying  on  the
letter of 13 December 2012 notwithstanding how it had come  to  be  provided
to the Tribunal.

On the contrary, as above, Ms Plaess indicated that the respondent  conceded
the appeal as it was accepted that a material  procedural  irregularity  and
unfairness arose where the appellant had asked for an oral hearing  but  the
matter had, unbeknownst to her, been decided on the papers without the  oral
evidence of the sponsor.

I was satisfied that this amounted to an error on a point of law  such  that
the decision of the First-tier Tribunal had to be set aside and re-made.

It was also my view that, following paragraph 7.2  (a)  of  Part  3  of  the
Senior President's Practice  Statement  dated  25  September  2012,  as  the
effect of the error has been to deprive the appellant before the  First-tier
Tribunal of a fair hearing, the appeal should be remitted to the  First-tier
Tribunal to be re-made. Neither party objected to  that  course  of  action,
announced at the hearing.

DECISION

The Immigration Judge made an error on a point of law. The determination  of
the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be re-made.

DIRECTIONS

 The hearing will take place on Tuesday 22 October 2013  at  the  Birmingham
hearing centre.

A Somali language interpreter will be provided in order for the  sponsor  to
give evidence.

If either party wishes to rely on any  further  documents,  an  indexed  and
paginated bundle must be filed with the Tribunal and  served  on  the  other
party BY TUESDAY 8 OCTOBER 2013 AT THE LATEST.

Given the time that has passed since the date  of  the  decision  and  as  a
result of the intervening appeal proceedings, the sponsor should  note  that
it is very unlikely that a further  adjournment  will  be  granted  for  any
reason.


Signed:                                 Date:  6 June 2013
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt




