
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/12460/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9th October 2015                  |On 5th January 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                               MR. AVTAR SINGH
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. R Soleman of Counsel instructed by Adam
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms. J Isherwood: Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a decision and reasons by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Malik promulgated on 27th May 2015 in  which  she  dismissed  the
    appeal against the decision made by the  respondent  on  4th  September
    2014 to refuse  the  appellant  Entry  Clearance  as  a  partner  under
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.







 Background

 2. The appellant has a protracted immigration history that is set  out  in
    the respondent's  decision  of  4th  September  2014  and  repeated  at
    paragraph [5] of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal.   I  do  not
    repeat  all  of  that  immigration  history  in  this  decision.   That
    immigration history is particularly relevant  because  the  appellant's
    application for Entry Clearance was refused under paragraph 320(11)  of
    the Immigration Rules.

 3. Paragraph 320(11) of the Immigration Rules set  out  grounds  on  which
    entry clearance or leave to enter should normally be refused:

         '11. where the applicant has previously contrived in a  significant
         way to frustrate the intentions of the Rules by:

             (i)  overstaying; or

             (ii) breaching a condition attached to his leave; or

             (iii)    being an illegal entrant; or

             (iv) using deception in an application  for  entry  clearance,
             leave to enter or remain or in order to obtain documents  from
             the Secretary of State or a third party required in support of
             the application (whether successful or  not);  and  there  are
             other  aggravating  circumstances,  such  as  absconding,  not
             meeting temporary  admission/reporting  restrictions  or  bail
             conditions, using an assumed identity or multiple  identities,
             switching nationality, making frivolous  applications  or  not
             complying with the re-documentation process.'

 4. Suffice it to say for present purposes that the Judge  found,  for  the
    reasons that are set out at paragraphs [20] to [27]  of  her  decision,
    that the respondent did not make any  error  in  refusing  to  exercise
    discretion in the appellant's favour, in light of what the Judge  found
    to be, a number of aggravating features.  The appellant, in the grounds
    of appeal before me, does not challenge the findings of  the  Judge  in
    that respect.

 5. What is in issue before me is the Judge's assessment of the  Article  8
    claim of the appellant and in particular, her assessment of whether the
    exclusion of the appellant from the UK  is  proportionate  in  all  the
    circumstances.

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Malik

 6. First-tier Tribunal Judge Malik heard  evidence  from  the  appellant's
    sponsor.  The evidence is set out at paragraphs  [8]  to  [19]  of  the
    decision and it serves no purpose to recite that evidence in  full,  in
    this decision.

 7. Having found that the respondent had not erred in the decision  not  to
    exercise the discretion under  paragraph  320(11)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules in favour of the appellant, the Judge  went  on  to  address  the
    Article 8 claim reminding herself, at paragraph [28] of  the  decision,
    of the five stage test referred to by Lord Bingham in  R  -v-  SSHD  ex
    parte Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.

 8. The Judge found at paragraph [29] that on the evidence before her,  the
    appellant and his sponsor are in a genuine and subsisting marriage, and
    that the appellant enjoys a family life with the sponsor  and  her  two
    sons.  She found that the interference with the right  to  family  life
    would have consequences of such gravity as potentially  to  engage  the
    operation of Article 8.  She also found  at  paragraph  [30]  that  the
    interference is in accordance with the  law,  and  in  pursuit  of  the
    legitimate aim of immigration control.

 9. The Judge then turned her mind to the fifth and  crucial  question,  of
    proportionality.  She states:

         "31.  Thus  I  turn  to  consider  whether  the   interference   is
         proportionate in pursuit of the legitimate aim. In doing so,  I  am
         concerned not only with the family life of the  appellant,  but  of
         the sponsor and her children. I have also had regard to Section  19
         Immigration Act 2014  Part  5A:  Article  8  of  the  ECHR:  Public
         Interest Considerations of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
         Act 2002 (as amended), where the relevant  parts  of  Section  117B
         are:

          1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
             public interest

             (4)  Little weight should be given to

                  (a)  a private life, or

                  (b)   a relationship formed with a qualifying partner

                   that is established by a person at a time when the person
                  is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

             (5)   Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a  private   life
             established  by  a  person  at  a  time  when   the   person's
             immigration status is precarious.

         32.  The sponsor early  in  her  relationship  with  the  appellant
         became aware he was in the UK illegally. This was sometime in 2010.
         Neither she nor the appellant could have had any  expectation  that
         in marrying one another, the appellant would be able to re-join the
         sponsor in the UK. They only decided the appellant should return to
         India voluntarily in 2011 after he had been arrested in the August.
         Any family and private life the parties formed in the UK was  at  a
         time the appellant had no leave to be here and was here illegally.

         33.  Whilst I accept the sponsor cannot be  required  to  join  the
         appellant in India with her sons as they are all  British  citizens
         and both children are settled in the UK, the sponsor and  her  sons
         have visited the appellant on two occasions, they keep  in  contact
         over the phone, through letters and  by  email.  There  is  nothing
         before me to suggest this cannot continue. I accept  the  sponsor's
         children will have  formed  a  bond  with  the  appellant  and  his
         immigration history should not be held against them, but  the  time
         the sponsor's children and the appellant have been together in  the
         UK, is outweighed  by  the  time  they  have  been  apart.  I  have
         considered the letter of the sponsor's  GP  regarding  her  medical
         conditions and the GP's view of the positive impact and support the
         appellant could provide to the sponsor and her son in the UK.  Yet,
         the GP's letter says the sponsor's son has improved over  the  last
         two years and 'has become a "Normal" child'. As the  appellant  has
         been absent from the UK since 2011, this improvement  has  occurred
         whilst the appellant has been absent  from  the  UK  and  when  the
         sponsor has had sole care of her sons.

         34.  In the absence of any reasonable evidence before me to suggest
         the current situation is contrary to the children's best interests,
         I do not find the decision of the respondent is a  disproportionate
         interference if the family lives of the parties,  when  considering
         the public interest considerations set out  in  Section  117B.   It
         follows the appeal is dismissed under  the  rules  and  also  under
         article 8 of  the  ECHR  and  I  am  satisfied  the  refusal  under
         paragraph 320 (11) is in accordance with the rules and law.

The Grounds of Appeal

10. The appellant complains that the Judge's assessment of  proportionality
    at paragraphs [31] to [34] of the decision suffers  from  an  error  of
    law.  The appellant contends that the Judge took into  account  section
    117B of the 2002 Act, but the weight to be given to family  life  ought
    to be dictated by the factual nature of it, in all  the  circumstances.
    The appellant contends that the assessment of proportionality  must  be
    an  open-ended  consideration,  not   inhibited   by   definitions   or
    limitations as defined by the rules and domestic law.

11. The appellant contends that in reaching her decision, having taken into
    account section 117B of the 2002 Act, the Judge  failed  to  take  into
    account other relevant factors of significant  import,  that  weigh  in
    favour of the appellant:

      a. That the Appellant had returned to India voluntarily with a view to
         fully complying with Entry Clearance requirements.

      b. That the Appellant and the Sponsor and her  family  have  now  been
         separated for in excess of 3 years due to efforts to comply.

      c. The Appellant had made 3 applications for Entry Clearance,  all  of
         which had been refused, in line with paragraph 320 (11).

      d. The genuine remorse shown by the Appellant.

      e. The Appellant's impeccable conduct in an attempt to comply over the
         last several years, with Entry Clearance requirements.

      f. Whilst holding the Appellant's 2011 conduct against him,  the  SSHD
         never pursued a deportation or criminal charges against him.

      g. Unlike in cases of deportation or where individuals  have  breached
         immigration requirements and the ECO applies rule 320 (7), rule 320
         (11) does not appear to have any time limits on its application  or
         relevance.  The  ECO's   adopted   approach,   is   of   indefinite
         application.

      h. Ancillary to the above point must be the broader consideration that
         given the ECO's approach, the consequence is to  deter  individuals
         such as the Appellant from returning to  their  home  countries  to
         make Entry Clearance Applications and  thereby  defeat  the  public
         interest.

      i. That the choice the  family  face  is  indefinite  and  potentially
         permanent separation (despite the IJ's reference  to  international
         methods of communication) or the Sponsor and her  British  children
         relocating to India.

12. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Ford  on
    25th August 2015.  The matter comes before me to  consider  whether  or
    not the decision of the Tribunal involved  the  making  of  a  material
    error of law, and  if  the  decision  is  set  aside,  to  re-make  the
    decision.

The hearing before me on 9th October 2015

13. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Soleman adopted the grounds  of  appeal.
    He submits that the judge, at paragraph  [32]  of  the  decision,  gave
    undue weight to s117B(4) of the 2002 Act, and failed to have regard  to
    factors that weigh in favour of the appellant including the  fact  that
    the appellant is able to speak English, and that the appellant and  his
    sponsor  are  financially  independent.   These  are  relevant   public
    interest considerations under sections 117B(2) and (3).

14. He also submits that in considering the best interests of the children,
    the Judge failed to have regard to section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.  He
    submits that the public  interest  does  not  require  the  appellant's
    exclusion.  The Judge found at [29] that the  appellant  enjoys  family
    life with the sponsor and her two sons, and Mr Soleman submits that  it
    would not be reasonable to expect the  children  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom.  Mr Soleman draws my attention to the decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in LD (Article 8 - best interests of  child)  Zimbabwe  [2010]
    UKUT 278 (IAC), and submits that the finding  of  the  Judge  that  the
    sponsor and her two sons can continue to maintain  contact  by  visits,
    over the phone  and  through  letters  and  email,  disregards  of  the
    observations made by the  Upper  Tribunal  at  paragraph  [21]  of  its
    decision:

         "... Families normally live together.  Family life consists of  the
         inter-dependent  bonds  between  spouses  or  stable  partners  and
         between parents and children with particular strength being  placed
         upon the interests and welfare of minor children. It is not  normal
         for family life to be  enjoyed  by  correspondence  and  occasional
         visits (even assuming that there were no obstacles to  such  visits
         following this immigration decision) ..."

15. Mr Soleman submits that paragraph 320 of the Immigration Rules provides
    for mandatory  refusal  in  certain  circumstances.  Paragraph  320(7B)
    provides for refusal where a person has previously  breached  the  UK's
    immigration laws by  overstaying, breaching a condition attached to his
    leave, being an illegal entrant or  using deception in  an  application
    for entry clearance, or leave to enter or remain unless he or she  left
    the UK voluntarily, not at the expense of the Secretary of  State  more
    than 12 months ago.  Mr Soleman submits that the appellant  voluntarily
    left the UK at his own expense over three years ago,  and  that  should
    inform the assessment of proportionality when  considering  the  period
    over which the appellant's past conduct can properly  be  held  against
    him.  Mr Soleman referred me to the decision of the Upper  Tribunal  in
    PS (Paragraph 320(11) discretion: care needed) India  [2010]  UKUT  440
    (IAC) and in particular the observation made by Mr  Justice  Parker  at
    paragraph [11] that:

         "... It might have been thought that the  provisions  of  paragraph
         320(7B) and (7C) were, among other things, intended to encourage  a
         person in the position of Mr S  voluntarily  to  leave  the  United
         Kingdom, to remain outside the United  Kingdom  for  a  significant
         period and then to seek to regularise  his  immigration  status  by
         applying properly for leave to enter the United Kingdom to join his
         wife. That would appear to be a desirable objective  of  the  rules
         since it would encourage those who were unlawfully  in  the  United
         Kingdom to leave and, as explained, to  seek  to  regularise  their
         immigration status."

    He submits that the Judge found that the appellant and his sponsor  are
    in a genuine and subsisting marriage and that the  appellant  enjoys  a
    family life with the sponsor and her two sons.   He  submits  that  the
    approach adopted by the respondent is counter-productive to the  public
    interest in  maintaining  a  coherent  system  of  immigration  control
    because of the risk that those in the position of the  appellant,  will
    not seek to regularise their immigration status in  the  way  that  the
    appellant seeks to do.

16. In reply, Ms Isherwood submits that the appellant seeks to do  no  more
    than to re-argue his case before the Upper Tribunal.  She submits  that
    to adopt the approach suggested by the  appellant,  is  to  ignore  the
    immigration rules and the significant weight that is to be attached  to
    the public interest as expressed in section 117B of the 2002  Act.   Ms
    Isherwood refers to the decision of the Upper Tribunal  in  AM  (s117B)
    Malawi [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC) in  support  of  her  submission  that  an
    appellant can obtain no positive right to a grant of  leave  to  remain
    from either sll7B (2) or (3) of the 2001 Act, whatever  the  degree  of
    his fluency in English, or the strength of his financial resources.

17. She reminds me that  the  appellant  does  not  challenge  the  Judge's
    finding that the respondent made  no  error  in  refusing  to  exercise
    discretion in the appellants favour, in light of what the  judge  found
    to be aggravating features, for  the  purposes  of  the  refusal  under
    paragraph 320(11) of the Immigration Rules.  She submits that the Judge
    properly acknowledged that  the  sponsor's  two  children  are  British
    citizens and in reaching her decision, the  Judge  properly  considered
    the nationality of the sponsor and her two children. The Judge  clearly
    considered all of the relevant evidence in coming to her decision  that
    the exclusion of the appellant from the UK is not  disproportionate  in
    all of the circumstances.   Ms  Isherwood  drew  my  attention  to  the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in SS (Congo) -v- SSHD [2015] EWCA  Civ
    387 as to the proper approach to adopted in considering  an  Article  8
    claim where the requirements of the immigration rules are not met.

Decision as to 'Error of Law'

18. It is uncontroversial that the Judge was entitled to find as  she  did,
    that there are a number of  aggravating  features  to  the  appellant's
    background  and  immigration  history  such  that  the  respondent  was
    entitled to refuse to exercise her discretion in favor of the appellant
    for the purposes of paragraph 320(11) of the Immigration  Rules.   That
    in my judgment must then form the backdrop against any decision  as  to
    whether the exclusion of the appellant from the UK would be  in  breach
    of the Article 8 rights of the appellant, his sponsor and her children.

19. In SSHD -v- SS (Congo) & Others [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387,  the  Court  of
    Appeal in a judgment handed down by Lord Justice Richards, stated;

         "... The proper approach should always be to identify,  first,  the
         substantive content of the relevant Immigration Rules, both to  see
         if an applicant for LTR or LTE satisfies the conditions  laid  down
         in those Rules (so as to be entitled  to  LTR  or  LTE  within  the
         Rules) and to  assess  the  force  of  the  public  interest  given
         expression in those rules (which will be relevant to the  balancing
         exercise under Article 8, in deciding whether LTR or LTE should  be
         granted outside the substantive provisions set out in  the  Rules).
         Secondly, if an applicant does not satisfy the requirements in  the
         substantive part of the Rules, they may seek to  maintain  a  claim
         for grant of LTR or LTE outside the substantive provisions  of  the
         Rules, pursuant to Article 8. If there  is  a  reasonably  arguable
         case under Article 8 which has not already been sufficiently  dealt
         with by consideration of  the  application  under  the  substantive
         provisions  of  the  Rules  (cf  Nagre  ,  para.  [30]),  then   in
         considering that case the individual interests of the applicant and
         others whose Article 8 rights  are  in  issue  should  be  balanced
         against the public interest, including as expressed in  the  Rules,
         in order to make an assessment whether refusal to grant LTR or LTE,
         as the case may be,  is  disproportionate  and  hence  unlawful  by
         virtue of section 6(1) of the HRA read with Article 8."; [44]

20. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Malik  found  at  paragraph  [30]  that  the
    interference is in accordance with the  law,  and  in  pursuit  of  the
    legitimate aim of immigration control.  The legitimate aim set  out  in
    Article 8(2) must now also be read in the light of  s117B  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,  and  particularly  sub-paragraph  (1)
    which holds that the maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is
    in the public interest.

21. It is the Judge's assessment of whether the exclusion of the  appellant
    amounts to a disproportionate interference to the family lives  of  the
    appellant, his sponsor and her children that is at  the  heart  of  the
    appeal before me.  To that end, the Judge was required to carry  out  a
    balancing exercise taking into account all the facts and factors of the
    case, but also giving regard to s117B of the  2002  Act.  Of  potential
    relevance were sub-paragraphs (4) and (5) which required the  Judge  to
    give  little  weight  to  a  relationship  formed  with  the   sponsor,
    established at a time when the appellant was in the UK unlawfully,  and
    to a private life established by the  appellant  at  a  time  when  his
    immigration status was precarious.  The Judge  has  correctly  directed
    herself to these relevant  considerations  at  paragraph  [31]  of  her
    decision.

22. I reject the  submission  made  by  Mr.  Soleman  that  the  Judge,  at
    paragraph [32] of the decision, gave undue weight to  s117B(4)  of  the
    2002 Act, and failed to have regard to  other relevant public  interest
    considerations under sections 117B(2) and (3).  As  the  panel  of  the
    Upper Tribunal held in AM  (s117B) Malawi [2015]  UKUT  260  (IAC),  an
    appellant can obtain no positive right to a grant of  leave  to  remain
    from either s117B (2) or (3), whatever the degree  of  his  fluency  in
    English, or the strength of his financial resources.

23. I also reject the submission made on behalf of the  appellant  that  in
    considering the best interests of the children,  the  judge  failed  to
    have regard to section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.  The Judge accepts that
    the sponsor and her children cannot be required to join  the  appellant
    in India, as they are all British Citizens and the children are settled
    in the UK.  At paragraph [33] of her decision, the Judge refers to  the
    relationship between the sponsor's children and the appellant,  and  in
    particular the evidence in the letter of the sponsor's GP regarding the
    positive impact and support the appellant could provide to the  sponsor
    and her son in the UK.  It was plainly open to the Judge to find on the
    evidence that the improvement in the presentation of the sponsor's  son
    has occurred whilst the appellant has been absent  from  the  UK.   The
    appellant does not challenge that finding.

24. In LD (Article 8- best interests of child)  Zimbabwe  [2010]  UKUT  278
    (lAC) the appellant had been in the United  Kingdom  with  leave  as  a
    dependant of his wife  since 1999.   She  became   eligible   to  apply
    for indefinite leave  to remain after several  years as a work   permit
    holder  and the appellant and  their three  children applied  in   line
    with   that   application.  All were given   indefinite leave  bar  the
    appellant. That was because he  made  a  false  representation  in  his
    application form, which attracted a mandatory refusal  under  paragraph
    322(1A) of the  Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended).   On appeal, the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge accepted that removal  would  interfere  with
    the  appellant's  private  and  family  life  but   found   that   such
    interference  would  be  a  proportionate  response.   The   First-tier
    Tribunal Judge found that whilst the   appellant's  wife  and  children
    would remain in  the United  Kingdom, the appellant would  be  able  to
    maintain contact with them "in the normal manner".

25. In looking at the First-tier Tribunal Judge's assessment of Article  8,
    Mr. Justice Blake could find no proper reasoning about proportionality.
    The Tribunal said:

         "The Immigration Judge has wholly failed to grapple with this.   We
         find his reference to maintaining contact with his family  'in  the
         normal manner' is extraordinary.  Families normally live  together.
         Family life consists of the inter-dependent bonds  between  spouses
         or stable partners and between parents and children with particular
         strength being placed upon  the  interests  and  welfare  of  minor
         children.  It is not normal  for  family  life  to  be  enjoyed  by
         correspondence and occasional visits (even assuming that there were
         no obstacles to such visits following this immigration decision)."

26. The panel carried out its own proportionality  balancing  exercise  and
    concluded there was little weight to be attached to the public interest
    in maintaining immigration control, given the flawed mandatory  refusal
    under part 9 of the Immigration Rules.

27. Here, unlike in LD, there is no flawed refusal under paragraph  320  of
    the Immigration Rules.  Section 117A(3) of the 2002  Act  imposes  upon
    the Judge a requirement to carry out  a  balancing  exercise  where  an
    appellant's circumstances engage Article 8(1) in deciding  whether  the
    proposed interference is proportionate in all the  circumstances.   The
    statutory regime under s117B now  expressly  requires  a  Tribunal,  in
    considering the  public  interest  question,  to  have  regard  to  the
    considerations listed in s117B.  Sections  117B(4)  and  (5)  expressly
    require the Judge to give little weight to a relationship  formed  with
    the sponsor, established at a time when the appellant  was  in  the  UK
    unlawfully, and to a private life established by  the  appellant  at  a
    time when his immigration status is precarious.

28. There is no doubt,  as  the  Judge  found  at  paragraph  [32]  of  her
    decision, that any family and private life established by the  parties,
    was formed at a time when the appellant had no leave to be  in  the  UK
    and was in the UK illegally.   That was a  finding  that  was  properly
    open to the Judge.  It was on the evidence,  the  only  proper  finding
    open to the Judge.

29. In my judgment, the appellant gains no support from the decision of the
    Upper Tribunal in PS (Paragraph 320(11) discretion: care needed)  India
    [2010] UKUT 440 (IAC).  Paragraph  320(7B)  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    requires that entry clearance or leave to enter the UK is to be refused
    where an applicant has previously breached the UK's immigration laws by
    (a) overstaying, (b) breaching a condition attached to his  leave,  (c)
    being an illegal entrant and (d) using deception in an application  for
    entry clearance, leave to enter  or  remain,  or  in  order  to  obtain
    documents from the Secretary of State or  a  third  party  required  in
    support of the application  (whether  successful  or  not)  unless  the
    applicant inter alia left  the  UK  voluntarily,  not  at  the  expense
    (directly or indirectly) of the Secretary of State more than 12  months
    ago.  Paragraph 320(7B) of the Immigration Rules sets out  grounds  for
    mandatory refusal.  Paragraphs 320(8) to  320(22)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules set out the grounds upon which entry clearance or leave to  enter
    the UK should normally be refused.   Paragraph  320(11)  of  the  rules
    mirrors paragraph 320(7B) but offers the opportunity for refusal  where
    there are other aggravating circumstances.

30. In my judgment it is unsurprising that the immigration  rules  seek  to
    draw a distinction between those that fall within paragraph 320(7B) who
    stand to attract a mandatory refusal for a fixed period and  those  who
    have not only previously breached the  UK's  immigration  laws  by  (a)
    overstaying, (b) breaching a condition attached to his leave, (c) being
    an illegal entrant and (d) using deception in an application for  entry
    clearance, leave to enter or remain, or in order to  obtain  documents,
    but where there are additional aggravating factors.  The  rules  framed
    in this way encourage  people  who  have  previously  been  in  the  UK
    unlawfully, even having used deception, to voluntarily leave the United
    Kingdom, to remain outside the United Kingdom for a period, and then to
    seek to regularise their immigration status by applying  for  leave  to
    enter  the  United  Kingdom  in  the  proper  way.   Absent  additional
    aggravating factors such people  would,  having  been  excluded  for  a
    period, be in a position to make an application to  return  to  the  UK
    provided the requirements of the rules are met.  It is only  where,  as
    here, additional aggravating factors are identified, that an  applicant
    can expect that an application for entry clearance or leave  to  remain
    in the UK will normally be refused.

31. Encouraging those that are in the UK unlawfully to  return  voluntarily
    and seek to regularise their immigration status is an important factor.
     However in my  judgment,  where  additional  aggravating  factors  are
    identified as required by paragraph 320(11), another important facet of
    the rules is the need to deter those that are in the UK unlawfully from
    absconding, not meeting temporary admission/reporting  restrictions  or
    bail conditions, or using assumed or multiple identities, or  switching
    nationalities, by leading them to understand that, whatever  the  other
    circumstances, their conduct may  well  lead  to  a  refusal  of  entry
    clearance or leave to enter the UK in the future.

32. Having carefully taken into account all of the facts and circumstances,
    and having considered the best interests of the children, it was in  my
    judgment, properly open to the Judge to conclude that  the  refusal  of
    entry clearance is not a disproportionate interference with the  family
    and private lives of the parties and to dismiss the appeal.   There  is
    no material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Malik shall stand.

DECISION

33. The appeal is dismissed.

34. No anonymity direction is made. No application was made  for  anonymity
    before me and the First-tier Tribunal made no anonymity direction.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

