
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/12966/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21st March 2016                            |On 13th April 2016            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     upper tribunal DEPUTY judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

                    Mrs manal mohammed ali ahmed almobark
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
            (ON BEHALF OF THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NAIROBI)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Saleem
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant a citizen of Sudan  born  27th  July  1992  appeals  with
    permission  against  the  decision  of  a  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Hindson) which in a decision promulgated on 16th July  2015,  dismissed
    her appeal against the Entry Clearance Officer's refusal to  grant  her
    entry clearance, under the family reunion rules, as the spouse of Abdel
    Wahab Ahmed Arbab (the Sponsor).

Background

 2. The Sponsor, who now has refugee status, entered the UK  in  2011.   He
    left the Sudan in 2008 travelling to the UK via Libya, Greece,  Austria
    and France.  He arrived here in 2011 and was granted limited  leave  to
    remain as a refugee, until May 2017.

 3. In December 2012, following the grant of the Sponsor's limited leave as
    a refugee, the Appellant made an application for entry  as  his  spouse
    under the Family Reunion Rules (the first  application).  In  order  to
    qualify under the  Family  Reunion  provisions  the  Appellant  had  to
    demonstrate that she and the sponsor  entered  into  a  valid  marriage
    before he left the Sudan.   That  application  was  refused  under  the
    provisions of Rule 320, because the Entry Clearance Officer  (the  ECO)
    was satisfied that the Appellant had produced to him, a false  marriage
    certificate. This certificate was purportedly issued by  the  imam  who
    conducted the marriage ceremony between the Appellant and her  Sponsor.
    It was claimed that the marriage took place in  July  2007  before  the
    Sponsor left the Sudan.

 4. When refusing the first application, the ECO had before him a  Document
    Verification Report showing that the document submitted as the marriage
    certificate was a forgery.  That evidence was never challenged  at  the
    time. It is correct to say that the Appellant did start the process  of
    appealing the first refusal, but then withdrew her  appeal.   Therefore
    the Entry  Clearance  Officer's  record  that  a  forged  document  was
    presented remains.

 5.  The  Appellant  applied  once  again  for   entry   clearance.    This
    application, which is the subject of this appeal, was  made  in  August
    2014 and was refused on 18th September 2014 (the  second  application).
    The ECO refused the second application because  he  was  not  satisfied
    that the provisions of paragraph 352A of  the  Immigration  Rules  were
    met.  In particular he was not satisfied on two counts;

       . that the marriage did not  take  place  after  the  person  granted
         asylum left the country of his former habitual residence  in  order
         to seek asylum; and

       . each of the parties intends to live permanently with the  other  as
         his or her spouse ... and the marriage is subsisting.

The First-tier Tribunal Hearing

 6. When the matter came before the FtT the judge had  before  him  various
    pieces of documentary evidence.  These included:

       . A copy of the Sponsor's asylum  screening  interview  where  it  is
         recorded that he said he was married to the Appellant and that  the
         marriage took place in July 2007. That document is dated 2011.

       . Photograph produced by the Appellant  to  the  ECO  on  the  second
         application which it is said shows her and  the  sponsor  at  their
         wedding ceremony.

       . Copy of a marriage registration  certificate  issued  in  September
         2014.

 7. In addition several itemised telephone bills going back  to  2012  were
    presented together with money transfer orders going back to 2013.

 8. The judge also recorded  that  he  took  evidence  from  the  sponsor's
    brother who said he was involved in the marriage arrangements  made  in
    2007, and a friend who made a statement that he  attended  the  wedding
    ceremony in 2007.

 9. The Sponsor gave oral evidence before the FtT  judge  who  records  the
    Sponsor's witness statement at [13] of  his  decision.   The  Sponsor's
    evidence contained four paragraphs outlining  evidence  concerning  the
    core of this matter, that is  to  say  whether  he  and  the  Appellant
    entered into a marriage before  he  fled  the  Sudan.   The  supporting
    documents from his brother and a friend both claim that  the  Appellant
    and Sponsor were married in July 2007.

Error of Law?

10. I find I am satisfied that the decision of the FtT must  be  set  aside
    for legal error. Nowhere in this decision do  I  see  any  findings  or
    analysis of the Sponsor's brothers evidence,  nor  of  the  friend  who
    witnessed the ceremony. Likewise I see no  finding  of  the  weight  or
    otherwise to be attached to the photograph  produced.   The  judge  has
    focused on the Document Verification Report which was part of the first
    refusal.  Whilst  I  accept  that  the  existence  or  otherwise  of  a
    fraudulent  marriage  certificate  is  a  difficult  obstacle  for  the
    Appellant to  overcome,  nevertheless  she  is  entitled  to  have  the
    evidence she produced, evaluated and considered.  This  does  not  mean
    that this evidence will necessarily result in a favourable decision for
    the Appellant, but the  impression  given  in  this  decision  is  that
    evidence has simply not been considered. This gives the impression that
    the Appellant has not been afforded the opportunity to  have  her  case
    fairly put.

11. The above  observations  also  concern  the  production  of  a  wedding
    photograph.  The ECO had serious doubts  that  this  photograph  was  a
    genuine contemporary record of an event which took place  in  2007.  He
    remarked that the Appellant looked older that the 14/15  years  of  age
    that she was in 2007.  A finding needs to be made on that  matter.  One
    further observation concerns the production of evidence of phone  calls
    and money transfer orders.  It  is  important  to  focus  on  what  the
    Tribunal has to decide in this appeal, which  is  whether  the  parties
    were validly married in 2007. Whilst the evidence of  phone  calls  and
    money transfers may lend some weight to that issue the core question is
    not whether the parties are married now but whether  they  were  so  in
    2007.

12. In these circumstances I consider that there is no alternative  but  to
    remit this matter to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.  Full
    findings of fact need be made on the evidence before it.  For the  sake
    of clarity I direct that no findings are  preserved  from  the  hearing
    before the FtT on 25th June 2015.  The matter should be heard before  a
    judge other than Judge Hindson.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on  16th  July  2015  is
hereby set aside for legal error.  The matter is now remitted to the  First-
tier Tribunal  (not  Judge  Hindson)  for  a  full  re-hearing  before  that
tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.








Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Deputy Judge Roberts

