
[pic]
                                                 Appeal Numbers: oa125842013
                                                                 Oa125852013
                                                                 oa125862013
                                                                 oa125872013
                                                                 oa125882013
                                                                 oa125892013
                                                                 Oa125902013
                                                                 oa125912013
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 20 November 2013                           |On 16 December 2013          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                  b- m- b-
                                    o- b-
                                  s- a- b-
                                    n- b-
                                  b- n- b-
                                  b- a- b-
                                  b- z- b-
                                  s- a- b-
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms B Asanovic, Counsel instructed by Makka
Solicitors Ltd.
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. I continue the anonymity order made  in  this  case  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 2. There are a total of eight  appellants  in  this  case.   They  are  all
    members of one family. They and are the wife and children (as  the  case
    may be) of their sponsor, Mr A.

 3. They applied for entry clearance to the United Kingdom as the  dependant
    relatives of their sponsor. The applications were refused for a  variety
    of reasons including things that were discreditable.  They  appealed  to
    the First-tier Tribunal and, in a detailed and considered determination,
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge ruled in the  appellants'  favour  on  the
    disputed points. The respondent has not challenged those findings.

 4. However the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was  very  concerned  that  the
    appellants had not shown that the sponsor was present and settled in the
    United Kingdom as is required by the rules. The judge took the point  on
    her own initiative and the parties were not really prepared to deal with
    it.  The decision was made to continue without an adjournment.  That may
    or may not have been the best decision but it is very easy  to  be  wise
    after the event.  The difficulty was that the papers before the Tribunal
    had not addressed that point taken by the judge  and  there  was  little
    chance to bolster the case with oral evidence.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal was particularly interested in  the  fact  that,
    for the purposes of tax law, the sponsor was described as "not  resident
    and not ordinarily resident" in the United  Kingdom.   The  phrase  "not
    ordinarily  resident"  is  particularly  significant  because  it  is  a
    requirement of the Immigration Rules if they are read carefully that the
    sponsor is ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom  (see  below  HC395
    rule 6 "settled in the United Kingdom" (b)(i).)

 6. I agree with Ms Everett for the respondent that the sponsor's status for
    tax purposes was a wholly pertinent avenue for  enquiry  in  determining
    whether or not the sponsor was ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom
    for the purpose of the immigration rules.

 7. I find that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred when, having noticed the
    requirement of the rules that the sponsor was "ordinarily  resident"  in
    the United Kingdom and noticed that for the purposes of taxation law  he
    was not "ordinarily resident", the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  made  no
    further enquiry or investigation into  his  circumstances  but  regarded
    that finding as determinative of the  status  of  the  sponsor  for  the
    purposes of the immigration rules. This, I find, was a clear mistake  in
    what is otherwise a very careful determination.  There is no  reason  at
    all why these concepts of ordinary residence should have  precisely  the
    same meaning when applied to quite different areas  of  law  and  it  is
    certainly  not  the  case  that  a  person's  status  for  tax  law   is
    determinative of their status under the Immigration  Rules.   I  do  not
    find it necessary to say very much about that because Ms Everett, I find
    wholly correctly and in accordance with her  professional  duty  to  the
    Tribunal, conceded that an error of law had been established essentially
    for the reason given.  I  note  that  the  need  for  a  full  and  fact
    sensitive inquiry into a person's  status  in  the  United  Kingdom  was
    spelled out by Collins J in R v SSHD ex parte Chungtai [1995] Imm AR 559
    which decision was before me.

 8. Having found an error of law I decided to permit  the  Sponsor  to  give
    oral evidence. I reminded myself that he was "wrong footed"  before  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  because  a  point  was  taken  that  he  had   not
    anticipated. He adopted statements made in July and  November  2013  and
    answered some supplementary questions.  He  was  not  cross-examined  at
    great length because, as Ms Everett said at several stages in the course
    of the hearing, the point taken by the judge had not been taken  by  the
    respondent and there was nothing in her papers that  encouraged  her  to
    investigate the point or make very much of it. Nevertheless it had  been
    raised and had to be answered.

 9. It is requirement of paragraph 281(i)(a)(i) of HC 395 that an  applicant
    seeking to join her husband is joining a person "present and settled" in
    the  United  Kingdom.  Paragraph  297(i)(c)  requires  a  child  seeking
    permission to enter the United Kingdom for settlement is a  child  of  a
    parent "present and settled" there. Rule 6 of HC 395 gives  definitions.
    A person is "settled"  in  the  United  Kingdom  if  he  is  "ordinarily
    resident" there (see  rule 6 "settled in the United Kingdom" (b)(i)) and
    is "present and settled" if he is "settled" when the application is made
    and either physically present there or "is coming here with or  to  join
    the applicant and intends to make the United Kingdom their home with the
    applicant if the application is successful" (see  rule  6  "present  and
    settled"). Clearly  the  rules  do  not  require  the  sponsor's  actual
    physical presence in the United Kingdom when  the  application  is  made
    provided there is an intention to join the applicants.

10. In order to be "settled" a person must be entitled to be in  the  United
    Kingdom (which this sponsor certainly is, he is a British national), and
    ordinarily resident there without falling  foul  of  certain  conditions
    that do not apply in his case.

11. The reasons for thinking that he is not ordinarily resident are that  he
    spends a considerable amount of his time, and in the recent past a great
    deal of his time, out of the United Kingdom.   He  has  asked  for  some
    discretion to be shown about the precise nature of  his  employment  and
    there is an anonymity order made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  I
    continue.  He has been working for NATO forces in a place  of  conflict.
    His particular skills are well rewarded. At the date of decision he  had
    no intention of being in the United Kingdom for more than 91 days in any
    particular tax year.  However he had a house in the United  Kingdom.  It
    is a rented property. It has five bedrooms and had been his home in  the
    United Kingdom since 2002.  He has inherited a house in his  country  of
    origin which is in a state of disrepair and  he  owns  a  house  in  its
    capital where the appellants live. The sponsor spends very  little  time
    there. He said, and I accept, that during his most recent tour  of  duty
    he made two visits there. Usually he stayed on the military  base  where
    he worked. I do not think it would be suggested that accommodation on  a
    military base however comfortable it may be is ordinarily regarded as  a
    person's home.

12. I am satisfied that he is not a man who has a home anywhere but  in  the
    United Kingdom in any meaningful sense of the word "home".  The gist  of
    the evidence clearly is that he his country of  birth  some  years  ago,
    made a home for himself in the United Kingdom and wants  his  family  to
    join him.  On an earlier occasion he had applied for  children  to  join
    him. That application was unsuccessful, but one child came  and  settled
    with him and made his home there.  That child is now an adult and is  of
    very little relevance to these proceedings except that his story adds to
    the picture of the sponsor as a man whose home  now  is  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

13. I accept the sponsor's evidence that he intended  to  join  the  family.
    The "date of decision" is only a very short period of  time  before  the
    sponsor's contract of employment came to an end.   The  expectation  was
    that the sponsor would, at least for a while,  have  come  back  to  the
    United Kingdom and I have no hesitation at  all  in  accepting  that  he
    would very soon have joined his family if they had travelled as soon  as
    entry clearance had been granted.  In reality the sponsor and appellants
    they would probably have travelled together as it they  would  all  have
    been ready to travel at about the same time.

14. I find that the interpretation of "ordinarily resident"  is  essentially
    a matter of fact  and  since  2002  ordinarily  this  sponsor  has  been
    resident in the United Kingdom.  He has worked away in order to  provide
    money to look after his family - that is entirely to his credit  and  in
    no way changes the fact that he  is  ordinarily  resident  and  for  the
    purposes of the Immigration Rules, settled in the United Kingdom.

15. I do not think this case is of any relevance whatsoever  except  to  the
    parties as a decision on its own  facts  and  on  its  own  facts  I  am
    persuaded on the balance of probability  that  the  appellants  met  the
    requirements of the Rules at the material time because their sponsor was
    ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom and for that reason having set
    aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal error of law I re-make the
    decision and allow the appeals.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 10 December 2013               |








