
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/12658/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 10th July 2014                               |10th September 2014        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER tribunal JUDGE KELLY

                                   Between

                               Mrs maqbool jan
                          (anonymity not directed)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and



               the secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M.A. Aziz, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1. This matter comes before the Upper Tribunal as the result of  Judge  E.B.
   Grant giving permission to appeal in the following terms:


         The hand-written grounds are not easy to read and I have  struggled
         to decipher the appellant's handwriting. In what I  can  understand
         the appellant submits the determination lacks clarity  that  it  is
         not clear what decision under the Immigration Rules the  judge  has
         made findings on and the reasons therefore. The appellant  asks  if
         Article 8 has been considered.


         I have some sympathy with  the  grounds.  The  determination  comes
         across as poorly structured but it is clear from the findings  that
         the judge found the appellant could not meet  the  requirements  of
         the Immigration Rules because  she  had  not  shown,  supported  by
         medical evidence, that she needed help to  perform  everyday  tasks
         and the evidence of Mrs Naseem did not  state  what  the  appellant
         could or could not do for  herself  without  assistance.  In  other
         words the evidence fell short of establishing  that  the  appellant
         met the requirements of the Immigration Rules.


         There are no findings on article 8 which was  raised  as  an  issue
         before the judge in the witness statement of the sponsor Mr Jabber.
         I cannot see if Article 8 was  raised  in  the  Grounds  of  Appeal
         because the handwritten grounds of  appeal  are  illegible  to  me.
         Permission is granted limited to Article 8.


2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who was born on  the  1st  January
   1944. She had appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Robson)  against
   the refusal  of  the  respondent  to  grant  her  application  for  entry
   clearance as an adult dependent relative of her son (Mr Abdul Jabbar) who
   is a British citizen.


3. The limited and somewhat confusing reference to Article 8 in the  witness
   statement of the sponsor, Mr Jabber, is as follows:


    This is a compelling case and has all the rights of human right article
    8 (sic) dependent financially from UK also has know one (sic)  to  care
    for her.


4. The appellant's grounds of appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  -  which,
   incidentally, are in the same hand as those that led to the  granting  of
   permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal -  are in the following terms:


    Appeal  against  paragraph  (EC-DR.1.1(c))  of  Appendix  FM   of   the
    Immigration Rules (E-ECDR.2.5) on the following grounds -


    1. All the documents regarding my health has been  place  before  (ECO)
       has been overlooked.


    2. It is very hard to look after person like my health  to  look  after
       without close family and my close family are settled in U.K.


    3. Person who used to look after me no longer will. To do evidence  are
       enclosed herewith.


    4. It is very hard to receive treatment of illness  less  someone  take
       you to doctor which are far away from where I live.


    5. Proof of (A,B,C) will follow later. Please review my application and
       allow me to join my family in U.K. where I can look after  last  day
       of life.


5. It is plain from the above that there was  absolutely  no  suggestion  in
   the grounds of appeal that the decision to refuse entry clearance was  in
   breach of the appellant's rights under Article 8  of  the  1950  European
   Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and  Fundamental  Freedoms.
   On the contrary, they made it abundantly clear that the appeal was  being
   brought solely on the ground that the decision was not in accordance with
   immigration rules, and Mr Aziz confirmed that this was all  that  he  had
   argued at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal. In any  event,  had
   the grounds of appeal been truly unintelligible, it is difficult  to  see
   how a failure to consider them could amount to an arguable error of  law.
   The fleeting and barely  intelligible  reference  to  Article  8  in  the
   witness statement of the sponsor was clearly insufficient to  invoke  the
   duty, under Section 86 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
   2002, to determine "any matter raised as a ground  of  appeal"  [emphasis
   added]. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal ought  thus  never  to
   have been granted.


6. I would that add that the criticism made of the determination within  the
   grant of permission to appeal was as unwarranted as it was gratuitous. It
   was gratuitous because permission to appeal was in any event  refused  in
   respect of the ground of application that  led  to  its  making.  It  was
   unwarranted because Judge Robson's determination is both  well-structured
   and a model of clarity.


Decision


7. The appeal is dismissed.


Anonymity not directed.



Signed                                  Date

David Kelly

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



