
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/12950/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|on 5 March 2015                      |on 18 August 2015                    |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     KAR
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Pipe, instructed by Rashid & Co.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal  is  brought  by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department against the decision promulgated on 24 January 2014 of First-
    tier Tribunal Ford which allowed the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    refusal to revoke a deportation order.

 2. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. I do so in order to avoid  a  likelihood
    of serious harm arising to the minor children concerned in this matter.



 3. For the purposes of this decision I refer to the Secretary of State  as
    the respondent and to KAR as the appellant, reflecting their  positions
    as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

Background

 4. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica and was born in 1971.

 5. The appellant came to the UK in 1995 when he was  24  years'  old.  The
    documents before me stated both that he came as a visitor and/or  using
    someone else's passport. Be that as it may, it is not disputed that, at
    best, other than 6 months' leave as a visitor in 1995, he  remained  in
    the UK unlawfully thereafter.

 6. Prior to coming to the UK, the appellant already had a son, KR, born in
    March 1989. At some point KR came to the UK to join the appellant.

 7. After coming to the UK, the appellant had four more children with  four
    different women. The children are:

         TM (daughter) born in October 1996

         LP (daughter) born in September 1997

         KJ (son) born in May 1999

         AR (daughter) born in November 1999

 8. On 14 April 2003 the appellant was  convicted  on  indictment  of  four
    counts of  being  knowingly  concerned  in  fraudulently  evading  duty
    chargeable on goods (controlled drug -  Class  A)  and  two  counts  of
    possessing class A drugs with intent to supply. He was sentenced to  14
    years' imprisonment. A drug trafficking confiscation order  for  �1,435
    was  made  or  in  default  an  additional  45  days  to  his  term  of
    imprisonment.

 9. In May 2008 whilst still in detention but serving at an open prison and
    working in a charity shop, the appellant began a relationship with  HT,
    a British national. She remains his partner.

10. On 29 October 2008 the appellant was sent  a  notice  of  liability  to
    deportation.

11. On 1 April 2009 the respondent made a decision under section  32(5)  of
    the UK Borders Act 2007 to deport the  appellant.  His  appeal  against
    that decision was dismissed on 19 June 2009.

12. The appellant was released on licence in April  2009  having  served  7
    years' imprisonment.

13. Between  the  appellant's  release  on  licence  in  2009  and  2011  a
    substantial amount of litigation ensued,  including  an  asylum  claim,
    further representations and  actions  in  the  High  Court  whilst  the
    respondent  continued  to   seek   to   deport   the   appellant.   The
    representations to the respondent included an application to revoke the
    deportation order.

14. Meanwhile, the appellant and HT had two daughters, FR, born in May 2010
    and MR, born in August 2011.

15. The application to revoke the  deportation  order  was  refused  on  21
    January 2012. The appeal against that decision was dismissed by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Place in a determination promulgated  on  13  March
    2012. The appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal against the decision
    of Judge Place was dismissed by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer  in
    a determination promulgated on 13 March 2013.

16. The appellant then made further submissions on 9  and  15  April  2013.
    Those submissions were on the basis of social work  evidence  that  had
    not been considered in the previous proceedings. On  10  May  2013  the
    respondent again refused to revoke the deportation order. It is it that
    third deportation decision, the second  decision  on  revocation,  that
    underpins the current proceedings.

17. The decision of 10 May 2013 found that the family and private  life  of
    the appellant, his partner and his  children  were  not  sufficient  to
    merit revocation. The Article 8 ECHR claim was certified under  section
    94 (2) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,  affording
    only an out of country appeal right.

18. Following  that  decision,  the  appellant  was  detained  and  removal
    directions were set. A judicial review application against removal  was
    dismissed and the appellant was deported to Jamaica  on  2  June  2013.
    From there, on 28 June 2013, he lodged an appeal against the refusal to
    revoke the deportation order.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

19. The appellant's appeal against the  refusal  dated  10  May  2013  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford on 13 January 2014.

20. Judge Ford found that the appeal should be allowed, essentially because
    of the significant difficulties the appellant's minor children  arising
    from their separation from their father.

21. Judge Ford considered there to be  material  change  from  the  earlier
    judicial decisions. There is no challenge to that approach. The  social
    work reports from 2013 gave significant information about the  children
    and their families and Judge Ford also heard up to date  evidence  from
    the children's mothers and from some of the  children  on  developments
    since the appellant had been deported to Jamaica.

22. Judge Ford considered  in  detail  the  evidence  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's children. There is no challenge to  her  finding  that  the
    appellant's deportation was having a serious, detrimental effect on the
    minor children and was not in their best interests, particularly FR and
    MR as their mother, still in a relationship  with  the  appellant,  was
    having  great  personal  difficulty  in   coping   with   his   absence
    notwithstanding the support of her parents.

23.  The  appellant's  submissions   seeking   to   defend   Judge   Ford's
    determination are right to indicate that it is thorough,  detailed  and
    includes correct legal self-direction as to the need for exceptionality
    where the Immigration Rules are not met; see [15].

24. At [115] Judge  Ford  brought  together  the  various  strands  of  her
    consideration and concluded:

         "By the smallest and narrowest of margins, I am satisfied that  due
         to the evidence concerning the impact on the  Appellant's  children
         of his deportation and physical absence from the UK, this  decision
         is unduly harsh. I am satisfied that this is an  exceptional  case.
         The decision to refuse to revoke the deportation order was  not  in
         the best interest of the children. This, when taken  together  with
         the low risk of re-offending and low risk of serious  harm  to  the
         public, renders this decision disproportionate when it is  balanced
         against the serious offences committed. I have not made  the  error
         of regarding the best interests of  the  children  as  the  primary
         consideration.  It  is  only  one  consideration,  but  when  taken
         together with all of the factors in this case, I am satisfied  that
         the  family  life  interests  outweigh  the  public   interest   in
         deportation. I do fully take into account the  will  of  Parliament
         that such crimes by a foreign  national  criminal  should  lead  to
         deportation for an extended period but the public interest must  be
         weighed against the private  and  family  life  interests  in  each
         individual case."

Error of Law

    Paragraph 391 of the Immigration Rules

25. At the hearing before me on 5  March  2015,  the  respondent  raised  a
    matter not in the written grounds to the effect that Judge  Ford  erred
    in failing to apply paragraph 391 of the Immigration Rules.

26. It was accepted for the appellant that the new ground  could  be  dealt
    with before me. I heard submissions on  the  point  and  gave  an  oral
    indication that, following paragraph 391, a material error arose  where
    the provision that a deportation order would not  be  revoked  "at  any
    time" where the sentence was at least 4 years', as here, had  not  been
    taken into account by the First-tier Tribunal.

27. I also gave an oral indication that the decision showed legal error  as
    the extremely high level of seriousness of the offence as reflected  in
    a sentence of 14 years'  imprisonment  and  weight  attracting  to  the
    public  interest  thereby  was  not  substantively  reflected  in   the
    exceptionality assessment conducted  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  My
    detailed reasons for that finding are below.

28. After I had announced my decision on error of law, the parties were  in
    agreement that the appeal could  be  re-made  by  me  on  the  evidence
    already before me with the assistance of written submissions  from  the
    representatives on  the  new  provisions  of  sections  117A-C  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and the Immigration  Rules
    brought in by the Immigration Act 2014.  A  timetable  was  agreed  for
    those submissions.

29. The respondent's written argument provided on 16 March  2015,  however,
    indicated that the submission on paragraph 391 had been  wrong  in  law
    and was withdrawn. The error of law challenge  was  maintained  on  the
    other grounds and argument put for the appeal being re-made as refused.



30. In the appellant's reply dated 22 March 2015 I was asked to revisit  my
    error of law decision in the light of the  respondent's  concession  on
    paragraph 391 and find that no error  arose.  The  written  submissions
    went on to put the case for the appeal being allowed in the event  that
    I remained of the view that the  First-tier  Tribunal  disclosed  legal
    error and re-made the decision.

31. Neither party requested further time for  written  argument  or  for  a
    hearing for further oral submissions or evidence  so  I  have  made  my
    decision on the basis of what was before me on 5  March  2015  and  the
    written submissions from the parties following that hearing.

32. Given the concession made for the respondent in her written  submission
    I accept that no legal error arises from the absence  of  consideration
    of paragraph 391 in the determination of Judge Ford.  As  advocated  in
    the written submission for the appellant, I revisited my error  of  law
    finding and decided that it remained sound even in the absence  of  the
    paragraph 391 point and such that the decision of Judge Ford had to  be
    set aside.

    Decision on Error of Law

33. As above, it is my judgement that the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Ford discloses legal error in failing to take proper  account  of
    the weight of the public interest arising from the extreme  seriousness
    of  the  appellant's  offence  and  concomitant  very  high  need   for
    deportation to continue in order to deter and express public  revulsion
    at such extremely serous offences.  This was  the  ground  set  out  at
    paragraphs 1 and 2 of the respondent's written  grounds  and  on  which
    permission was granted on 10  March  2014  in  the  decision  of  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Grubb.

34. I accept  that  Judge  Ford  refers  to  the  standard  principles  and
    importance of the public interest at [16], [80], [81], [111], [115] and
    [116]. There is a reference at [79] and  [111]  to  the  "very  serious
    nature" of the offence and  to  how  this  is  reflected  in  the  long
    sentence.

35. What remains absent from the determination, in  my  view,  however,  is
    proper reflection in  substance  of  the  extreme  seriousness  of  the
    offence here and how that increases the weight attracting to the public
    interest over and above that which must always feature  in  deportation
    cases since the introduction of the current statutory  regime  in  July
    2012; see SS (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA  Civ  550,  paragraphs  [48]-
    [55], in particular at [54].

36. I also referred to the Upper Tribunal case of  McLarty  (Deportation  -
    proportionality balance) [2014] UKUT 315 (IAC) which indicates at [29]-
    [31]:

         "29. First, the proportionality test requires a Court  or  Tribunal
         to address itself to and assess the aims or object of the policy in
         question and then to set against that assessment the  factors  said
         to warrant departing from the  stated  object  or  policy.  In  the
         present case the  object  or  policy  in  question  is  the  public
         interest, set out in an Act of Parliament, in favour  of  deporting
         criminals. It is essential that in any assessment the weight of the
         specific object be appraised both in  the  abstract  sense  of  how
         important that object is in policy terms, but also on the basis  of
         the particular facts of the case - how  serious  was  the  specific
         appellant's criminality.

         30.  With regard to the overall weight to be attached to the policy
         there can be little doubt, as we  have  set  out  above,  but  that
         Parliament views the object of  deporting  those  with  a  criminal
         record as a very strong policy. This is a constant in all cases.

         31.  However, the weight to be attached to that  object  will  also
         include a variable component  which  reflects  the  criminality  in
         issue."

37.  The  consideration  at  [115],  set  out  above,  does  not  show   an
    appreciation of the height of the public interest here or  the  factors
    of deterrence and expression of  public  revulsion,  however,  weighing
    only the best interest of the children  and  low  risk  of  reoffending
    against "the serious offences".

38. In reaching my decision on error of law, I was further assisted by  the
    learning of the Court of Appeal in SSHD v AJ (Angola) [2014]  EWCA  Civ
    1636 on the correct approach to the role of the  Immigration  Rules  in
    the exceptionality assessment:

         "39  The fact that the new rules  are  intended  to  operate  as  a
         comprehensive  code  is  significant,  because  it  means  that  an
         official  or  a  tribunal  should  seek  to  take  account  of  any
         Convention rights of an appellant through the lens of the new rules
         themselves, rather than looking  to  apply  Convention  rights  for
         themselves in a free-standing  way  outside  the  new  rules.  This
         feature of the new rules makes  the  decision-making  framework  in
         relation to foreign criminals different from that  in  relation  to
         other parts of the Immigration Rules, where the Secretary of  State
         retains a general discretion  outside  the  Rules  in  exercise  of
         which, in some circumstances, decisions may  need  to  be  made  in
         order to accommodate certain claims for  leave  to  remain  on  the
         basis of Convention rights, as explained in Huang and R  (Nagre)  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin).



      1. The requirement that claims by appellants who are foreign criminals
         for leave to remain, based on the Convention rights  of  themselves
         or their partners, relations or children, should be assessed  under
         the new rules and through their lens is important, as the Court  of
         Appeal  in  MF  (Nigeria)  has  emphasised.  It  seeks  to   ensure
         uniformity of approach between different officials,  tribunals  and
         courts who have to assess such claims, in the interests of fair and
         equal treatment of different appellants with similar cases  on  the
         facts. In this regard, the new rules also serve as a  safeguard  in
         relation  to  rights  of  appellants  under  Article  14  to  equal
         treatment within  the  scope  of  Article  8.  The  requirement  of
         assessment through the lens of the new rules also seeks  to  ensure
         that decisions are made in a way that is properly informed  by  the
         considerable  weight  to  be  given  to  the  public  interest   in
         deportation of foreign criminals, as declared by Parliament in  the
         2007 Act and reinforced by the Secretary of State (as the  relevant
         Minister with  responsibility  for  operation  of  the  immigration
         system), so as to promote public confidence in that system in  this
         sensitive area"

39. It was not disputed here that the appellant could not benefit from  the
    Immigration Rules in force at the time  of  the  hearing  before  Judge
    Ford. Those Immigration Rules took account of the appellant's  children
    and made provision for them where they were able to remain  in  the  UK
    with their mothers; see paragraph 399(b) then in force.

40. Through the Immigration Rules the respondent made legitimate  provision
    for the Article 8 rights of the children and, without  more,  something
    meeting the requirement for  "exceptionality"  in  paragraph  398,  the
    situation of the children cannot defeat deportation.  The  decision  of
    Judge Ford does not conduct the  exceptionality  here  on  that  basis,
    "through the lens of the new rules".

41. Before taking a definitive decision on error of law here, I  took  care
    to ask myself if I was merely disagreeing with what is, in the main,  a
    clear and thorough decision from Judge Ford. I  remained  of  the  view
    that there is a failure to weigh properly the public interest given the
    extreme seriousness of the offence, to take into account  in  substance
    the importance of deterrence and need  for  the  expression  of  public
    revulsion and to take account of the provision  already  made  for  the
    difficulties that will be faced by  children  of  deportees  under  the
    substantive provision of paragraph 399(b) of the Immigration Rules.

42. I am satisfied that those errors are such that that it cannot  be  said
    that the same outcome would have been reached had they not occurred.  I
    must therefore set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and re-
    make the decision.

Re-Making of the Appeal

43. Although there are two previous judicial decisions which found that the
    appellant should be deported and remain deported,  I  accept  that  the
    situation now is materially different and requires a fresh  assessment.
    Some 6 years have passed since the deportation order  was  made  and  2
    years since the  appellant  was  deported  to  Jamaica.  There  is  the
    additional social work material and up to date evidence brought  before
    First-tier Tribunal-tier Judge Ford.

44. Further, significant legislation  concerning  deportation  appeals  has
    been brought into force. Before me, the appeal falls to  be  considered
    in line with Section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014 which inserted Part
    5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 with effect from
    28th July 2014. All deportation appeals heard after that date,  whether
    the decision to deport or the deportation order was made prior to  that
    date or not, are subject to this new statutory  scheme;  Singh  v  SSHD
    [2015] EWCA Civ 74 applied.

45. The relevant parts of section 117A-C are as follows:

         117A  Application of this Part

         (1) This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required to
         determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

              (a) breaches a person's right to respect for private and
              family life under Article 8, and

              (b) as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the
              Human Rights Act 1998.

         (2) In considering the public interest question, the court or
         tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

              (a) in all cases, to the considerations listed in section
              117B, and

              (b) in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals,
              to the considerations listed in section 117C.

         (3) In subsection (2), "the public interest question" means the
         question of whether an interference with a person's right to
         respect for private and family life is justified under Article
         8(2).

         117B  Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all
              cases

         (1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the
         public interest.

         (2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

          [pic] [pic]  [pic]

              (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

              (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are
         financially independent, because such persons-

              (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

              (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (4) Little weight should be given to-

              (a) a private life, or

              (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner, that is
              established by a person at a time when the person is in the
              United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person at a time when the person's immigration status is
         precarious.

         (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

              (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
              relationship with a qualifying child, and

              (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
              the United Kingdom.

         117C  Article 8: additional considerations in cases involving
              foreign criminals

         (1) The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.



         (2) The more serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal,
         the greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.

         (3) In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more, the
         public interest requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or
         Exception 2 applies.

         (4) Exception 1 applies where-

              (a) C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for
              most of C's life,

              (b) C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
              Kingdom, and

              (c) there would be very significant obstacles to C's
              integration into the country to which C is proposed to be
              deported.

         (5) Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and the effect of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

         (6) In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to a
         period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public interest
         requires deportation unless there are very compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and
         2.

         (7) The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be taken
         into account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision to
         deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that the reason for
         the decision was the offence or offences for which the criminal has
         been convicted.

46. The Immigration Rules have also been amended and for my purposes are as
    follows:

         "A362.Where Article 8 is raised in the context of deportation under
         Part 13 of these Rules, the claim under Article 8 will only succeed
         where the requirements of these rules as at 28 July 2014 are met,
         regardless of when the notice of intention to deport or the
         deportation order, as appropriate, was served.

         ...

         Revocation of deportation order

         390. An application for revocation of a deportation order will be
         considered in the light of all the circumstances including the
         following:

             (i) the grounds on which the order was made;

             (ii) any representations made in support of revocation;

             (iii) the interests of the community, including the
             maintenance of an effective immigration control;

             (iv) the interests of the applicant, including any
             compassionate circumstances.

         390A. Where paragraph 398 applies the Secretary of State will
         consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not,
         it will only be in exceptional circumstances that the public
         interest in maintaining the deportation order will be outweighed by
         other factors.

         ...

         391A. In other cases, revocation of the order will not normally be
         authorised unless the situation has been materially altered, either
         by a change of circumstances since the order was made, or by fresh
         information coming to light which was not before the appellate
         authorities or the Secretary of State. The passage of time since
         the person was deported may also in itself amount to such a change
         of circumstances as to warrant revocation of the order.

         ...

         396. Where a person is liable to deportation the presumption shall
         be that the public interest requires deportation. It is in the
         public interest to deport where the Secretary of State must make a
         deportation order in accordance with section 32 of the UK Borders
         Act 2007.

         397. A deportation order will not be made if the person's removal
         pursuant to the order would be contrary to the UK's obligations
         under the Refugee Convention or the Human Rights Convention. Where
         deportation would not be contrary to these obligations, it will
         only be in exceptional circumstances that the public interest in
         deportation is outweighed.

         Deportation and Article 8

         A398. These rules apply where:

         (a) a foreign criminal liable to deportation claims that his
         deportation would be contrary to the United Kingdom's obligations
         under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention;

         (b) a foreign criminal applies for a deportation order made against
         him to be revoked.

         398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
         to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights
         Convention, and

         (a) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the
         public good and in the public interest because they have been
         convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced to a
         period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;

         (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the
         public good and in the public interest because they have been
         convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced to a
         period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least 12 months;

         (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the
         public good and in the public interest because, in the view of the
         Secretary of State, their offending has caused serious harm or they
         are a persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for the
         law,

         the Secretary of State in assessing that claim will consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, the
         public interest in deportation will only be outweighed by other
         factors where there are very compelling circumstances over and
         above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c) applies
         if -

         (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
         with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and

             (i) the child is a British Citizen; or

             (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for at least
             the 7 years immediately preceding the date of the immigration
             decision; and in either case

             (a) it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the
             country to which the person is to be deported; and

             (b) it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in the UK
             without the person who is to be deported; or

         (b) the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a
         partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or settled in the
         UK, and

             (i) the relationship was formed at a time when the person
             (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and their immigration status
             was not precarious; and

             (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live in the
             country to which the person is to be deported, because of
             compelling circumstances over and above those described in
             paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and

             (iii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to remain in
             the UK without the person who is to be deported.

         399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies
         if -

         (a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for most of his
         life; and

         (b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and

         (c) there would be very significant obstacles to his integration
         into the country to which it is proposed he is deported."

47. The head note of Chege (section 117D - Article  8  -  approach)  [2015]
    UKUT 00165 (IAC) states:

         "The correct approach, where an appeal on human rights grounds  has
         been brought in seeking to resist deportation, is to consider:

             (i) is the appellant a foreign criminal as  defined  by  s117D
             (2) (a), (b) or (c);

             (ii) if so, does he fall within paragraph 399 or 399A  of  the
             Immigration Rules;

             (iii) if not are there very compelling circumstances over  and
             beyond those falling within 399 and  399A  relied  upon,  such
             identification to  be  informed  by  the  seriousness  of  the
             criminality and taking into account the  factors  set  out  in
             s117B.

         Compelling as an adjective has the meaning of having a powerful and
         irresistible effect; convincing.

         The purpose of paragraph 398 is to recognize circumstances that are
         sufficiently  compelling  to  outweigh  the  public   interest   in
         deportation but do not fall within paragraphs 399 and 399A.

         The task of the judge is to assess the competing interests  and  to
         determine whether an interference with a person's right to  respect
         for private and family life is  justified  under  Article  8(2)  or
         whether   the   public   interest    arguments    should    prevail
         notwithstanding the engagement of Article 8.

         It follows from this that if an appeal does not  succeed  on  human
         rights grounds,  paragraph  397  provides  the  respondent  with  a
         residual  discretion  to  grant  leave  to  remain  in  exceptional
         circumstances where an appellant cannot succeed by invoking  rights
         protected by Article 8 of the ECHR."

48. It was common ground before me that the appellant is a foreign national
    criminal as defined in s117D.

49. He cannot fall within paragraphs 399 and 399A as he has a  sentence  of
    14 years' and comes within paragraph 398(a).

50. The appellant can therefore only succeed in his appeal where there  are
    "very compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those  described  in
    paragraphs 399 and 399A relied upon, such identification to be informed
    by the seriousness of the  criminality  and  taking  into  account  the
    factors set out in s117B.

51. The compelling factor here, realistically, is the damage being done  to
    the appellant's children as a result of his deportation. There  was  no
    challenge to the best interest assessment of Judge Ford or her  finding
    that the children's  situations  are  "quite  severe".  I  am  entirely
    content to adopt her position on the seriousness  for  the  appellant's
    children, nothing suggesting that  it  will  diminish  with  time.  The
    children have exhibited emotional and  behavioural  problems  in  their
    different ways and,  for  those  of  school  age,  their  education  is
    suffering. The two youngest children are  additionally  affected  where
    the appellant was a full-time carer for them before he was deported and
    their mother is struggling to cope emotionally and practically  in  his
    absence. There is an additional detriment as the children  are  not  in
    contact with each other as they were when the appellant  was  here   to
    coordinate contact.

52. The best interests of the children  here  are  in  the  return  of  the
    appellant so that he can have regular direct contact with them all  and
    resume day to day  care  of  his  two  youngest  children.  Those  best
    interests remain a primary  factor  in  the  assessment  that  must  be
    conducted notwithstanding the provisions  of  section  117A-C  and  the
    Immigration Rules.

53. I accept, therefore, that the difficulties for the children here are at
    the higher end of what might be expected as a result of their  father's
    deportation. It remains the case that the Immigration Rules  anticipate
    hardship of this kind and provide for it at  paragraph 399(a)(ii)(b).

54. I also referred to the comments of the Court of Appeal at  [31]  of  ZZ
    (Tanzania) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1404, in  which  deportation  in  the
    context of a criminal sentence was six years was upheld:

         "31. Insofar as [a social worker] offered the opinion that [ZZ's
         son] would be adversely affected by the deportation of his father,
         the Tribunal accepted it without reservation but observed that it
         was essentially uncontroversial. It is unsurprising that they did
         not regard it as assisting the appellant's case on exceptional
         circumstances. As Sedley LJ said in Lee v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 348:



             'The tragic consequence is that this family ... will be broken
             up forever because of the appellant's bad behaviour. That is
             what deportation does. Sometimes the balance between its
             justification and its consequences falls the other way, but
             when it does so is a question for [the Tribunal].'"

55. It will be clear from  my  error  of  law  decision  that  I  view  the
    criminality here as extremely serious indeed.    Section  117C  (2)  of
    the 2002 Act indicates that the more serious the offences, "the greater
    is the public interest in deportation". There must be an extremely high
    public interest in the continuation  of  the  deportation  order  here,
    including the importance of deterring others from  such  offending  and
    expression of public revulsion at such serious crimes involving drugs.

56. It did not appear to me that the provisions of paragraph 117B  assisted
    the appellant. As above, other  provisions  already  bring  the  public
    interest to weigh very heavily indeed against him.  I  assume  that  he
    speaks English  but  against  the  seriousness  of  his  offending  and
    immigration history this cannot alter the balance very  much.   Nothing
    suggests that he has been financially independent or that he  has  ever
    provided for his children financially. Little weight  attracts  to  his
    family life with his partner and to any private life he had here  where
    he was  here  almost  entirely  illegally.  He  does  not  qualify  for
    consideration under section 117B(6) where he is subject to deportation.



57. I should also add that it is not my view that the appellant can benefit
    a great deal from his offences occurring as long ago as  2002  where  a
    substantial period of imprisonment  forms  over  half  the  intervening
    period and, as indicated above, protracted, albeit I accept legitimate,
    legal proceedings have led to a great deal of the remaining period with
    the appellant at all times knowing that he faced deportation.

58. This appeal raises deeply  concerning  issues.  The  wellbeing  of  the
    appellant's  children  is  already   significantly   damaged   by   his
    deportation. They will have to face ongoing hardship in future  if  the
    deportation order is not revoked. It is my  conclusion,  however,  that
    even taking the children's difficulties at their highest together  with
    those of the appellant's partner and the  appellant  himself  at  being
    separated from his children, the evidence here does not show compelling
    circumstances that can outweigh the extremely high public  interest  in
    the appellant remaining subject to  a  deportation  order.  The  public
    interest here is so very high as a result of  the  seriousness  of  the
    offending that it demands  that  the  appellant  remain  subject  to  a
    deportation order and the  respondent's  decision  to  that  effect  is
    proportionate.

59. I therefore dismiss the appeal.

Decision

60. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal disclosed an error on  a  point
    of law and is set aside.

61. The appeal is re-made as dismissed.



Signed   [pic]    Date: 14 August 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

