
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  OA/12246/2012
     OA/12248/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 25th September  2013                         |On 25th September 2013     |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                             MISS KIRANJIT KAUR
                             MISS RAJWINDER KAUR
                         (Anonymity Order not Made)
                                                                    Claimant
                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs T White (instructed by Ali Sinclair Solicitors)

For the Respondent:  Mr N Bramble (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Appellants against a determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Moore) promulgated on  23rd  April  2013  by  which  he  dismissed  the
    Appellants' appeals against the Entry Clearance Officer's  decision  to
    refuse them leave to enter the UK as the children of their UK  Sponsor,
    their father.

 2. At the time of the applications both  Appellants  were  under  the  age
    eighteen.

 3. The grounds seeking permission to appeal have been expanded upon by Mrs
    White in a skeleton argument helpfully provided for the hearing  before
    me and in her oral submissions. The ground in which it is said that the
    Judge erred is simple, namely that the Judge did not  engage  with  the
    evidence of the two Appellants who had filed  witness  statements.  Had
    their evidence been taken into  account  it  would  have  affected  the
    Judge's findings as to the relationship the Appellants had  with  their
    sponsoring father and  would  have  been  material  to  the  Article  8
    decision.

 4. Mrs White also asserts that the First-tier Tribunal erred on the  basis
    that the Judge did not say that the Sponsor had no contact or financial
    responsibility for his daughters and was thus not entitled to say as he
    did that the Sponsor had abdicated responsibility for  them.  She  also
    drew attention to the Judge's recital of the Entry Clearance  Officer's
    position who acknowledged that the sponsoring father had  been  sending
    money and had had contact with his daughters.

 5. Mr Bramble defended the determination pointing out that the Appellants'
    witness statements were both identical;  there  was  no  difference  in
    nuance or in their evidence. The Judge who heard oral evidence from the
    sponsoring father had made adverse credibility findings  in  particular
    as to the whether the Appellants  were  still  in  contact  with  their
    mother and as to the Sponsor's insistence that  he  did  not  know  the
    mother's whereabouts, despite  the  fact  that  she  had  submitted  an
    affidavit for the appeal.  The  Judge's  adverse  credibility  findings
    would affect the amount of weight to be  attached  to  the  Appellants'
    statements.

 6. Additionally Mr Bramble pointed out that the issues dealt with  in  the
    Appellants' statements as to contact with  the  Sponsor,  contact  with
    their mother and financial responsibility  are  all  addressed  by  the
    Judge in his determination. He submitted that the Judge dealt with  all
    of the issues raised by the Sponsor and the Appellants  and  made  full
    reasoned findings and it could not be said that the Judge was not aware
    of or failed to take into account any aspect of the case.

 7. In his Article 8 findings the  Judge  took  those  adverse  credibility
    findings as a starting point and conducted  the  appropriate  balancing
    exercise.

 8. Mr Bramble submitted that it was not  the  case,  as  asserted  in  the
    grounds seeking permission, that the Judge  concentrated  only  on  the
    Sponsor and failed to take into account that it was not  the  Sponsor's
    appeal but the Appellants'. Where the Judge   referred at paragraph  36
    to the Article 8 right to respect  for  "  his  family  life"  that  is
    clearly a typographical error because it is apparent from the remainder
    of that paragraph that it is the two Appellants'  best  interests  that
    the judge is considering.

 9. Mrs White then referred me to paragraph  36 of the determination  where
    the Judge  said:-"despite the elderly nature of the grandparents  I  am
    not satisfied that their health conditions prevent them from continuing
    to accommodate the Appellants, and indeed as  the  two  Appellants  get
    older they may be able to assist their grandparents when  needed."  She
    suggested that the Judge, far from looking at the best interests of the
    Appellants  was  rather  looking  at  the  best  interests   of   their
    grandparents.

10. I do not find that the First-tier Tribunal made an error  of  law  such
    that the determination should be set aside in this case.

11. The essential facts of this case are that some nine years prior to  the
    application the Sponsor had left India leaving his wife and  daughters.
    He and his wife were then divorced and his  daughters  were  left  with
    their grandparents who are now aged 71 and 67. It was  claimed  in  the
    application  and  appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that   the
    sponsoring father had  had  sole  responsibility  for  the  Appellants'
    upbringing and that the grandparents  are  no  longer  either  able  or
    willing to continue with their care.

12. The First-tier Tribunal heard oral evidence from the sponsoring father.
    It also had a statement from each Appellant signed on 11th April 2013.

13. Mr Bramble is right in saying that the Appellants'  witness  statements
    are identical. That is a clear  indication  that  the  statements  were
    drafted by a third party, probably the solicitors and forwarded to  the
    Appellants to read and sign. That is not to say that there is  anything
    untoward in the preparation of the statements;  it  simply  means  that
    they are not expressed in the Appellants own words.

14. The Judge having heard the father's evidence had considerable  concerns
    over his credibility. He accepted, as had the Entry Clearance  Officer,
    on the basis of receipts, that father had been sending money  to  India
    to the grandparents for the benefit of the girls.  However,  none  were
    more than two years old and the payments were not  made  on  a  regular
    basis. The Judge also noted that there was no evidence from the  school
    that the father paid the school fees and had always done so; rather the
    evidence was that the grandfather paid the school fees. With regards to
    the contact which it was claimed was regular  and  frequent  the  Judge
    noted that save for the claims made by the parties there was  no  other
    evidence of that.

15. With regard to the role that the father had taken in the girls'  lives,
    the Judge found the Sponsor's answers to have been lacking  in  clarity
    and vague and he specifically found at paragraph 28 that:-

         "Whilst it would be fair to say that  the  sponsor  has  made  some
         contact with his daughters and has infrequently sent money  to  the
         grandparents this is indicative of a certain interest at  least  by
         the father. However, in reality he had abdicated responsibility for
         their welfare and upbringing and did so  many  years  ago,  leaving
         that to the grandparents."

16. Contrary to Mrs White's submission I find that there is  no  perversity
    in that finding by the Judge. The Judge found that  whilst  the  father
    has a certain interest in his daughters he has in  reality  left  their
    day-to-day welfare and upbringing  to  others.  That  is  clearly  what
    happened in this case.

17. The Judge then goes on to consider the situation as regards the  girls'
    mother, the Sponsor's former wife. For reasons which he gave and  which
    have not been challenged before me the Judge concluded  that  he  could
    not be satisfied that the girls were in fact not in  touch  with  their
    mother.

18. Again, contrary to the assertions by Mrs White, the adverse credibility
    findings in relation to the Sponsor clearly impact significantly on the
    case as a whole. Whilst it is true that the Sponsor is only one half of
    the story and that he is not the  Appellants,  he  is  giving  evidence
    about the relationship between him and the Appellants and therefore his
    evidence should have been satisfactory and credible  and  it  was  not.
    Those findings will necessarily affect the weight to be attached to any
    statements filed by the Appellants which give the same evidence as  the
    father in terms of responsibility, finances and their mother.

19. I accept that the Judge may be criticised for not specifically  setting
    out that he  was  not  attaching  weight  to  the  Appellants'  witness
    statements and why; however his failure to  do  so,  whilst  an  error,
    could not have had any material effect on the outcome  of  the  appeal.
    The Appellants' credibility was also destroyed by their father and  the
    witness statements can not be said to carry weight  which  would  alter
    the outcome.

20. The Judge in looking at Article 8 has clearly had at the  forefront  of
    his mind where the best interests of  the  Appellants  lie.  The  Judge
    referred himself to ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4. That case, as well  as
    stressing the primacy to be afforded  to  the  best  interests  of  the
    child, finds that a British child is entitled to be brought up  in  the
    country of its nationality and culture. In this case the Appellants are
    Indian nationals who have lived all their lives in India. They have had
    extremely limited contact with their father for the past nine years and
    their home has always been with  their  grandparents  throughout  their
    formative years and it is to their grandparents that they will have the
    emotional attachment. In finding that  it  is  not  a  disproportionate
    breach of the Appellants' right to family life to  dismiss  the  appeal
    and refuse them entry the Judge has clearly had their best interests to
    the fore.

21. Where the Judge comments  about  the  Appellants'  as  they  get  older
    perhaps assisting their grandparents when needed, I do not  agree  with
    Mrs White that this is suggesting  that  their  best  interests  should
    dictate that they look after their grandparents. Rather  the  Judge  is
    noting the reality of the situation. The Appellant's closest  relatives
    are  their  grandparents.  They  have  lived  with  their  grandparents
    throughout  their  formative  years  and  continue  to   do   so.   The
    grandparents are getting older but the Appellants' need to  be  "looked
    after" diminishes as they  are  older  teenagers  and  similarly  their
    ability to offer assistance to their grandparents with whom  they  live
    increases as they get older. That is simply a fact of life and does, in
    my view not amount to a finding as to the Appellants' best interests.

22. I find that the First-tier Tribunal Judge made no  error  of  law  that
    could possibly have led to a different outcome and so the determination
    stands.

23. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.




Signed                              Date 25th September 2013





Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

