
[pic]

IAC-AH-LEM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)            Appeal Number: OA/12154/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the RCJ                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 February 2016                    |On 28 April 2016                     |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISTANBUL

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            mR Zurab Tamazishvili
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:          Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:      Mr S Harding, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.        The  appellant  has  been  granted  permission   to   appeal   the
    determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Mayall   allowing   the
    respondent's appeal against the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer
    taken on 3 September 2014 to refuse him admission  to  the  UK  as  the
    family member of an EEA national exercising treaty rights in the UK.

2.       The judge held at paragraph 17 that it was not in dispute that  the
    EEA national was exercising treaty rights.  He  stated  that  the  only
    issue raised in the ECM appeal was the nature of the relationship.   He
    noted that since then the parties have married.

3.       The judge held as follows:

         "18.  I heard the evidence of the sponsor.  She struck me as  being
             an obviously  credible  and  honest  witness.   I  accept  her
             evidence.  Thus I am satisfied that this couple, who  are  now
             married, are in  a  long-term  and  durable  relationship  and
             intend to live together permanently as husband and wife.  They
             have a daughter together.  They have been separated  when  the
             appellant returned to Georgia but I  am  satisfied  that  they
             have kept in contact with each other.  I am entirely satisfied
             that the sponsor supports the application.


         19.    In these circumstances I am satisfied that the appellant met
             the requirements of the EEA Regulations at  the  time  of  the
             decision.  He is now the spouse of an EEA national  exercising
             treaty rights."


4.        The  judge  then  allowed  the  appeal   pursuant   to   the   EEA
    Regulations.

5.       The first issue raised by the appellant  was  that  the  judge  had
    materially erred in law by allowing the respondent's  appeal  outright.
    The  ECO  has  not  exercised  their  discretion  in  this  case  under
    Regulation 17(4) of the 2006 EEA Regulations.  As  the  respondent  was
    found to be an extended/other family member under Regulation 8(5),  the
    judge should have remitted the case  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for
    consideration under Regulation 17(4), instead of  allowing  the  appeal
    outright.  Reliance was placed on  Ihemedu  (OFMs  -  meaning)  Nigeria
    [2011] UKUT 003040 (IAC), head note (3).

6.       The grounds went on to say that whilst the respondent  and  sponsor
    may now be married, the relevant date in entry  clearance  applications
    is the date of application and therefore the matter considered  by  the
    judge and findings he arrived at had to be in line with this.  As  such
    it was submitted that despite being married now  at  the  date  of  the
    application, the respondent could only be  considered  as  an  extended
    family member and therefore Regulation 17(4) applied.

7.       In respect of which date applied when  the  judge  was  considering
    this appeal, Mr Harding relied on  the  Upper  Tribunal's  decision  in
    Boodhoo and another (EEA Regs: relevant  evidence)  [2013]  UKUT  00346
    (IAC).  Head note 1 states:

         "(1)   Neither Section 85A  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
             Asylum Act 2002 nor the guidance in DR (Morocco)* [2005] UKAIT
             38 regarding a previous version of Section 85(5) of  that  Act
             has any bearing on an appeal under the  Immigration  (European
             Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006.   In  such  an  appeal,  a
             Tribunal has power to consider any evidence  which  it  thinks
             relevant to the substance of the decision, including  evidence
             which concerns a matter arising after the date of decision."

8.       It follows from this decision that the appellant was wrong to  rely
    on Ihemedu, as Ihemedu was not on all fours  with  the  facts  of  this
    case.  Ihemedu concerned an applicant who was an extended family member
    of an EEA national. Whilst this appellant was an extended family member
    at the date he made his application,  he  had  since  become  a  family
    member of the EEA national following their marriage on 13 August  2014.
    In the light of Boodhoo,  I find that the judge did not err in  law  in
    considering the evidence that was before him at the date of hearing.

9.       The second ground raised by the appellant was that the judge  erred
    in law in not remitting the case to the Secretary of State rather  than
    allowing the appeal outright.  I find that this ground  cannot  succeed
    in light of my findings at paragraph 8 above.  The respondent is now  a
    family member of the EEA national.

10.     I find that Regulation 11(2) applies in  this  case  which  requires
    the respondent to be admitted to the UK as he is a family member of  an
    EEA national and is joining the EEA national in the UK.  The judge  did
    not err in law in allowing the appeal outright.  The  judge's  decision
    allowing the respondent's appeal shall stand.




Signed
       Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

