
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/12086/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 9 August 2016                          |On 16 August 2016                |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                      entry clearnce officer, abu dhabi
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                   nourelhouda hamed abdelrahman elebiary
                            (no anonymity order)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Dr H Massoud, Sponsor


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant Entry Clearance Officer appeals with  permission  against
    the decision and reasons statement of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Juss
    that was promulgated on 19 August 2015.  Judge Juss allowed the  appeal
    of Mrs Elebiary against the decision of  9  September  2014  to  refuse
    entry clearance as a medical visitor.

 2. Mr Elebiary was represented by her daughter and  son-in  law  who  were
    present at the hearing.  Both are  medical  doctors  and  as  would  be
    expected are well educated.  Nevertheless, I ensured they were able  to
    follow proceedings by explaining  to  them  the  procedural  and  legal
    issues that arose.

 3. After hearing from Mr Mills and discussing matters with all  present  I
    am satisfied that Judge Juss erred in law in the way he dealt with  the
    appeal.  It is evident that he believed the appellant had a full  right
    of appeal against the  decision  refusing  her  entry  clearance  as  a
    medical visitor.  There has never been a full right of  appeal  against
    such an immigration decision.  A person refused entry  clearance  as  a
    medical visitor has only ever  been  able  to  appeal  on  the  limited
    grounds of race relations and human rights.   Therefore,  the  approach
    taken by Judge Juss is fundamentally flawed and his  decision  must  be
    set aside.

 4. The question  for  me  is  what  should  the  decision  be.   Mr  Mills
    acknowledged that Judge Juss had made a number of sustainable  findings
    about the appellant's circumstances.  The issue was whether  article  8
    was engaged at all.  He argued it could not be engaged on private  life
    grounds because there was no reason the appellant could  not  have  the
    necessary medical treatment either in Egypt or elsewhere.  But Mr Mills
    acknowledged that the appellant's daughter and her  family  resided  in
    the UK and part of the reason for choosing the UK for medical treatment
    was the fact that they were here and could assist the appellant both in
    dealing with the medical issues and treatment as well as  helping  with
    any aftercare.

 5. Having reviewed all the evidence and arguments, I am satisfied that  it
    would be appropriate to remake the appeal to allow it.  As indicated by
    the Upper Tribunal in Abbasi, article 8 can be engaged in  relation  to
    short term visits but each case will  turn  on  its  own  merits.   The
    evidence in this case is that the appellant was seeking to come to  the
    UK for a multitude of reasons.  She needed surgery on  her  knee.   She
    wanted the support of her daughter, who is medically qualified  in  the
    UK, both in terms of ensuring she received the best available treatment
    but also that she could be cared for after any  operation  by  a  close
    relative.  Such are common and perhaps natural desires which  leads  me
    to conclude that the appellant's circumstances just  engage  article  8
    for family life reasons.

 6. Judge Juss made findings that the appellant met all of the requirements
    of paragraph 51 of the immigration rules as a medical visitor.  Bearing
    in mind the guidance in Kaur these  are  strong  indications  that  the
    decision refusing  entry  clearance  is  disproportionate  in  all  the
    circumstances because it is  not  in  accordance  with  the  law.   The
    appellant met the usual criteria and the Entry Clearance Office has not
    given any explanation as to why she should not benefit  from  the  law.
    Not allowing her entry even though she meets all the relevant  criteria
    amounts to arbitrariness which proportionality abhors.

 7. As the Entry Clearance Officer has failed  to  demonstrate  why  it  is
    necessary to refuse to admit the appellant as a  medical  visitor,  and
    since the burden in this regard is on the Entry Clearance Office  given
    the sustained findings of Judge Juss, there is no need to carry out the
    balancing exercise other than to say  that  there  is  nothing  in  the
    public interest to weigh against  the  appellant.   As  there  is  good
    reason why she wishes to undergo surgery in the  UK,  because  she  has
    close relatives here who will be able to care for her in the  immediate
    period after her operation, and this is a a time  when  family  members
    help each other out, the appeal must succeed.

 8. I add, for clarity, that I have no doubt whatsoever about the integrity
    of the appellant's daughter and son-in-law and  even  at  the  date  of
    hearing I am satisfied  that  the  requirements  of  paragraph  51  are
    satisfied.  But the appeal is allowed  because  the  refusal  of  entry
    clearance fails to respect the appellant's rights under  article  8  of
    the human rights convention because the decision is arbitrary given the
    facts established by the evidence.



Decision

The decision and reasons of Judge Juss contain an error on a  point  of  law
and are set aside.

I remake the decision and allow the appeal  against  the  refusal  of  entry
clearance.



Signed                                  Date     16/08/2016

Judge McCarthy
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
