
`[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/12619/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 February 2016                            |On 13 April 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - LAHORE
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                Faisal AFZAL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Hashimi, instructed by Whitefield Solicitors
Limited


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I shall refer to the respondent as the appellant and to  the  appellant
    as the respondent (as they appeared respectively before the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The appellant, Faisal Afzal, was born on 10 June  1977  and
    is a male  citizen  of  Pakistan.   The  appellant  applied  for  entry
    clearance to the United Kingdom for settlement  as  the  partner  of  a
    person present or settled here.   His  application  was  refused  by  a
    decision of the Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) on 8 September 2014.   He
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Mensah) which, in a Decision
    and Reasons promulgated on 10 June 2015 allowed the appeal on Article 8
    ECHR grounds.  The Secretary of State now appeals, with permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. It is common ground between the parties that the appellant  was  unable
    to meet the requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   Indeed,  Judge
    Mensah [9] noted that,

         The sponsor accepts that she cannot meet  the  specified  documents
         required within the Rules because her job with HRA Brothers Limited
         was not paid into her bank account but instead was  paid  cash  and
         she did not deposit the entire wage into her bank but says she used
         the money for her day-to-day expenses.

 3. Notwithstanding that finding, the judge went on to find that there were
    exceptional circumstances such that the appeal should be allowed  under
    Article 8 ECHR.  Before the First-tier Tribunal, the  appellant  relied
    upon Mostafa (Article 8 in Entry Clearance) [2015] UKUT 112.  Referring
    to that case [11], the judged noted that it "made clear when  assessing
    proportionality under Article 8 the ability of the appellant to satisfy
    the Rules was capable of being a weighty [factor]."  The judge accepted
    "undisputed documentary evidence" that the sponsor was in fact  earning
    in excess of the financial minimum and that she had failed to "pay  the
    total sum from her employment with HRA Brothers into her  bank  account
    because she used some of the money on day-to-day expenses."  The  judge
    noted that the sponsor had rectified that difficulty as from  September
    2014 "when she received the  decision."   Concluding  her  analysis  at
    [12], the judge said,

         I do not consider it proportionate  to  force  [the  appellant  and
         sponsor] to now re-apply and file the same documents as are  before
         me and can see no material benefit or public  interest  in  forcing
         them to do so.  However I can see that to force them to do so would
         delay their union and therefore  interfere  with  the  family  life
         (sic)

 4. I find that the judge erred in law such that her decision falls  to  be
    set aside.  I have reached that decision  for  the  following  reasons.
    First, I find that the judge has misapplied Mostafa.  An ability of  an
    appellant to satisfy the Immigration  Rules  may  well  be  a  "weighty
    factor" in determining proportionality  under  Article  8  but  in  the
    present appeal the appellant did  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules; in particular, he could not meet  the  Rules  as  to
    specified documents.  Secondly, it is not clear in this out of  country
    application why the judge has taken into account post-decision evidence
    such that the appellant and sponsor  have,  in  effect,  persuaded  the
    judge that they could meet the specified documents requirements of  the
    Immigration Rules (see the "rectification" of  the  sponsor's  physical
    arrangements referred to at [11]).  Further, having regard to the Court
    of Appeal judgment in SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA  Civ  387,  there  was  no
    analysis by the judge as to whether family life may be enjoyed  outside
    the United Kingdom.   Finally,  the  reason  given  by  the  judge  for
    allowing the appeal on Article 8 grounds (that is, because it would not
    be reasonable to "force them to ... delay  their  union  and  therefore
    interfere with the family  life.")  is  not  apposite.   I  accept  Mrs
    Petterson's submission that, as  soon  as  the  appellant  and  sponsor
    realised that they were failing to comply with the specified  documents
    requirements  in  September  2014,  they  could  have  made   a   fresh
    application for entry clearance rather than  pursue  a  lengthy  appeal
    through the Tribunal system.  They have, therefore, been kept apart  by
    their own conduct and not that of the Secretary of State.

 5. In the circumstances, I set aside the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision.
    Further, in the light of the findings and observations which I have set
    out above I re-make  the  decision  dismissing  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules and on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

 6. Finally, I record that Miss Hashimi raised a preliminary issue  at  the
    Upper Tribunal hearing.  She was concerned that the grant of permission
    by Judge Rintoul referred, in  the  headings  to  the  decision,  to  a
    different appellant.  I am not satisfied that that is any more  than  a
    typographical or template error and has no  impact  whatever  upon  the
    validity on Judge Rintoul's grant of permission.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on  10  June
2015 is set aside.  I re-make the decision.  The appellant's appeal  against
the decision of the Entry  Clearance  Officer  dated  8  September  2014  is
dismissed under the Immigration Rules and on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 2 April 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date 2 April 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
