
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/12048/2011
                                                               OA/12052/2011
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23 August 2013                             |On 5 September 2013          |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                 Liu Yu Yan
                                   Jie Lin

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER GUANGZHOU
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
for the Appellant:     Mr C. Lamb, Counsel instructed by David Tang & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P. Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants in this appeal are mother and son. They are  citizens  of
    China. The son was born in October 1996 and so now nearly 17 years  old.
    They appealed against a decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing
    their appeals against a decision of the respondent to refuse them  entry
    clearance to the United Kingdom as  the  wife  and  child  of  a  person
    present and settled there.

 2. The respondent was not satisfied that the marriage between  the  sponsor
    and first appellant was subsisting  or  that  the  appellants  could  be
    maintained in accordance with the Rules at the date of  decision.   When
    refusing  the  application  the  respondent  referred   to   the   first
    appellant's adverse immigration history because she had made an  earlier
    application to enter the United Kingdom as a visitor and had relied on a
    false document. She had also been irresponsible in  connection  with  an
    application to visit another country.

 3. The First-tier  Tribunal  judge  decided  to  dismiss  the  appeal  with
    reference to paragraph 320(11) of HC 395.  This is  a  Rule  identifying
    circumstances in which applications will usually be refused. On 14 March
    2011 when the application relevant to  these  appeals  were  refused  it
    provided that applications should normally be refused when an  applicant
    "has  previously  contrived  in  a  significant  way  to  frustrate  the
    intentions of the Rules".

 4. This  wording,  no  doubt  quite  deliberately,  is  imprecise  and  its
    operation has been guided at different times by examples  in  the  rules
    and policies outside them.  I am quite satisfied that it  was  wrong  of
    the First-tier Tribunal judge to take  this  point  without  raising  it
    first with the parties.  It is trite immigration law that a person  must
    satisfy each of the requirements of the rules,  and  it  does  sometimes
    happen that judge's hearing cases by way of rehearing  are  dissatisfied
    on points about which the respondent was perfectly satisfied, but it  is
    incumbent upon judges in those circumstances to  raise  their  concerns.
    It is especially important when, as is the case here, the point concerns
    a Rule involving an exercise of discretion.  Often  there  are  policies
    which may not be known to the Tribunal but which  have  been  considered
    properly by the respondent who made the considered choice not to rely on
    a Rule which appeared to be relevant.  I am quite satisfied that it  was
    an error of law to apply the rules without asking for  submissions  from
    the parties.

 5. Mr Deller has assisted me by taking the matter further and saying  that,
    in fact, he was satisfied that the respondent had considered  the  point
    and had decided not to  take  it.   He  pointed  out  that  the  conduct
    complained of was not obviously  analogous  to  the  examples  given  or
    described properly as "significant".

 6. It follows that the First-tier Tribunal judge erred not merely by taking
    a point that he did not raise with the appellants but by  relying  on  a
    point that should not have been taken at all.   The  appellants  clearly
    succeed to the extent that they satisfy me that the First-tier  Tribunal
    was wrong  to  dismiss  the  application  with  reference  to  paragraph
    320(11).

 7. That of course does not end the matter.  The  appellants  also  have  to
    satisfy the Rules with regard to maintenance.  The way they set  out  to
    do that was very straightforward.  They said that they would  be  living
    with the sponsor above a Chinese restaurant business that he managed and
    owned, and the business was  sufficiently  profitable  to  support  them
    while they did that.

 8. The sponsor produced accounts which, on  a  superficial  reading,  I  am
    quite satisfied showed the appellants satisfied the requirements of  the
    Rules.  They were management accounts for a  relevant  period  of  about
    nine months spanning the date of decision  and,  if  they  are  reliable
    documents, show that there was a profit at least in excess of the social
    security and housing requirements on which  the  appellants  would  have
    relied if they  had  not  been  maintained  properly.   I  am  therefore
    satisfied that if the documents had been accepted the appeal should have
    been allowed.

 9. The First-tier Tribunal judge was not impressed  by  the  accounts.   He
    gave two reasons.  He did not regard the sponsor as a reliable  witness,
    partly because of the sponsor's own immigration  history.   The  sponsor
    came to the United Kingdom as a refugee.  He was refused recognition  as
    a refugee.  He was eventually given leave to remain and  extremely  soon
    after being given leave to remain he returned to the  country  where  he
    claimed he had been a refugee to be reunited with his  wife.   Put  like
    that, I understand the First-tier  Tribunal  judge's  reservations,  but
    there is something very important missing from that summary.  It is  the
    gap of nearly eleven years between the sponsor arriving  in  the  United
    Kingdom and claiming asylum, which he did in 1999, and his returning  to
    China after he had been given leave to remain  which  he  did  in  2010.
    Clearly a great deal can happen in a decade.  A person's  own  attitudes
    might change so that the things that made them a refugee might not be  a
    matter of concern to them any more,  or  a  country  might  become  more
    liberal or, although this is not what has happened in China, there could
    be a complete change of regime.

10. It was incumbent  upon  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  to  have  made
    enquiries about the sponsor's reasons for returning  to  China  when  he
    claimed he was a refugee in that country. Again this was  not  done,  so
    the Tribunal erred  by  taking  an  adverse  point  without  giving  the
    appellants notice.   The  point  was  relevant  because  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge said at paragraph 20 of his determination:

         "The adverse credibility of both the appellant and her  spouse  has
         to be taken into account  and  it  does  adversely  impact  on  the
         quality of their evidence".

11. It follows that I am satisfied that one  of  the  reasons  advanced  for
    disbelieving the sponsor was a bad reason.

12.  The  accounts  themselves  are  management  accounts.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal judge was perfectly entitled to say  that  management  accounts
    are recognition in the form of accounts of information coming  from  the
    person presenting the accounts about the nature  of  the  business,  but
    they are not audited accounts. They have not been analysed critically by
    a professional person with an obligation to look  for  fault,  and  they
    have not been accepted by the  Revenue,  who  are  required  to  have  a
    discerning eye on the information  given  when  people  make  their  tax
    returns.  It follows that the First-tier Tribunal  judge  was  perfectly
    entitled to regard the accounting evidence as somewhat weak.

13. However, the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  he  has  written  them  off  as
    worthless. It is apparent  from  the  face  of  the  document  that  the
    accounts were prepared by a firm of chartered certified accountants  and
    statutory auditors, and I am prepared to assume, were  prepared  on  the
    basis of vouchers, business records  and  the  like  which  were  placed
    before them.  It must follow from this either that the letter  from  the
    accountant's firm is itself a forgery or that the firm of accountants is
    associating itself knowingly with dishonest accounts, or the  accountant
    has been duped by a rather sophisticated set of figures and vouchers  to
    produce accounts which bear no relation to reality.  All of  things  are
    possible as Mr Lam reasonably conceded, but  there  is  no  evidence  to
    support any such explanation.

14. The  most  likely  explanation  for  a  firm  of  chartered  accountants
    producing a set of accounts is  that  they  were  the  result  of  their
    labours on business records provided.

15. Although I have reminded myself, as Mr  Deller  very  properly  insisted
    that I should, that I must look for error rather than simply a different
    approach, I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal judge was wrong in
    law to reach the conclusions that he did about the accounts.  He did not
    in his conclusions give any reasoning at all to explain why  he  was  so
    willing to dismiss the apparent approval and endorsement of  a  firm  of
    chartered accountants and he  was  wrong  to  say  the  appellant's  and
    sponsor's credibility was damaged on a point that was  not  put  to  the
    sponsor or investigated in any way.

16. I therefore set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

17. Perhaps it is not necessary to say but I think the appellants seemed  to
    be very grateful for Mr Lam's persistence because this is not the view I
    thought I would take when I prepared the case for the hearing but I have
    been persuaded for the reasons given.

18. I must now ask myself if I need to hear any further  evidence  before  a
    proper disposal of the appeal.  I think the answer is  that  I  do  not.
    The sponsor has produced accounts  which,  on  the  face  of  them,  are
    capable of belief and there is not before me any good reason  to  regard
    the sponsor as so unreliable that I can ignore the evidence.

19. There is another point taken by the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  sponsor
    produced documents showing that the business that he now owned had  been
    in his possession not very long before and sold.  That is peculiar,  but
    that was his case, and if he was trying to  deceive  he  need  not  have
    introduced the document in the first place.  It  does  not  really  take
    anybody very far except possibly open up an explanation that the sponsor
    had just been extremely stupid.  I do not say that disrespectfully. That
    is what he would have been if he had drawn attention  to  dishonesty  by
    needlessly introducing a document.

20. I reminding myself that the appellants must prove  their  cases  on  the
    balance of probabilities.

21. The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  adverse  view  of  the  evidence  was
    clouded by bad points. Having assessed the evidence without that cloud I
    am persuaded that the appellants have proved their  cases  and  I  allow
    their appeals.

22. It does not follow from this that the  appellants  will  be  allowed  to
    enter the United Kingdom because the circumstances have changed so  that
    the First Appellant and sponsor now have a second child who, presumably,
    will apply to settle in the United Kingdom.

23. These appeals are allowed.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 4 September 2013               |


