
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/12687/2012
                                                               OA/12700/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 13th February 2014                           |On 25th February 2014      |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               hussain mazloom
                               hassan mazloom


                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms V Eastey, Counsel instructed on behalf of Duncan
Lewis
     & Co Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Malins) who in a decision promulgated on
    29th  November  2013  allowed  the  Respondent's  appeals  against  the
    decision to refuse entry  clearance  as  family  members  of  a  person
    settled in the United Kingdom.

 2. The history of the appeal can  be  shortly  stated.   The  Sponsor,  Mr
    Sheralam  Mazloom,  married  Waranga  Mazloom  on  2nd  March  2002  in
    Afghanistan.  During the course of their marriage, four  children  were
    born including  twin  sons  born  on  6th  January  2010  who  are  the
    Respondents to this appeal.  The  Sponsor  left  his  home  country  of
    Afghanistan on 30th November 2005 and claimed asylum.  He  was  granted
    refugee status thereafter and indefinite leave to remain was granted in
    or about August 2011.  It is  plain  from  the  history  given  by  the
    parties that the Sponsor and his wife lived together after he had  left
    Afghanistan for periods of time in Pakistan in  2007,  2008,  2009  and
    2011 until 9th February 2012.  It was during one  of  those  visits  in
    2009 that the two youngest children and the Respondents to this  appeal
    were born.  Thus they were born after he was granted refugee status.

 3. Applications were thus made for family reunion by  the  Sponsor's  wife
    and four children.  Those applications were made on 23rd February 2012.
     In a series of immigration decisions  made  on  14th  May  2012  those
    applications  were  refused.   The  Sponsor's  wife's  application  was
    firstly refused under paragraph 320(7A) on the basis  that  a  document
    had been provided that was said not to be a genuine document  and  also
    under paragraph 352A on the basis that the Sponsor's wife had failed to
    prove that they had contracted a valid marriage and also that the Entry
    Clearance Officer was not satisfied that they intended to live together
    or had a subsisting relationship (352A(i) and (iv)).  In respect of the
    two eldest children, their applications were considered under paragraph
    352D of the Immigration  Rules.   Similarly  they  were  refused  under
    paragraph 320(7A) but also under paragraph  352D(i)  and  (iv)  on  the
    basis that the Entry Clearance Officer was not satisfied that they were
    children of a person granted refugee status in the UK or that they were
    part  of  the  family  unit  at  the  time  the  Sponsor  left.   Those
    applications were also considered under Article 8.  In respect  of  the
    two youngest children, they had applied for entry clearance as a  child
    of a parent settled in the United  Kingdom.   Thus  those  applications
    were considered under paragraph 297.  As with the earlier  applications
    they were  also  refused  under  paragraph  320(7A)  on  the  basis  of
    documentation that had been produced but also they were  not  satisfied
    that the Appellant was a child of a person settled and present  in  the
    UK (paragraph 297(i)).  The Entry Clearance Officer also considered  in
    very brief terms Article 8 in respect of those two applications.

 4. The appeals came before the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Malins)  on  8th
    October 2013.  It is plain from the determination that  in  respect  of
    the issue raised by the Entry Clearance Officer under paragraph 320(7A)
    that after considering the documentation the judge did not  uphold  the
    refusal under paragraph 320(7A).  She found the Sponsor to  have  legal
    status as a refugee in the UK  and  based  on  the  DNA  evidence  from
    Cellmark was satisfied that  the  Sponsor's  wife  was  the  biological
    mother of all four children and that the Sponsor was  their  biological
    father.  She also found that as the marriage had preceded the Sponsor's
    refugee status, the Sponsor was entitled to  family  reunion  with  the
    five appellants (his wife and four children).   Therefore  she  allowed
    all five appeals.

 5. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal  that  decision  but
    only in respect of the two youngest  children.   There  was  no  appeal
    against the decision relating  to  the  Sponsor's  wife  or  elder  two
    children.  Nor was there any appeal  against  the  judge's  refusal  to
    uphold the decision under paragraph  320(7A).   The  grounds  submitted
    relate  to  the  judge's  assessment  under  paragraph  352D   of   the
    Immigration Rules.  It was set out in the grounds that the judge  erred
    in allowing the appeals of the two younger children as they  could  not
    satisfy the requirements of paragraph 352D as they did not form part of
    the Sponsor's family in 2005 when he left Afghanistan to seek asylum in
    the UK.  Secondly, the judge had failed to assess the appeals under the
    relevant Rule, that being 297 (or in the alternative 319R).  The  judge
    had failed to consider or make findings on these requirements.

 6. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Ms Eastey on  behalf  of  the
    Respondents conceded that  the  grounds  submitted  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State had been made out and that the  judge  had  made  an
    error of law in that the  applications  of  the  two  younger  children
    should have been considered under the provisions of  paragraph  297  as
    set out in the  decision  letters.   Furthermore  the  judge  was  also
    required to consider in the alternative matters relevant to Article  8.
    Ms Eastey and Mr Bramble, Senior Presenting Officer, prior to the  case
    proceeding had the opportunity to discuss the appeals and they informed
    the Tribunal that the course that they invited the court to  adopt  was
    to set aside the decisions made in respect of the two youngest children
    and to remit the appeals to the original judge (Judge Malins)  so  that
    the judge  could  consider  the  issue  in  respect  of  paragraph  297
    including maintenance and accommodation and Article 8.

 7. In light of the concession made before me on the  Respondent's  behalf,
    there is no basis on which I could possibly do  otherwise  than  accept
    that concession and find that the judge made an error of law as set out
    in the preceding paragraph.  The younger  two  children's  applications
    were considered on a different basis to the other children by reason of
    their dates of birth being after the Sponsor left Afghanistan.  Thus in
    those circumstances, both representatives have invited this Tribunal to
    remit the appeal to Judge Malins to consider paragraph 297,  which  was
    the basis of the refusal and in the alternative, Article 8 of the ECHR.
     In those circumstances, I am satisfied that the appropriate course  is
    for  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  respect  of  the
    Respondent to be set aside.  Both advocates have invited  the  Tribunal
    to adopt the course outlined in the preceding paragraphs with  a  fresh
    oral hearing by way of  remittal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Malins) based on the nature of the error of law in  this  case,  namely
    that the consideration of the relevant paragraph  of  the   Immigration
    Rules is still outstanding.  Due to the nature of  the  error  of  law,
    First-tier Tribunal will be required to hear the oral evidence  of  the
    Sponsor and consider the documentation provided relevant to the  issues
    outlined above.  Both advocates are in agreement to this  course  being
    adopted for the reasons that they have  furnished  the  Tribunal  with.
    Whilst it is not the ordinary practice of the Tribunal to  remit  cases
    to the First-tier Tribunal, there are reasons advanced by both  parties
    why this is  the  case  and  having  given  particular  regard  to  the
    overriding objective of the  efficient  disposal  of  the  appeal  have
    reached the conclusion that that is the appropriate course.

 8. Therefore the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and  the
    case is to be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Malins)  at
    Hatton Cross for a hearing which should be listed before  Judge  Malins
    in  accordance  with  Section  12(2)  of  the  Tribunals,  Courts   and
    Enforcement Act and paragraph 7.2 of the  Practice  Statement  of  10th
    February 2010 (as amended).

Decision

 9. The First-tier Tribunal made an error of  law.   The  decision  is  set
    aside.  The appeal is to be remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at
    Hatton Cross for a hearing before First-tier Tribunal Judge Malins on a
    date to be fixed.




Signed                              Date: 14/2/2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

