
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/12823/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 January 2016                   |On 11 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                               NATALIA MARKINA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms H Sheizon of Kadmos Consultants Ltd.
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal  but
in order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Blake, promulgated on13  August  2015,
which allowed the Appellant's appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds only.

Background

3.    The Appellant was born on 7 March 1961 and is a  national  of  Russia.
On  8  October  2014  the  Secretary  of  State  refused   the   Appellant's
application for entry clearance as the  partner  of  a  person  present  and
settled in the UK.

The Judge's Decision

4.     The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   First-tier
Tribunal  Judge  Blake  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal   under   the
immigration rules, but allowed the appeal on article 8 ECHR grounds.

5.    Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 11 December 2015 Judge  Robertson
gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

    "The Judge found that  the  appellant  could  not  meet  the  specified
    evidence requirements  of  the  immigration  rules,  but  was  able  to
    establish that she "would be able to meet the  financial  requirements"
    and allowed the appeal under article 8 for the reasons set out in  para
    [131-139]. As submitted in the grounds of application, it is  difficult
    to see how the financial requirements would  be  met  if  the  evidence
    required  to  establish  that  they  can  be  met  was  not   supplied.
    Furthermore, it is arguable that where an appellant is in fact able  to
    make  an   application   supported   by   the   evidence,   exceptional
    circumstances have not been established for the grant  of  leave  under
    article 8 (SS(Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387)"

The hearing

6.    (a)   Mr Avery, for the respondent, told me that the  Judge  had  made
material errors of law because, after finding that the appellant  could  not
meet the provisions of either appendices FM or  FM-SE,  the  Judge  did  not
then set out compelling circumstances which  would  merit  consideration  of
article 8 out-with the rules. Mr Avery explained that the Judge  made  clear
findings that the appellant cannot meet either the substantive  requirements
of appendix FM or the evidential requirements of appendix FM SE.

    (b)    At [124] and [125] the Judge  takes  guidance  from  SS  (Congo)
[2015] EWCA Civ 387, and between [126] and [139]  considers  the  appellants
case out-with the immigration rules. Mr Avery told me that the crux  of  the
argument that the decision is tainted by a material error of law  is  to  be
found at [136] & [137]. There, he argued, the Judge says that the effect  of
the respondent's decision is that the appellant and  sponsor  will  have  to
rearrange their finances and apply afresh. He argued that  that  amounts  to
an   inconvenience   rather   than   either   exceptional   or    compelling
circumstances, so that on the basis of SS (Congo)  there  is  no  reason  to
consider the appellants article  8  ECHR  rights  out-with  the  rules,  and
insufficient reason to allow the appeal under article 8 ECHR.  He  urged  me
to set aside the decision and to  remake  the  decision  by  dismissing  the
appellant's appeal

7.    For the appellant, Ms Scheizen told me that the decision  is  a  well-
reasoned decision  which  does  not  contain  errors  of  law,  material  or
otherwise.  She  told  me  that  the  decision  demonstrates   a   carefully
considered  balancing  exercise  and  fully  explains  why  that   balancing
exercise came down in the appellant's favour. She told  me  that  the  Judge
took correct guidance from SS Congo before  concluding  at  [132]  that  the
preservation of fair and effective immigration control  and  the  protection
of the economic well-being of the UK did not dictate  that  the  appellant's
exclusion was necessary. She told me that at [139]  the  Judge  specifically
finds  that  this  case  engages  compelling   circumstances   which   merit
consideration of article 8 ECHR out-with the immigration  rules.  She  urged
me to dismiss the appeal and allow the decision to stand.

Analysis

8.    The focus in this appeal is on [125] to [139]  of  the  decision.  The
respondent argues that because the  appellant  cannot  meet  the  evidential
requirements of appendix FM- SE, and because at [121] the Judge  found  that
the appellant "... could not comply with  the  strict  requirements  of  the
rules", then the Judge could not make the finding at  [131]  that  "...  the
appellant would be able to meet the financial requirements", and should  not
have gone  on  to  consider  article  8  ECHR  out-with  the  rules  because
compelling circumstances are not made out.

9.    At first sight, there may appear to be a contradiction  between  [121]
and [130] & [131], but an holistic reading of the  decision  indicates  that
there is neither a contradiction nor an ambiguity. What the  Judge  says  at
[121]  is  that  the  appellant  "...  could  not  comply  with  the  strict
requirements of the  rules."  The  Judge  goes  on  to  emphasise  that  the
appellant does not meet the evidential requirements set out in appendix  FM-
SE.

10.   [130]  and  [131]  narrate  factors  which  the  Judge  weighs  up  in
assessing proportionality for article  8  ECHR  purposes.  For  the  reasons
given in the decision, the Judge finds  that,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the
appellant's income exceeds the threshold set by the financial  requirements,
but that the appellant cannot discharge  the  burden  of  proving  that  she
fulfils the requirements of  the  immigration  rules  because  she  has  not
produced the documents required in FM-SE. The  Judge  factors  that  finding
(that  is  a  matter  of  fact  the  appellant  can  satisfy  the  financial
requirements  of  the  rules)  as  one  element   of   the   proportionality
assessment. In doing so the Judge acknowledges that  it  is  the  evidential
requirements of appendix FM SE which prevent the appeal  from  meeting  with
success under the immigration rules.

11.   The determinative question in this appeal is whether or not the  Judge
was correct to consider article  8  ECHR  out-with  the  immigration  rules.
Parties are agreed that if  there  is  a  material  error  of  law  in  this
decision, it will be found between [125] and [139].

12.   At [125] the Judge correctly takes guidance from [51] of  SS  (Congo),
and identifies "... That compelling circumstances would have  to  apply  ...
Where the evidence rules are not complied with". Mr Avery  argued  that  the
facts, as the Judge found them to be in  the  remaining  paragraphs  of  the
decision, do not amount to "compelling circumstances". He told me  that  the
Judge's findings of fact merely identify an inconvenient situation.

13.   At [128] the Judge declares  that  he  considers  whether  there  were
exceptional circumstances  to  justify  allowing  the  appeal  out-with  the
rules. Between  [129]  &  [138]  the  Judge  discusses  the  impact  of  the
respondent's decision on both the appellant and sponsor, & finds that,  were
it not for the evidential requirements, the rules  would  be  satisfied.  He
weighs that finding against the purpose of  immigration  control,  and  then
sets out the disruption caused to the married  life  of  the  appellant  and
sponsor by the respondent's decision.

14.   The Judge finds that  the  sponsor  has  to  reorganise  his  business
arrangements and finances;  that  the  decision  causes  separation  between
spouses; that the sponsor feels that he is being driven from  the  UK;  that
the appellant is on the cusp of having to return to  Russia;  and  that  the
appellant and sponsor are only able to pursue married life  when  they  meet
temporarily in Spain.

15.   Weighing each of those matters the  Judge  finds  at  [139]  that  the
facts and circumstances of this case amount  to  exceptional  circumstances.
Deciding what amounts to exceptional (or compelling)  circumstances  is  the
job of the Judge at first instance, and  is  exactly  what  this  Judge  has
done. The respondent may disagree and view the circumstances  as  less  than
compelling, but deciding whether the impact  of  the  respondent's  decision
raises compelling or exceptional circumstances is a question for the  First-
tier  Judge.  In  reaching  his  conclusions,  the  First-tier   Judge   has
manifestly  applied  the  correct  test  in  searching  for  compelling   or
exceptional circumstances.

16.   It is not an arguable error of law for a First-tier Judge to give  too
little weight or too much  weight  to  a  factor,  unless  irrationality  is
alleged. Nor is it an error of law for a First-tier Judge to  fail  to  deal
with every factual issue under  argument.  Disagreement  with  a  First-tier
Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of the evidence or assessment  of
credibility, or his evaluation of risk does not give rise  to  an  error  of
law. In Green (Article 8 - new rules) [2013] UKUT  254  (IAC)  the  Tribunal
said that "Giving weight to a factor one way or  another  is  for  the  fact
finding Tribunal and the assignment of weight will rarely give  rise  to  an
error of law".

17.   In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside)  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)
the Tribunal held that the Upper Tribunal would not  normally  set  aside  a
decision of the First-tier Tribunal where there has been no misdirection  of
law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised and the relevant  Country
Guidance has been taken into  account,  unless  the  conclusions  the  judge
draws from the primary data were not reasonably open to him or her.

18.   The Judge carefully considered each strand of evidence  placed  before
him. He carefully records the submissions that were  made  and  then,  after
correctly directing himself in law, makes reasoned findings of  fact  before
reaching conclusions which were manifestly open to the Judge to reach.

19.   I find that the Judge's decision, when  read  as  a  whole,  sets  out
findings that are sustainable and sufficiently detailed and based on  cogent
reasoning.



CONCLUSION

20.   No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

21.   The appeal is dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
stands.


Signed      Date 5 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
