
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/12037/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29th July 2014                             |On 05th Aug 2014             |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge POOLE

                                   Between

                         THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              BILGE OZTURK EDGE
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Erwin Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr SP Edge



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. In this determination I will refer to the parties by  the  description
      adopted before the First-Tier Tribunal.

   2. The appellant is a female citizen of Turkey born 8 August  1972.   She
      is the wife of Mr Simon Phillip Edge.


   3. The appellant had sought leave to enter the  United  Kingdom  and  the
      respondent considered the application pursuant to Appendix FM  of  the
      Immigration  Rules  HC295.   That  application  was  refused  and  the
      appellant appealed that decision but did not elect  to  have  an  oral
      hearing.

   4. The matter came before Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Frankish as  a
      "paper case" on 17 April 2014 and by  a  determination  of  that  date
      found that the appellant could not succeed under  the  Rules  but  the
      appeal was allowed under Article 8 ECHR.

   5. The respondent Entry Clearance Officer  then  sought  to  appeal  that
      decision alleging that there was a material misdirection of law on the
      part of the First-Tier Tribunal Judge.  In those grounds it was  noted
      that the appellant's case failed  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the
      Immigration Rules but then it is alleged that the judge erred  by  not
      following the case of Gulshan [2013] UKUT 640  having  not  identified
      any compelling circumstances.  The outcome of the respondent's initial
      decision was not "unjustifiably harsh".

   6. In granting leave to appeal another judge of the  First-Tier  Tribunal
      gave the following as reasons:

         "1.  The respondent seeks permission to appeal in  time  against  a
      decision of  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Frankish)  who,  in  a
      determination promulgated on 22 April 2014,  allowed  the  appellant's
      appeal against the decision of the respondent to refuse to  grant  her
      leave to enter the UK as a spouse.

     2.  The appeal dated 30 April 2014 was in time.  The grounds of  appeal
      asserted that  although  the  appeal  had  been  dismissed  under  the
      Immigration Rules, the judge had erred in law in allowing  the  appeal
      under Article 8.  Following Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640(IAC) an  Article
      8 assessment should only be carried out where  there  were  compelling
      circumstances not recognised by the  Rules.   Nagre  [2013]  EWHC  720
      Admin endorsed the Secretary of State's guidance  on  the  meaning  of
      exceptional circumstances.  The judge had also erred  in  law  in  nor
      giving appropriate regard to the relevant date.

   3. In the determination the judge mentioned Gulshan but  arguably  failed
      to take its guidance into account.  There was no reference to Nagre.


      4.  I find that  the  judge  arguably  failed  to  take  note  of  the
      appropriate guidance on the meaning  of  "exceptional  circumstances".
      There was therefore an arguable error of law".


   7. At the commencement of the hearing the appellant  (who  was  present!)
      was represented by her husband/sponsor Mr SP Edge.   I  explained  the
      nature of the proceedings.  Mr Edge indicated  his  understanding.   I
      enquired as to whether or not there had been a response to the  appeal
      and Mr Edge referred me to a copy of that response.

   8. In his submission Mr Richards referred to the grounds  of  appeal  but
      said that he did not rely  upon  them  completely  as  they  were  not
      strictly accurate.  It had been alleged that the judge had  failed  to
      identify "compelling circumstances".  That was not true.  Mr  Richards
      referred me to paragraph 12  of  the  determination  where  the  judge
      clearly  directs  himself  accurately  to  the  law  by  reference  to
      "compelling" circumstances.  The question was, were they  sufficiently
      compelling and would there be a harsh  outcome  should  the  appellant
      have to reapply out of the country.  The question of harsh outcome was
      the only identifiable material error of law.

   9. Having previously noted the comments made by  Mr  Edge  following  the
      grant of leave I did not need  to  call  upon  him  and  announced  my
      decision that I considered there was no material error of law and that
      the appeal of the Entry Clearance Officer was accordingly dismissed.

  10. In giving my reasons I can now comment that there seemed to be  little
      issue in  whether  or  not  the  appellant  could  succeed  under  the
      Immigration Rules.  She could not.

  11. The judge was required to consider the  merits  of  the  human  rights
      claim in accordance with the approach set out by the Court  of  Appeal
      in MF (Nigeria) [2013] 1192 and the High Court in  Nagre  [2013]  EWHC
      720 (Admin) and by the Upper Tribunal  in  Gulshan.   These  judgments
      make it clear that the question of proportionality must be  looked  at
      in the context of the Immigration Rules  with  no  need  to  go  to  a
      specific assessment under Article 8 if it is clear from the facts that
      there  was  no  particular  compelling  or  exceptional  circumstances
      requiring that course to be a taken.

  12. In this particular case the judge quite properly  concluded  that  the
      Immigration Rules would not apply  (paragraph  11).   The  judge  then
      directs himself with regard  to  the  case  of  MF  and  Gulshan.   He
      mentions other cases but does not (as pointed out in the  reasons  for
      the grant of leave) refer to the case of Nagre.  However despite  this
      the judge properly directed himself as to the question of  "compelling
      circumstances".  He clearly had in mind the relevant  and  appropriate
      test.  He gave examples of the circumstances faced by  this  appellant
      and properly explains himself in paragraph 12  of  his  determination.
      Whilst not using the word the judge clearly found the outcome  of  the
      Entry Clearance Officer's original decision would be harsh.

  13. There is no error identifiable in the judge's  determination  and  its
      outcome must stand.

  14. The challenge by the Entry Clearance Officer is accordingly dismissed.

  15.  No  application  was  before  me  in  respect  of  anonymity  and  no
      application has been made to consider the refusal by Judge Frankish to
      make a fee order.



Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Poole

