


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/12375/2012



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 27 June 2013                             |On : 2 July 2013             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                    l m r
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Aghayere of UK Immigration Consultants
For the Respondent:    Ms H Horsley, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant claims to be a citizen of Burundi born in  September  1994.
   He has been given permission to appeal against the determination of First-
   tier Tribunal Judge Charlton-Brown  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
   respondent's decision to refuse him entry clearance.

2. The appellant applied  for  entry  clearance  to  settle  in  the  United
   Kingdom with his mother, H M H. His application was  refused  on  29  May
   2012 under paragraph 320(3) of HC 395 on the grounds that he  had  failed
   to provide a valid national passport  or  other  document  satisfactorily
   establishing his identity and nationality. It was noted that  he  claimed
   to have lived in Burundi his entire life  until  a  month  prior  to  his
   application when he travelled to Uganda, but there  was  no  evidence  of
   either his residence in Burundi or his journey from  Burundi  to  Uganda.
   The respondent was furthermore not satisfied that the appellant  met  the
   requirements of paragraph 297.  He  had  failed  to  submit  evidence  to
   confirm his relationship to the sponsor. He claimed to  have  lived  with
   his father when his parents separated and prior to his mother's departure
   for the United Kingdom and to have lived with his aunt  in  Burundi  from
   2003 when his father died and had provided no evidence of contact between
   himself and his mother, the sponsor. There was no evidence to support his
   claim that his father was deceased, that his aunt had  abandoned  him  in
   Uganda and that his mother had only recently  located  him  when  someone
   contacted her. The respondent was not, therefore,  satisfied  that  there
   were any serious and compelling  family  or  other  considerations  which
   merited the issue of United Kingdom entry clearance and was not satisfied
   that the appellant had ever been part of the sponsor's family  unit.  The
   respondent was also not satisfied that there was  adequate  accommodation
   available to the appellant in the United Kingdom or that the decision  to
   refuse entry clearance was in breach of Article 8 of the ECHR.

3. The appellant's appeal against that decision was heard in the  First-tier
   Tribunal on 29 January 2013. On behalf of  the  respondent,  the  present
   officer indicated that he was not pursuing concerns about maintenance  or
   accommodation in the United Kingdom. Furthermore, in  the  light  of  DNA
   evidence, the relationship between the  appellant  and  the  sponsor  was
   accepted.  The  only  issues,  therefore,  were  paragraphs  320(3)   and
   297(i)(f), the latter being  the  existence  of  serious  and  compelling
   family or other considerations making the appellant's exclusion from  the
   United Kingdom undesirable.

4. Judge Charlton-Brown noted that the sponsor claimed to have left  Burundi
   as a refugee and had arrived in the United Kingdom on  12  May  2001  and
   claimed asylum.  Her  claim  had  been  refused  and  she  had  made  two
   unsuccessful appeals,  both  raising  credibility  issues  and  involving
   concerns about her nationality, although the second  judge  had  accepted
   her nationality. She remained in the United Kingdom  and  was  eventually
   granted indefinite leave to remain on 8 September 2010, under the  legacy
   provisions. She claimed to have left the appellant with  his  father  and
   sister in Burundi until she departed and that both his father and  sister
   had been killed in 2003, at which time the appellant  was  left  with  an
   aunt, her sister. The aunt had abandoned him outside a mosque  in  Uganda
   on 4 April 2012, after which he was taken in by a good Samaritan, Mr Aly,
   who had managed to contact her and put her in touch with him.  The  judge
   heard from the sponsor and noted that she had made no attempt to approach
   any of the appropriate authorities for travel documentation for her  son.
   She concluded that the respondent had made out their case under paragraph
   320(3).

5. With regard to paragraph 297, the judge noted that the sponsor  had  been
   disbelieved in her own previous applications and appeals and did not find
   her a credible witness. She noted the sponsor's claim  to  have  provided
   money to Mr Aly to assist  the  appellant  but  had  concerns  about  the
   evidence in that regard. She found it significant that  the  sponsor  had
   made no attempts to locate or contact her son in the eleven  years  since
   she had last seen  him.  She  noted  the  sponsor's  claim  to  have  re-
   established contact with her son in March  when  Mr  Aly  contacted  her,
   having been given her telephone number by the appellant who in  turn  had
   been given it by his aunt, but found there to be no explanation as to why
   her sister had her mobile number  if,  as  she  claimed,  they  had  lost
   contact. She did not find it credible that  the  appellant's  aunt  would
   have simply abandoned him in Uganda and shared the ECO's concerns  as  to
   how he  had  managed  to  travel  from  Burundi  to  Uganda  without  any
   appropriate documentation. The judge concluded that there were no serious
   and compelling family or other considerations and that  the  sponsor  had
   always known where her son was, had  always  been  satisfied  as  to  his
   circumstances and had no concerns about his  health  and  wellbeing.  She
   went on to consider Article 8 but concluded that  any  family  life  that
   existed between the appellant and the sponsor had already been interfered
   with by the sponsor's own actions and that, in any event, the decision to
   refuse entry clearance was not disproportionate and was not in breach  of
   the appellant's human rights.

6. Permission to appeal against the decision was sought  on  behalf  of  the
   appellant on the following grounds: that the judge had erred  in  finding
   that the refusal was justified under paragraph 320(3) and ought  to  have
   found that the appellant's nationality and identity was evidenced by  the
   respondent's acceptance of the sponsor's nationality  together  with  the
   DNA report; that the judge had failed to have regard to the  decision  in
   AM (Section 88(2): Immigration Document) Somalia [2009] UKAIT 00008;  and
   that the judge had erred in her findings in regard to paragraph 297(i)(f)
   since there were compelling family considerations owing to the  prolonged
   separation between mother and son as a result of the sponsor  having  had
   to flee her country of nationality.

7. Permission was granted on 7 May 2013 with respect in  particular  to  the
   judge's findings in regard to paragraph 320(3).

Appeal hearing

8. At the hearing I heard submissions on the error of law.

9. Mr Aghayere expanded upon the grounds  of  appeal,  submitting  that  the
   respondent's confirmation of the sponsor's nationality in her immigration
   status document together with the DNA report was sufficient  as  evidence
   of the appellant's own nationality, so as to satisfy paragraph 320(3). He
   relied upon the decision in AM. With regard to  paragraph  297(i)(f),  he
   submitted that the judge was wrong to find that there were no serious and
   compelling circumstances and that she had failed  to  consider  that  the
   appellant's father had died, that his  aunt  had  taken  him  to  another
   country and abandoned him  and  that  there  had  been  a  prolonged  and
   enforced separation between the appellant and the  sponsor.  Mr  Aghayere
   also raised a new ground of appeal, submitting that, following the recent
   decision in Mundeba (s.55 and para 297(i)  (f))  Democratic  Republic  of
   Congo [2013] UKUT 88,  the  judge  ought  to  have  considered  the  best
   interests of the child.

10. Ms Horsley submitted that the  judge  had  given  adequate  reasons  for
   finding that the appellant  had  failed  to  satisfy  the  provisions  of
   paragraph 320(3) and that her findings in that regard  were  sustainable.
   The decision in AM did not assist the appellant as the circumstances were
   entirely different. The respondent had had to accept that the sponsor was
   a Burundian national because of the findings of  the  judge,  which  were
   based upon the low standard of proof, but that did not mean that she  was
   Burundian.  With  regard  to  paragraph  297(i)(f),  there  had  been  no
   challenge to the judge's credibility findings,  which  were  sustainable,
   and on the basis of which she had found there to have been  no  prolonged
   and enforced separation. There was  no  error  of  law.  The  credibility
   findings disposed of any argument in relation to Mundeba.

11. In response, Mr Aghayere  submitted  that  the  appellant's  nationality
   would have had to follow that of his mother and the judge ought  to  have
   considered the link  between  the  DNA  report  and  her  nationality  as
   establishing the appellant's nationality. The judge  failed  to  consider
   the appellant's circumstances. The decision was in breach of  Article  8,
   following the principles in Mundeba.

12. I advised the parties that I found no error of law in  the  decision  of
   the First-tier Tribunal. My reasons for so concluding are as follows.

Consideration and findings.

13.  It is asserted in the grounds that the acceptance by the respondent  of
   the sponsor's nationality, in  her  immigration  status  document,  taken
   together with the DNA report  confirming  the  relationship  between  the
   sponsor and appellant as mother and son, was sufficient to establish  the
   appellant's nationality. What the grounds assert, in effect, is that  the
   judge was wrong to find otherwise.

14. However, the judge gave careful consideration, at paragraphs 15  and  16
   of her determination, to the  question  of  the  appellant's  status.  At
   paragraph 15, she took account  of  the  fact  that  the  respondent  had
   accepted the sponsor's nationality as a result of  the  findings  of  the
   Tribunal in that regard in the sponsor's own appeal. At paragraph 14  she
   noted the respondent's concession as a result of the  DNA  test  results.
   She then went on, however, at paragraph  16,  to  give  consideration  to
   other matters. She found the sponsor's evidence, in regard to the lack of
   documentation establishing her son's nationality, to  be  unsatisfactory,
   noting that the sponsor was unable to give any credible explanation as to
   how she expected  her  son  to  travel  to  the  United  Kingdom  without
   documentation and why no attempt had been made to prove his  nationality.
   Those were matters that she was entitled to take into  consideration  and
   it was plainly her view, in the light of those considerations, that there
   was simply  no  credible  explanation  for  the  absence  of  appropriate
   documentation.

15. It is, at this point, relevant to note that the  grounds  of  appeal  do
   not take account of the fact that the relationship between the  appellant
   and sponsor had not been established by documentary evidence  before  the
   ECO and that the DNA report was submitted  only  after  the  decision  to
   refuse entry clearance. Neither do the grounds state  why  the  sponsor's
   nationality was conclusive of  the  appellant's  nationality,  given  the
   absence of evidence of the  appellant's  father's  nationality,  evidence
   that a child's nationality followed that  of  his  or  her  mother  under
   Burundian law or evidence that the sponsor's  Burundian  nationality  was
   acquired prior to the appellant's birth.  Those  were  matters  that  the
   judge did not specifically address and her  determination  could  perhaps
   have benefitted from such additional  considerations.  Nevertheless,  she
   properly noted that the relevant concern  was  that  of  the  appellant's
   status and not simply that of his mother.

16. It is also asserted, in the grounds,  that  the  judge  failed  to  have
   regard to the decision in the case of AM. However, aside  from  the  fact
   that that was not a matter raised before her, the grounds fail to explain
   how that case was of relevance  to  the  appellant's  appeal.  That  case
   concerned the jurisdiction of the Tribunal  in  cases  of  refusal  under
   320(3) and the exemptions under section 88 of the Nationality, Asylum and
   Immigration Act 2002 from the section 82 rights of appeal. It  has  never
   been suggested in the appellant's case that there was no right of appeal.
   Furthermore, the favourable decision in AM arose out of an acceptance  by
   the judge of the oral evidence and  the  documentation  produced  by  the
   appellant as  evidence  of  his  identity,  whereas  there  was  no  such
   documentation in this appellant's case and Judge Charlton-Brown  rejected
   the oral  evidence  and  statements  made  in  respect  to  identity  and
   nationality.

17. Accordingly, I find that it was open to the judge to conclude,  for  the
   reasons that she gave and on the basis of the evidence before  her,  that
   the appellant had failed to establish his nationality  and  identity  for
   the purposes of paragraph 320(3).

18. The judge's findings in regard to paragraph 320(3)  were  in  any  event
   not  ultimately  material  to  the  outcome  of  the  appeal,  given  her
   conclusion that the appellant was unable  to  meet  the  requirements  of
   paragraph  297.  The  grounds  challenge  her  findings  with  regard  to
   paragraph 297 but do not  state  the  basis  for  such  a  challenge.  Mr
   Aghayere's submission was that  the  prolonged  and  enforced  separation
   between the appellant and the sponsor, the death of his  father  and  his
   aunt's actions in abandoning  him  amounted  to  serious  and  compelling
   circumstances. However he was unable to respond to  the  suggestion  that
   the judge had not accepted any of those facts, other than  by  submitting
   that she was wrong to have made  such  findings.  There  was  clearly  no
   failure on the part of the judge to consider all of  those  circumstances
   and she did so in some detail, at paragraphs 17 to 24, making  fully  and
   cogently reasoned findings at paragraphs 20 to 25. She did not  find  the
   sponsor to be a reliable witness and  she  did  not  accept  any  of  the
   evidence about the appellant's circumstances and the circumstances of the
   re-establishment of contact between them. She was fully entitled to reach
   the conclusions that she  did  and  the  grounds  do  not  in  any  event
   challenge her findings other than by way of disagreement.  There  are  no
   errors of law in her decision.

19. With regard to the additional  ground  raised  by  Mr  Aghayere  at  the
   hearing, with respect to the decision in Mundeba, it is clear  that  that
   does not assist the appellant, given  the  adverse  credibility  findings
   made by the judge. She undertook a detailed and careful assessment of the
   appellant's and sponsor's circumstances in the context of Article  8  and
   found that family life existed between them only to the extent  of  their
   biological relationship and that any interference with that  family  life
   had been caused by the sponsor and not as a result  of  the  respondent's
   decision. Whilst, in going on to consider proportionality,  she  made  no
   specific reference to the best interests of the child, there  is  nothing
   in her detailed and cogent findings, in particular those at paragraphs 25
   and 27, to suggest that such a consideration could have led to any  other
   conclusion than the one she reached. I therefore find no  merit  in  this
   ground of appeal.

DECISION

20. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve
   the making of an error of law. I do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
   decision to dismiss the appeal therefore stands.
























                               Signed                                  Date
                               Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
