
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/13129/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 18 December 2014                  |On 15 April 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                     THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, KUWAIT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              SAFFA HUSSAIN KHAN
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Caskie, instructed by Innes Johnson Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent in this appeal by the Secretary of State, whom we  shall
    call  "the  claimant",  is  a  national  of  Pakistan.   She   applied,
    apparently on 12 April 2013 (that is the date the application  fee  was
    received) to the Entry Clearance  Officer  for  entry  clearance  as  a
    spouse.  She was refused.  The date of that decision  appears  to  have
    been 15 May 2013.  She appealed, and there was a hearing  before  Judge
    Gillespie in the First-tier Tribunal.  That was on  28  February  2014,
    and his decision was sent out on 2 May 2014.  He  allowed  the  appeal.
    The issues before him related to whether the claimant could satisfy the
    maintenance requirements of the Rules.  He examined copious documentary
    evidence and heard oral evidence, which he appears to have regarded  as
    wholly credible.  He was satisfied that the claimant  and  her  husband
    had access to the amount of money demanded by the rules.

 2. The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  now  appeals  to  this  Tribunal,  with
    permission.  The application for permission was submitted,  months  out
    of time, on 4 September 2014.  Judge Shimmin, a Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal, decided that time should be extended, and granted  permission
    to appeal.  In response to that grant, the claimant submitted a  notice
    under Rule 24.  That notice purports to reserve the claimant's position
    in relation to the decision to extend time.

 3. The grounds of appeal are undoubtedly  strong.   They  point  out  that
    Judge Gillespie appears to have wholly ignored the requirements of  the
    Rules relating to the manner in which an applicant is required to prove
    financial standing.  The documents before the Entry  Clearance  Officer
    and before the Judge were wholly incapable of satisfying the rules.  Mr
    Caskie's response was to assert that the judge had indeed mentioned the
    relevant rules, but he was unable to demonstrate any material adherence
    to them.  He acknowledged that there had  been  no  suggestion  by  the
    claimant that Judge Gillespie's decision to allow the appeal should  be
    upheld on any other ground.  After considering the matter  he  told  us
    that he no longer resisted the Entry Clearance Officer's appeal.

 4. In those circumstances we are content  to  find  that  Judge  Gillespie
    erred in law as asserted in the Entry Clearance Officer's grounds.   We
    set aside his determination and substitute a  determination  dismissing
    the claimant's appeal.

 5. The fact that the Entry Clearance Officer's application for  permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was so long out of time does,  however,
    cause  us  considerable  concerns.   The  application  for   permission
    recognises the delay.  The determination is said to have been  received
    in the Home Office on 7 May 2014, when a particular Presenting  Officer
    was out of the office, and, as he explains, "when absent my work is not
    routinely covered by colleagues because of a lack of  resources".   The
    Presenting Officer returned to work on 12 May but was not made aware of
    this determination, and did not discover about it until September, when
    he immediately took steps to  attempt  to  appeal  against  it.   Judge
    Shemmin's response to that was as follows:

          "Given that there may have been an interaction  between  increased
         First-tier listings and Home Office deployment I am persuaded  that
         the lateness of the application is not fatal and that it should  be
         admitted, it being in the interest of justice that it should be".

 6. There was, of course,  no  right  of  appeal  against  Judge  Shimmin's
    decision, and there was no other attempt  to  set  it  aside.   We  do,
    however regard it as deeply unsatisfactory.  First, it  appears  to  be
    based partly on an explanation that was in the Judge's mind but had not
    been pleaded by the applicant.  Secondly, we should have regarded  such
    long extension of time as requiring substantially more in  the  way  of
    reasons.  What was essentially  being  said  on  behalf  of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer is that there is (or at the time  was)  no  efficient
    system for ensuring that adverse determinations are considered and,  if
    necessary, dealt with, within the appropriate timescale.   It  is  very
    difficult to see how the absence of such a system  can  itself  be  the
    ground for extending time, particularly given  that  the  Secretary  of
    State's resources are obviously considerably larger than those  of  any
    appellant.  We hope that judges faced with applications of this  nature
    will in future deal with them on the grounds on which they are made and
    provide what can be regarded as proper reasons, based on their approach
    to those grounds, for a decision that time be extended.

 7. Having said that we accept that the grounds in the  present  case  were
    exceptionally strong.  Although  the  strength  of  grounds  cannot  by
    itself be a reason for extending time, where some acceptable excuse for
    the delay is provided, the strength of the grounds may help to outweigh
    the weakness of the excuse see BO (Nigeria) [2006] UKAIT 00035.

 8. For the reasons we have given, the Entry Clearance Officer's appeal  is
    allowed.



                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                         Date: 12 March 2015
