
[pic]
IAC-CH-SA-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/13098/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19th April 2016                           |On 9th May 2016               |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE

                                   Between

                        MR MARK JOHN BAGUNU MACARUBBO
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           entry clearance officer

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Jegarajah, Counsel
For the Respondent:    No Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of the Philippine born on  16th  April  1998
    and 16 years 2  months  at  the  date  of  his  application  for  entry
    clearance to join his sponsoring mother in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    respondent refused the application on 17 September 2014, on  the  basis
    that he failed to establish that his mother had sole responsibility for
    him.

 2. The Appellant appealed on 15th October 2014, the grounds set out  in  a
    covering letter from the Sponsor were limited to asserting:

      a)  "that mother is the sole person who is responsible for  upbringing
         son."

 3. Judge Khawar, following a hearing on 11th  June  2015,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 1st September 2015 dismissed the appeal.

 4. Permission was granted on  renewal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  Judge
    Goldstein on 15th February 2016 in the following terms:

         "1.  The renewed grounds continue to rely upon the original grounds
             submitted in support of the first application  for  permission
             to appeal.

         2.   Without wishing to unduly raise the appellant's  hopes,  I  am
             persuaded that the grounds raise arguable issues as to whether
             the First-tier Tribunal Judge was entitled in law to reach the
             conclusions that he did for the  reasons  given  that  in  the
             circumstances raise an arguable concern as to the adequacy  of
             his reasoning.

         3.   In particular, Grounds One and Two raise arguable issues,  not
             least in relation to the veracity, reliability and weight that
             the Judge placed upon the Order of the Regional Trial Court of
             the Philippines dated 24 April 2015, awarding sole custody  of
             the appellant to the sponsor.

         4.   In such circumstances I am persuaded that permission to appeal
             should be granted in respect of all of the grounds."

 5. At the hearing before me Ms Jegarajah relied  on  the  grounds  of  the
    application for permission, and the skeleton argument dated  11th  June
    2015 that she had prepared for the hearing at the First-tier  Tribunal.
    In short the issue of sole responsibility  had  been  determined  by  a
    decision of the family court in the Philippines who  had  declared  the
    mother to be the sole guardian of three minor  children  including  the
    Appellant, and granting her sole custody over them.  The  judgment  was
    binding on the First-tier Tribunal. It was not open  to  the  judge  to
    reach a different conclusion, placing emphasis on difficulties  in  the
    evidence.

 6. Ms Jegarajah set out in the grounds that should the Appellant's  father
    seek to assume full custody of the Appellant he would be breaching  the
    Philippine family court order.   In  oral  submissions  the  issue  was
    extended further with the assertion that any exercise by the father  of
    parental responsibility, even  if  shared  with  the  Appellant,  would
    similarly breach the order.

 7. With regard to the difficulties in the evidence identified by the judge
    the inconsistency between the application, where it is  said  that  the
    Appellant's father will be seeking to make an application,  along  with
    another child, to join the Sponsor, and the Appellant once he is in the
    United Kingdom, was given too much weight.  The judge failing  to  take
    account of the Sponsor's witness  statement  evidence  that  the  child
    completed the application without  her  knowledge  and  authority,  and
    erroneously  thought  that  by  including  his  father  and  portraying
    themselves as a family the application would stand a better  chance  of
    success.

 8. Further the judge has failed to take account of the Sponsor's  evidence
    that in fact the father left the family home in approximately  November
    2006, as discovered by the Appellant's mother when she went to visit in
    mid-November 2006, as per her witness statement at  [9],  also  in  her
    affidavit prepared for the Regional  Trial  Court  in  the  Philippines
    [12], [13], [14], and [15].

         "12. Q: You stated in your petition that you work  as  an  Overseas
             Contract Worker.  Where do your children stays  everytime  you
             go abroad?

             A: For the first time I went to work as an  Overseas  Contract
             Worker sometime in April 2006  my  husband  took  care  of  my
             children and they stayed in our house located at Villart  St.,
             District I, Cauayan City, Isabela.

         13.  Q: Then what happened?

             A: Six (6) months thereafter that  was  sometime  in  November
             2006 I went home for a short vacation and much to my surprised
             my husband was not at home.  I learned that at the time I went
             abroad he also left our conjugal dwelling  leaving  behind  my
             children to the care of my mother who was very old.

         14.  Q: Did your husband return when you went home for a vacation?

             A: No, sir.  From the time he left in 2006  he  did  not  come
             home anymore.  He abandoned his children.

         15.  Q: When you said he did not come home  anymore  and  abandoned
             his children.  Do you mean totally abandoned?

             A: Yes, sir.  I learned that he cohabited with another  woman,
             as a matter of fact he executed  an  Affidavit  stating  among
             other thins that he is living with the said woman, sir."

 9.  The  grounds  complain  that  the  Philippines  judge   accepted   the
    Appellant's account, so that the facts asserted have  been  established
    in a court of law, and are finding on the judge in the  United  Kingdom
    absent good reason.

10. Any  difficulties  arising  as  a  result  of  the  father's  telephone
    interview with the Respondent  Entry  Clearance  Officer  in  which  he
    asserts shared responsibility was irrelevant given the transfer of sole
    custody to the Sponsor as per the court order of 29th April  2015,  and
    as above, because "any attempt by the Appellant father to renew contact
    would be in breach of the order." Ms Jegarajah reminded me of the  case
    that she had submitted to the First-tier Tribunal a judgment dated  9th
    September 2013 in the matter of A (Children) (AP) [2013] UKSC 60 to the
    point the habitual residence of a child determined the court which  has
    jurisdiction in respect of family law.  Ms Jegarajah also handed up  Re
    Z (Recognition of Foreign Judgments) [2016] EWHC 784 (SAM)  a  judgment
    considering the exercise of  the  court's  powers  under  the  inherent
    jurisdiction to recognise and enforce  orders  concerning  the  medical
    treatment of children made by the court of another member state of  the
    European Union.

11. Ms Jegarajah submitted that the judge had failed to properly assess the
    best interests of  the  Appellant  which  were  self  evidently  to  be
    reunited with his mother given that he had been abandoned by his father
    some time between April and November 2006,  the  grandmother,  who  had
    been caring for him, being 87  years  old  and  no  longer  capable  of
    looking after three children full time,  even  with  the  help  of  the
    nanny.   The  Appellant's  mother  had  been  here  since   2006,   was
    financially stable, settled with a partner since 2010  who  helped  her
    with her business in the United Kingdom, and she and her  partner  were
    now both British citizens.  The Appellant's mother's life  was  plainly
    established as being in the United Kingdom. The judge could and  should
    have looked beyond the sole responsibility provisions to the compelling
    family or other circumstances provisions and allowed the  appeal  under
    those provisions if not satisfied on  the  sole  responsibility  point.
    Whilst there was no specific ground of appeal  or  submission  to  that
    effect the skeleton encompassed issues relevant to the  best  interests
    and welfare of the child so that it was plainly before the judge.

12. Ms Jegarajah  did  not  accept  that  out  of  country  cases  required
    consideration as at the date of decision , but submitted that  even  if
    that was right the judge should have made an assessment as at the  date
    of hearing given the that the case concerned the best interests of  the
    child.

13. Mr Jarvis for the Respondent relied on the Respondent's Rule 24  Notice
    to the point that the grounds amount to a disagreement  on  the  facts.
    Judge Khawar found that the evidence presented by the Sponsor was not a
    true reflection of the situation. Family court orders, even  when  made
    in the UK, are not binding on an  immigration  judge,  where  different
    matters are weighed. Given the findings the alternative  of  compelling
    family or other circumstances, which was not  argued  and  cannot  give
    rise to an error, would not have assisted in any event.

My Consideration and Findings

14.  I reminded the representatives at the hearing the leading case of  TD.
    (paragraph 297(i)(e): "Sole Responsibility") [2006] UKAIT 00049 remains
    the guiding case in the discussion of sole  responsibility.   The  case
    guides that the issue of sole responsibility is fixed to  the  date  of
    decision.  In this case 17th September 2014.

15. The Sponsor's petition to  the  Philippine  court  was  lodged  on  8th
    October 2014 as revealed by an application to admit the same, dated 7th
    April 2015.  The application to admit, and the  amended  petition,  the
    sponsor's subsequent judicial affidavit, and the  order  of  the  court
    were all before the First-tier Tribunal, as was her husband's affidavit
    in those proceedings, dated 9th October 2014. All of that evidence post
    dates the date of decision.

16. At its highest it encompasses evidence as to the position prior to  the
    order which falls to be  weighed  in  the  round  with  all  the  other
    evidence.

17. I find that the Appellant has not established any error of law  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal's approach to the judgment of the  trial  court  in
    the Philippines.  Judge Khawar  has  explained  why  the  court  order,
    obtained by a petition filed after the Respondent's refusal,  based  on
    the representation of a factual  matrix  asserted  by  the  Appellant's
    mother in an amended petition in April 2015, was inconsistent with  the
    evidence before the Entry Clearance Officer as  set  out  both  in  the
    application and the interview with the Appellant's father, and referred
    to above.  Judge Khawar has explained why he has rejected the Sponsor's
    explanations for the evidence which was undermining of the assertion of
    her sole responsibility.   The  Philippine  court  decision  is  not  a
    resolution of a factual dispute  between  the  Appellant's  mother  and
    father, the judge noting that the mother's evidence  that  her  husband
    had attended court was contrary to the face of the court order.   Judge
    Khawar carefully read the father's affidavit as shown by his noting  of
    the limits of that evidence.

18. Even if, as the particularisation of the grounds before me indicate,  a
    transfer of sole responsibility/custody occurred in April 2015, and for
    the reasons I set out above the evidence is not  without  difficulties,
    it remains that as at the date of decision there was amble evidence  of
    joint responsibility so that Judge Khawar's conclusion  is  sustainable
    on the evidence, and reveals no perversity.

19. Ms Jegarajah made a belated attempt in submissions to widen  the  ambit
    of the grounds of appeal to include a challenge to the judge's decision
    on the basis that even  if  the  Appellant  could  not  establish  sole
    responsibility lay with his Sponsor the evidence showed that there were
    family or other compelling circumstances under a different limb of  the
    Rule.  I find no merit in  that  submission.   Firstly  Ms  Jegarajah's
    broad submission that references to the best  interests  of  the  child
    were sufficient to particularise a ground of appeal in relation to  the
    separate sub-paragraph of  the  Rule,  so  that  it  required  distinct
    articulation in Judge Khawar's decision, runs contrary to the  duty  to
    deal with a case as it is argued. In any event the satisfaction of  the
    rule must be as at the date  of  decision,  and  for  all  the  reasons
    provided by Judge Khawar,   it  is  clear  on  his  findings  that  the
    requirements of the alternative sub paragraph had not been met so  that
    if the ground had been raised, which it had not, it was bound to fail.

20. The credibility findings in respect of the Sponsor were plainly open to
    the judge on the evidence and reveal no perversity. The burden of proof
    is on the Appellant.  The judge found that he had not discharged it  as
    at the date  of  decision  including  taking  into  account  the  later
    obtained Court order.

21. Ms Jegarajah efforts to persuade me that Judge Khawar should have  made
    an  assessment  as  at  the  date  of  hearing  were  made  without  an
    appreciation that in an out of country appeal  the  relevant  date  for
    assessment is the date of decision in  respect  of  the  Rules  and  in
    respect of Article  8  ECHR.   Ms  Jegarajah  asserted  that  this  was
    flagrantly in breach of the UK's international obligations  because  it
    failed to provide a consideration of the best interests of the child at
    the later date of the hearing.  The suggestion that  I  should  adjourn
    and list the matter for a panel to consider the point  because  it  was
    important, fails to recognise that it has already been  decided.  There
    was no cogent argument as  to  why  I  should  depart  from  the  well-
    established principle.

Notice of Decision

22. The Appellant's appeal is dismissed and the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal dismissing the Appellant's appeal stands.

23. No anonymity direction was requested and I see no reason to make one at
    this stage.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge

