
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/13959/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 23rd November 2015                         |On 4th January 2016            |
|                                              |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT

                                   Between

                                LATIFIA JAWID
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     The Sponsor in person
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Before the Upper Tribunal the Secretary of State becomes the appellant.
    However, for the avoidance of confusion and to be consistent,  I  shall
    continue to refer to the parties as they  were  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 2. On 14th September 2015, in a renewed application, Upper Tribunal  Judge
    Kopieczek gave permission to  the  respondent  to  appeal  against  the
    decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Place in which she allowed
    the appeal against the decision  of  the  respondent  to  refuse  entry
    clearance as the partner of Rajab Ali  Jawid  in  accordance  with  the
    partnership provisions set out in Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.
     In particular, the respondent applied paragraph S-EC.2.2(a)  requiring
    that the  application  should  be  refused  where,  false  information,
    representations or documents had been  submitted  in  relation  to  the
    application.   The  respondent  alleged  that  two  ETS  TOEIC  English
    language certificates (one for  speaking  and  one  for  listening  and
    reading) were invalid.

 3. When granting permission Judge Kopieczek  noted  that  the  grounds  of
    application showed that the judge had before her a datasheet  from  the
    respondent and two "general" witness  statements  indicating  that  the
    test taken by the appellant  on  22nd  February  2012  was  invalid  as
    explained in a witness statement  by  Peter  Millington  and  that,  as
    asserted in the grounds, the datasheet revealed  that  the  appellant's
    test was taken in England and not  in  Pakistan.   Thus,  he  concluded
    that, notwithstanding other reasons give by the judge for resolving the
    appeal in favour of the appellant, it was arguable that the judge erred
    in concluding that the evidence was not specific  enough  to  establish
    the use of deception.

 4. At the  hearing  before  me  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  the  appellant's
    representatives, IAS (UK) Ltd, did not attend.  I therefore assisted Mr
    Jawid, the sponsor, to give evidence in support of the appeal.   I  did
    so by confirming with him his understanding of the reasons for  refusal
    dated 13th October 2014 and the points made by the  respondent  in  the
    application  before  the  Upper  Tribunal.   I  also  noted  that   the
    appellant's case was supported by  an  e-mail  from  the  sponsor's  MP
    which, amongst other things, refers to the ill-health of the sponsor.

 5. Ms Johnstone confirmed that the  grounds  of  application  were  relied
    upon.  She drew attention to paragraph 21  of  the  decision  in  which
    reference was made to the document produced by ETS in cases where  they
    considered that a proxy had taken the test on behalf of the  applicant.
    She also contended that the ETS spreadsheet, a copy of which was handed
    to me, did not show that the appellant had a writing score so her  test
    result would have been invalid in any event.  She  also  asserted  that
    the applicant could not have taken the test in Pakistan.   She  agreed,
    however, that the writing test issue which she had raised had not  been
    put to the judge.

 6. Mr Jawid addressed me in English.  He insisted that his wife had  taken
    the test properly pointing out that it had been performed  online  from
    Pakistan which, he submitted, accounted for the allegation that it  had
    been taken in UK.

 7. After considering the matter for a few moments, I announced that I  was
    satisfied that the decision of the First-tier Judge  did  not  show  an
    error on a point  of  law  and  should  stand.   My  reasons  for  that
    conclusion now follow.

Conclusions

 8. The decision by the experienced First-tier Judge is  comprehensive  and
    cogently reasoned.  In particular, the judge was entitled to take  into
    consideration evidence showing how the appellant had prepared  for  her
    English language  tests  through  private  tuition  in  Pakistan.   She
    examines  and  gives  cogent  reasons  for  accepting  the  appellant's
    explanation of the  delay  between  taking  her  test  and  making  her
    application, which would account for any perceived  inconsistencies  in
    the interview of the appellant on 9th  October  2014  about  which  the
    judge was entitled to reach the conclusions set out in paragraph 27.

 9. Further, the judge fairly acknowledged that there had been  significant
    problems with ETS  tests  but  was  not  wrong  to  conclude  that  the
    documents provided by the respondent at the hearing did not show  there
    was a specific problem with the test taken  by  the  appellant  or  the
    certificates provided as a result.  Additionally, the judge was able to
    support her conclusions about the inadequacy of the  evidence  provided
    by pointing out that the appellant was able to answer A1 level  English
    questions when interviewed over the telephone.  Most significantly, the
    judge was correct to refer to the interviewing officer's conclusions in
    a settlement interview template, where it is stated that the  applicant
    had answered questions in a fluent manner suggesting she had  not  been
    coached and that she had achieved A1 English language  proficiency  and
    had obtained the ETS  certificate  legitimately.   This  amounts  to  a
    significant inconsistency with the respondent's subsequent  allegations
    in respect of which,  the  judge  was  entitled  to  reach  conclusions
    favourable to the appellant.

10. As  to  the  issues  concerning  the  location  of  the  test  and  the
    respondent's recent observation  that  the  ETS  spreadsheet  does  not
    suggest that the appellant achieved a score in writing, these were  not
    raised in the refusal nor, I conclude, put to the judge at the hearing.
     In any event, as  the  refusal  notice  comments,  the  appellant  had
    claimed that she had taken the test in Quetta on the internet.  In  the
    absence of further explanation from the respondent, I conclude that the
    test taken on the internet might well be recorded as a  test  taken  in
    UK.   Clearly  the  appellant  was  not  in  the  United  Kingdom   and
    significantly more information would be required from the respondent to
    show that a proxy had taken the test in UK on behalf of someone who was
    abroad.  Further, the issue relating to the writing  test  details  was
    not put to the judge and so she cannot be expected to have  dealt  with
    it. In any event, the evidence which supports this  allegation  is  not
    conclusive as the ETS spreadsheet to which I was referred could not  be
    assumed to show that there was no writing score.

11. It was entirely appropriate for the judge to  examine  and  reject  the
    challenge to the strength and quality of the evidence underpinning  the
    respondent's decision in  relation  to  the  test  result  (R  (on  the
    application of Gazi) (ETS - judicial review - IJR)  [2015]  UKUT  00327
    (IAC).  The judge's conclusions are comprehensive and  cogently  argued
    allowing her to reach the conclusion which was open to her.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not show an error  on  a  point
of law and shall stand.

Anonymity

Anonymity was not requested before the Upper Tribunal nor was any  anonymity
direction made by the First-tier Tribunal.

Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt
