
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/13730/2014
                                                               OA/13731/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21st January 2016                 |On 19th February 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                            KMI (FIRST APPELLANT)
                           KOI (SECOND APPELLANT)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - SHEFFIELD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are both citizens of Nigeria.  They are  a  brother  and
    his sister.  [KOI] was born on 16th August 2001, and [KMI] was born  on
    9th December 2005.  They both applied for entry clearance in the UK  as
    the dependant children of the Sponsor, their father, also  named  [KI].
    Those applications were refused for the reasons  given  in  Notices  of
    Decision dated 26th September 2014.  The Appellants appealed, and their
    appeals were heard by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Majid  (the  Judge)
    sitting at Taylor House on 24th June 2015.  He  decided  to  allow  the
    appeals for the reasons given in his Decision promulgated on  2nd  July
    2015.  The Respondent sought leave to appeal that decision, and on  6th
    November 2015 such permission was granted.

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The applications for entry clearance were refused under the  provisions
    of paragraph 297 of the Statement of Changes in  Immigration  Rules  HC
    395.  This was because the Entry Clearance Officer concluded  that  the
    Appellants were still living with their mother in Nigeria  and  as  she
    was not a party to the application, that the Appellants could not  meet
    the requirements of paragraph 297(i).   Further,  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer was not satisfied that the Sponsor had sole responsibility  for
    the care and upbringing of  the  Appellants  and  that  there  were  no
    serious and compelling family or other considerations  which  made  the
    exclusion of the Appellants from the  UK  undesirable.   Therefore  the
    Appellants failed to satisfy the provisions of paragraph 297(i)(e)  and
    (f).

 4. The  Judge  allowed  the  appeal  because  the  Judge  found  that  the
    Appellants' mother had no interest in the welfare of the Appellants and
    had left Nigeria.  The Appellants were living with an elderly and frail
    grandmother who was finding it difficult to support them.   It  was  in
    the best interests of the children for them to join their father in the
    UK.  He was the only person genuinely interested in their welfare.

 5. At the hearing, Mr Whitwell argued that the Judge had erred in  law  in
    coming to that conclusion.  He referred to the grounds  of  application
    and argued that the Judge had not engaged fully with the case  and  the
    evidence before him.  He had failed to analyse the  evidence,  and  had
    given inadequate reasons for his findings.  There  was  no  medical  or
    other  evidence  before  the  Judge  showing   that   the   Appellants'
    grandmother could not look after them adequately.  The  Judge  had  not
    come to a finding as to whether the Sponsor had had sole responsibility
    for the Appellants at the date of decision.  The Judge had  taken  into
    account  post-decision  evidence  as  to  the  circumstances   of   the
    Appellants in Nigeria.

 6. The Sponsor appeared at the hearing on behalf of  the  Appellants.   He
    indicated to me that he was happy for the hearing to  proceed  although
    the Appellants were  not  legally  represented.   I  explained  to  the
    Sponsor the nature of the proceedings and the need for him to  persuade
    me by way of argument that the Judge had not made an error  of  law  in
    reaching his decision.  This the Sponsor did not  attempt  to  do,  but
    instead explained the circumstances of the Appellants in Nigeria.

 7. I do find an error of law in the decision  of  the  Judge  so  that  it
    should be set aside.  As argued by Mr Whitwell,  the  Judge  failed  to
    engage with the evidence and made very few findings of fact.  Those  he
    did make were not explained.   As  it  was  not  in  dispute  that  the
    Appellants' mother was not present and  settled  in  the  UK;  was  not
    accompanying her children to the  UK;  and  was  still  alive,  it  was
    necessary for the Judge in order to allow the appeal to find  that  the
    Appellants'  father  had  had  the  sole   responsibility   for   their
    upbringing, or that there were serious and compelling family  or  other
    considerations which made the exclusion of the Appellants  undesirable.
    The Judge did not deal with these issues and  made  no  such  findings.
    There were therefore errors of law requiring the decision of the  Judge
    to be set aside.

 8. I did not proceed to re-make the decision but instead I direct that the
    appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for the decision to be re-
    made there.  This  is  in  accordance  with  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the
    Practice Statements.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside that decision.

The decision is to be re-made in the First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so, and indeed I find no reason to do so.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

