
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: OA/13272/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On February 16 2016                  |On 24 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                          MR MUHAMMAD NAEEM MUSHTAQ
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
Appellant   Mr Syed (Legal Representative)
Respondent  Ms Johnstone (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan. The appellant applied for entry
    clearance as a spouse to enter the United Kingdom on May 28, 2014.  The
    respondent considered his application and on September 7, 2014  refused
    it.

 2. The appellant appealed this decision on December 1, 2014 under  section
    82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 3. The Entry Clearance Manager reviewed the decision on February 10,  2015
    but upheld the original decision.

 4. The appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Pickup on  June
    26, 2015 and in a decision promulgated on July 10, 2015 he refused  the
    appeal under the Immigration Rules and article 8 ECHR.

 5. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on July 24, 2015 submitting  the
    First-tier Judge had erred by placing too much reliance on  an  earlier
    decision of Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Nicholson  and  having
    accepted there was evidence to  support  their  claims  to  be  married
    should have allowed the appeal.

 6. Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Shaerf gave  permission  to
    appeal finding it was arguable Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Pickup
    should have taken the earlier decision only as  a  starting  point  and
    should then have given consideration to the  explanation  contained  in
    the letter dated June 9, 2014.

 7. In a Rule 24 letter dated October 29, 2016 the respondent  opposed  the
    appeal. She argued the First-tier Judge had made adequate findings  and
    there was no material error.

 8. The matter came before me on the above date  and  I  heard  submissions
    from both representatives. The sponsor was in attendance.

 9. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
    pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I make no order now.

    SUBMISSIONS

10. Mr Syed submitted the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal had accepted  at
    paragraph [22] of his decision that there was evidence to  support  the
    marriage. He  misquoted  from  the  refusal  letter  referring  to  the
    respondent's finding the evidence submitted was not  satisfactory  when
    in fact the respondent had found it was not substantial. The  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal placed far too  much  weight  on  the  original
    decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Nicholson  when  in  fact
    there  was  a  fresh  explanation  that  should  have  at  least   been
    considered. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  had  placed  far  too
    much weight on an interview especially when the appellant was  able  to
    answer all but one question. There  was  evidence  of  photographs  and
    passport  stamps  that  should  have  been  given  more   weight   when
    considering whether the marriage was genuine and subsisting. The  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal had been critical of photographs but they in
    fact showed the couple as a couple. He submitted there was an error  in
    law.

11. Ms Johnston adopted the rule 24 response and stated the  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal did not dispute the marriage had  taken  place  but
    having considered the evidence concluded that the sponsor's claims  did
    not move the case beyond the findings made by Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Nicholson. The witnesses had failed to address the  dishonesty
    issues and this undermined her claims.

12. Mr Syed reminded me that the original decision was over five years  old
    and the relationship had progressed since that date.

13. I reserved my decision.

    DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS

14. This had been the appellant's third attempt to be admitted as a spouse.
    His first application had been  refused  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Nicholson in a decision promulgated on November  10,  2011.  A
    second application had been refused because the appellant did not  have
    the correct English Language test and  this  was  therefore  his  third
    attempt to be admitted.

15. At paragraph [7] Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Pickup  referred  to
    the evidence that he had taken  into  account  and  that  included  the
    appellant's bundle consisting of 83 pages.

16. The appellant's  current  application  had  been  refused  because  the
    respondent was not satisfied the marriage was genuine  and  subsisting.
    His application was refused having regard to Appendix FM and  in  short
    the respondent refused the application because of a lack of  supporting
    evidence and the appellant's perceived poor knowledge of  the  sponsor.
    When the decision was reviewed the Entry Clearance Manager  upheld  the
    decision.

17. The thrust of Mr Syed's argument is that by concentrating  on  previous
    misdemeanours the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal lost  sight  of  the
    issues in the case. Ms Johnstone argued that in assessing the  marriage
    the Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  was  entitled  to  consider  all
    matters known to him.

18. Mr Syed accepted at the hearing that  the  explanation  for  the  false
    documents given by the sponsor at the hearing before Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Nicholson differed to what had subsequently been advanced
    in the appellant's solicitor's letter dated June 9, 2014. However,  the
    fact a totally different explanation  was  now  being  advanced  was  a
    factor the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal was entitled to  take  into
    account.

19. At  the  hearing  in  February  2011  the  sponsor  blamed  the  "false
    documents" on a combination of things including a denial  the  payslips
    were fraudulent, a change of name meant the employer stated she did not
    work there and bad photocopies of bank statements.

20. The letter from the solicitors dated June 9,  2014  sought  to  address
    those issues and on page 4 of the said letter the solicitors no  longer
    relied on the explanation put forward but suggested  that  neither  the
    appellant nor the sponsor had been aware of any false documents and  it
    was the fault of an immigration advisor  who  had  been  convicted  for
    submitting false documents.

21. Mr Syed argues that the Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to
    consider this explanation anywhere in his decision and he submits  that
    amounts to an error in law.

22. I accept the Judge makes no direct reference  to  the  content  of  the
    letter but as stated before he does refer to the letter  indirectly  as
    it forms part of the appellant's bundle and he made it  clear  that  he
    had considered all of the evidence before making any findings.

23. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal observed that against  a  previous
    deception the respondent took  a  cautious  approach  to  the  evidence
    submitted. Which ever way the previous  decision  was  dressed  up  the
    appellant cannot escape from the fact false  documents  were  submitted
    and the sponsor had sought, at the earlier hearing to explain away  the
    fact they were false whereas now it was  accepted  the  documents  were
    false and it was someone else's fault.

24. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal noted the new evidence in relation
    to the genuineness of the marriage but between paragraph [14] and  [23]
    the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal considered  the  evidence  and  at
    paragraph [22] he accepted there was reasonable evidence of five visits
    by the sponsor to the  appellant,  the  fact  a  marriage  took  place,
    photographs to support the wedding and  the  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal concluded this evidence was supportive of a marriage  but  was
    not  clear  evidence  that  they  were  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship.

25. Mr Syed pointed me to paragraph [23] in which the Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal accepted there was some evidence  capable  of  supporting
    the claim it was a genuine and subsisting marriage but  then  concluded
    for reasons given in the decision that the marriage was not genuine.

26. For the reasons given the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  upheld  the
    finding  on  the  evidence  despite  further  evidence  that  had  been
    advanced. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal does not have to set out
    each piece of evidence but must  demonstrate  an  engagement  with  the
    evidence being advanced.

27. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal clearly engaged with the  evidence
    and gave numerous reasons for rejecting this as a genuine marriage  and
    in the circumstances I do not find the failure to mention  specifically
    a document contained in the appellant's bundle  did  not  amount  to  a
    material error. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal had the benefit of
    seeing the sponsor give her  evidence  and  he  was  entitled  to  make
    findings about her as he did.

28. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not accept  the  marriage  was
    genuine. He accepted there was evidence that could support  that  claim
    but he gave reasons for making an adverse finding.

29. I am satisfied there is no material error.

    DECISION

30. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point  of  law.  I  uphold  the  First-tier
    decision.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

FEE AWARD

I make no fee award as I have dismissed the appeal.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
