

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/13118/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 24th April, 18th September &             |On  :  29th November 2013    |
|22nd November 2013                            |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge McKee


                                   Between

                         IBRAHIM HAJI AHMED MOHAMOUD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer, Abu Dhabi
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr James Collins, instructed by Ahmed Hersi
For the Respondent:    Mr Chris Avery & Miss Julie Isherwood of the
                    Specialist Appeals Team

                                DETERMINATION


(1)  This appeal to the Upper Tribunal has been  attended  by  a  number  of
difficulties.  The decision to  refuse  entry  clearance  on  the  basis  of
marriage was made on 10th June 2012, the ECO  not  being  satisfied  that  a
valid marriage had been contracted or, in any event, that the  marriage  was
genuine and subsisting, with each party intending to live  permanently  with
the other.  An appeal to the First-tier Tribunal came before Judge James  on
29th October 2012 and was dismissed, but permission to appeal to  the  Upper
Tribunal was granted by Judge Baird.  By the time  the  matter  came  before
me, however, most of the necessary  documents  had  gone  missing,  although
enough remained to enable an error of law to be  established.   After  that,
the  case  was  adjourned,  and  the  parties  were  sent  a   'Decision   &
Directions', setting out the error and asking for the missing  documents  to
be retrieved.  This is appended below.  The case then came before  me  again
on 18th September, but again it had to be adjourned, and the  final  hearing
was  on  22nd  November.   My  understanding  of  the   issues   has   grown
incrementally  with  each  hearing,   as   will   be   reflected   in   this
determination, which is divided into  three  parts,  to  correspond  to  the
three hearings.


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


1.   Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  against  the  determination
    of Judge James, after a hearing at  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  29th
    October 2012, was granted by  Designated  Judge  Baird,  but  when  the
    matter came before me on 24th April this year, the original court  file
    had been lost, and the only documents on my file  were  the  First-tier
    determination,  the  application  by  the  Horn  of  Africa  Women  and
    Children's Association for leave to appeal, the grant of leave and  the
    notice of today's hearing.  Mr  Avery  did  not  have  a  copy  of  the
    Respondent's Bundle, which would have been sent from the  British  post
    in response to the notice  of  appeal  against  the  refusal  of  entry
    clearance, while Mr Collins said that the sponsor had not yet been able
    to obtain all the papers in the case from her previous  representative,
    a Mr Paxi-Cato.  Nevertheless, it was possible to  identify  errors  of
    law in Judge James' determination, rendering it necessary  to  set  her
    decision aside.

2.    An adverse credibility  finding  was  made  by  the  judge  because  a
    business trip supposedly taken by the appellant to the  United  Kingdom
    overlaps with the time when he and the sponsor  were  together  in  Abu
    Dhabi, celebrating their wedding.  This is stated at paragraphs 35  and
    47 of her determination, and clearly misunderstands the  evidence.   Mr
    Avery argues that "overlaps" should  not  be  taken  to  mean  what  it
    apparently means, but if the judge is using the word in a  sense  which
    no one else can understand, that in itself  would  be  a  legal  error.
    Apart from that, there are no clear findings on whether the sponsor was
    free to marry the appellant and, if so,  whether  a  marriage  actually
    took place.  The decision on the appeal will have to be re-made by  the
    Upper Tribunal, in the light of whatever evidence is available.


     DIRECTIONS

     The parties are  to  use  their  best  endeavours  to  re-assemble  the
    missing  documents,  in  particular   the   Respondent's   Bundle   and
    Appellant's Bundle which were before the First-tier  Tribunal.   These,
    and any further relevant documents, should be filed with  the  Tribunal
    and served on the other side no later than five working days before the
    next hearing, at which the  sponsor  will  be  expected  to  give  oral
    evidence.  Statements from her and from any other witness who is to  be
    called should be filed and served in the same way.

Hearing on 18th September

(2)  Mr Avery was able to replace the Respondent's Bundle on 30th  May,  but
a thick Appellant's  Bundle  from  the  Horn  of  Africa  Women  &  Children
Association did not reach Field House until  10th  September,  and  was  not
copied to the Specialist Appeals Team.  Another, smaller bundle arrived  the
day before the re-listed hearing on 18th September, but  this  time  it  was
copied to Angel Square  as  well  as  Field  House.   We  now  had  all  the
documents which were before the First-tier Tribunal, and  some  more  recent
ones.  But as Mr Collins  frankly  admitted,  there  was  still  not  enough
evidence to address all the issues arising in this appeal.   In  particular,
had the sponsor divorced his first wife?  At Q.168 of the  Visa  Application
Form, the appellant said that he had been  separated  from  his  first  wife
since 2005, not that he had divorced her.  He had also stated  that  he  had
married the sponsor in Abu Dhabi on 27th July 2011, but it turned  out  that
this was a small party to celebrate the wedding which had actually,  it  was
said, taken place by proxy on 25th July 2011 in Somalia.

(3)  I pointed out some  oddities  in  the  certificate  (with  translation)
adduced as evidence of  this.   There  are  actually  two  versions  of  the
certificate, one apparently being a 'standard'  pre-printed  Nikah  form  in
Somali, with the names of those involved  being  filled  in  by  hand.   The
other version is in Arabic.  The English translation misses out the name  of
the appellant's father, which is Haji Ahmed Mohamud in the certificate,  but
gives the names of the two witnesses  as  Mohamed  Sheikh  Ahmed  and  Salad
Ahmed Noor.  Only one of those names appears on the  certificate,  and  only
as 'Mohamed'.  It is accordingly doubtful whether there were  two  witnesses
to this Nikah contract at  all.   For  some  reason,  the  location  of  the
marriage is given in the translation as 'Herjisa city  in  the  Republic  of
Somalia', but in fact it is Hargeisa, the capital of  Somaliland.   Yet  the
Nikah  form  is  headed  'Democratic  Republic  of  Somalia'  (Jamhuuriyadda
Dimoqraadiga Soomaaliya).  This was the name of the  country  from  1969  to
1991, under the Communist regime of Siad Barre.   The  translation  is  here
incomplete, just putting 'Republic of  Somalia'.   Clearly,  what  has  been
used to record the marriage is an out-of-date Nikah form, at least 20  years
old.  Another oddity is that the name of the groom's father is requested  on
the form, but not the name of the bride's  father.   Her  mother's  name  is
given instead.  Yet, as we shall see, according to  the  sponsor  the  whole
purpose of having a marriage by proxy in Hargeisa was that  her  father  was
there, and his consent to the marriage was essential.   Hargeisa  being  the
capital of the self-styled independent  Republic  of  Somaliland,  it  might
seem surprising that the bottom part of  the  certificate  is  stamped  with
'attestations' from the Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs  of  the  now-defunct
Somali Democratic Republic (the Ministry would  not  have  been  located  in
Hargeisa in any event), as well as by the Consular Section  of  the  Embassy
of the Somali Federal Republic (the name of the country since  August  2012,
but not including Somaliland) in Abu Dhabi.

(4)  Because the sponsor was in attendance, we were at least  able  to  find
out what light she could shed on the issues which  the  troubled  the  Entry
Clearance Officer and the First-tier judge.  In  examination  in-chief,  she
explained that her four children were the offspring of an  Islamic  marriage
which was contracted at her mother's house in 1996 and terminated  by  talaq
pronounced by her husband in 2006.  The marriage was  never  registered  for
official purposes in the United  Kingdom.   As  for  the  appellant's  first
marriage, this, thought the sponsor, was an Islamic marriage  contracted  in
Somalia (in the VAF, the sponsor said Abu Dhabi),  which  had  ended  in  an
Islamic divorce in the UAE in 2005.  She was sure her husband was  divorced.
 The sponsor was adamant that she would never go back to  live  in  Somalia.
She had not been back since leaving the country at the age of 10  (actually,
being born in 1978, she would have been at least 16).  Having  been  granted
refugee status, she was now a British citizen, and London was her home.

(5)  Both in-chief and in cross-examination, the sponsor explained that  the
proxy marriage had taken place in Hargeisa because her  father  was  passing
through that city on his way to Mogadishu from the  Yemen.   He  was  there,
she insisted, despite his name not being on the Nikah.  She had not  thought
to ask for evidence from any of the people who attended  the  proxy  wedding
ceremony.   She  confirmed  that  the  appellant  had  completed  the   Visa
Application Form himself, and that  he  understood  the  difference  between
being divorced and being separated.

(6)  In re-examination, the sponsor  confirmed  that  she  did  know  things
about her husband, such as the tribe which he belonged  to.   She  did  have
photographs at home of when the appellant visited London in June  2011,  but
she had not adduced these as evidence.  In reply to questions from  me,  and
to further questions from Mr Collins, the sponsor said that her  father  had
been living in the Yemen for a long time.  He was on his way from  there  to
Mogadishu, where he had some property, when he stopped off in  Hargeisa  for
three or four weeks to do some  business  there.   No  family  members  were
living in Hargeisa, but the sponsor thought that the witnesses to the  Nikah
were friends.  She could ask her father.  The sponsor was adamant  that  her
father's consent was needed in order for the  wedding  to  take  place,  but
that he could not obtain a visa to come to Abu Dhabi in time  for  when  the
sponsor was there.  Miss Isherwood asked when the wedding  photographs  were
taken, and the sponsor said at first 25th July  2011.   She  then  corrected
this to 27th July, the date of the celebratory party, not the  date  of  the
proxy wedding itself.

(7)  The appeal was now  adjourned,  in  order,  if  possible,  for  further
evidence to be obtained  as  to  whether  a  proxy  wedding  took  place  in
Hargeisa on 25th July 2011, and  whether  the  appellant  had  divorced  his
first wife by that date.

Hearing on 22nd November

(8)  When we convened again on 22nd November, I  indicated  to  the  parties
that there  were  problems  with  the  documentary  evidence  of  the  proxy
marriage which went beyond those  which  I  had  outlined  at  the  previous
hearing.  The  documents  which  I  was  looking  at  then  ~  the  marriage
certificate in Somali, an  Arabic  version  of  the  same,  and  an  English
translation ~ had been included with the Notice of Appeal, and  were  listed
as B1- B3 in the bundle which was reviewed by the Entry  Clearance  Manager.
I had not noticed  that  different  versions  of  the  same  documents  were
submitted with the Visa Application Form in April 2012, and are numbered  A4
-  A6  in  the  bundle  reviewed  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Manager.    The
differences are significant.  The entries in  the  Somali-language  Marriage
Certificate were clearly made at different times.  The later version is  not
simply a photocopy of the earlier one.  Rather, the form has been  completed
again by hand ~ although, contrary to my initial impression, it may  be  the
same hand.  The main difference between the two Somali versions is that  the
earlier one gives the names of the two witnesses in full  ~  Mohamed  Sheikh
Ahmed and Salad Ahmed Nur ~ whereas the later version just gives  one  name,
Mohamed.

(9)  The Arabic versions of the  marriage  certificate  are  very  different
from each other in appearance, and they too have obviously been produced  at
different times.  But the most  serious  discrepancy  concerns  the  English
translations.  The translation  of  the  earlier  certificate  contains  the
following passage :
         "They married by proxy before the judge of The Court  of  Hargesia
    City - Somali (sic), dated in 25/07/2011 AD, this Marriage is  done  by
    presence of Abdi Haji Ahmed  Mohamoud  representing  his  brother  (the
    husband) and with the approval of the guardian of the wife, that is her
    father called Nasir Mohamed."

(10)  Nothing corresponding to this passage appears in the  Somali  version.
It is a concoction designed to show that  the  marriage  was  contracted  by
proxy.  The later translation does not contain this passage,  and  it  would
appear that there is nothing in the Somali certificate to suggest  that  the
marriage was a proxy marriage.  The  later  translation  is  no  doubt  more
faithful when it says, "They were married  before  the  judge  at  court  of
Herjisa city."  Curiously, the inserted passage suggests that the  sponsor's
father was not there.  If he had been present,  his  presence  would  surely
have been mentioned, rather than just his approval.

(11)  We now have a witness statement from Nasir Mohamed Sheikh  Nur,  dated
19th November 2013, in  which  he  emphasizes  that  he  was  indeed  there,
because "it is very important that the bride's father is present during  the
ceremony and gives his blessing to the marriage."  He  also  says  that  not
only was he there, but so were "Ibrahim's mother and many of his  siblings."
 That was not mentioned by  the  sponsor  at  the  last  hearing,  when  she
surmised that the two witnesses to the marriage were friends of her  father.
 In her oral evidence today, she said  that  she  did  not  think  that  any
further details about who was there were needed.

(12)  Far from assisting the  appellant's  case,  the  documentary  evidence
adduced for today's hearing has added more confusion.  A statement from  the
sponsor's mother, also dated 19th November 2013, says : "My daughter had  an
Islamic engagement with the father of  her  children,  Mr  Abdirahman  Osman
Abdi.  She was never legally married to him.  Once  the  relationship  broke
down they both went their separate ways."  It is  certainly  the  case  that
the sponsor was never married for official purposes in the  United  Kingdom.
But to say that she had nothing more than an 'Islamic engagement'  with  the
father of her four children is  ludicrous.   I  can  only  assume  that  the
wording of this statement is the result of the anxiety  of  the  appellant's
representative, Ahmed Hersi, to make sure that the Upper Tribunal  does  not
labour under the misapprehension that the sponsor  was  married  to  another
man when she married the  appellant  in  2011.   He  should  not  have  been
worried about that.  I am quite sure that the sponsor's Islamic marriage  to
her first husband was not valid under English law.  Her subsequent  divorce,
by Talaq, rendered her free to marry again  by  Islamic  law,  but  was  not
necessary under English law.

(13)  The confusing and contradictory evidence as to who was in Hargeisa  on
25th July 2011 led Miss Isherwood to submit that there was no proxy  wedding
at all.  On the other hand, evidence adduced on  the  day  of  the  hearing,
which inexplicably had not been provided sooner, bolstered  the  claim  that
on 27th July 2011 there had been a celebration in  Abu  Dhabi.   Previously,
there had just  been  photographs  of  the  appellant  and  the  sponsor  in
romantic  poses.   Now,  photographs  were  produced  of  the  happy  couple
surrounded by well-wishers at a party venue.   In  her  oral  evidence,  the
sponsor explained that these people were friends of her  husband.   She  did
not know them herself.

(14)  Asked whether, if she was found not  to  be  validly  married  to  the
appellant for the purposes of English law, she could go back  to  Abu  Dhabi
and marry the appellant again, as it were, the  sponsor  replied  that  this
would be feasible.  Her father, who has permission to reside in  the  Yemen,
would have great difficulty getting a visa to come  to  Abu  Dhabi,  but  he
could give his consent to the marriage  over  the  telephone  while  it  was
being celebrated.  One might ask why this was not done in the  first  place,
rather than arrange for the wedding to be celebrated  without  the  physical
presence of either  the  bride  or  the  groom,  while  the  bride's  father
happened to be passing through Somaliland and,  as  we  are  now  told,  the
groom's mother and brother and other siblings  converged  on  Hargeisa  from
Buhodle (a town which I have been unable to spot on a map of  Somalia,  with
that spelling).   But  Mr  Collins  submitted  that,  if  it  was  perfectly
possible for the couple to get married in Abu Dhabi,  why  would  they  have
gone to the trouble of pretending to get married  by  proxy  in  Somaliland,
and getting together all  the  evidence  to  prove  it,  if  no  such  proxy
marriage had ever taken place?

(15)  There is logic in Mr Collins' submission.  Despite the  problems  with
the documentary evidence, I think it more likely than not  that  the  couple
had something to celebrate on 27th July 2011, and that  that  something  was
their  wedding.   The  sponsor  gave  what   Mr   Collins   rightly   called
"compelling" evidence today that she  regards  herself  as  married  to  the
appellant.  She explained how, having agreed to marry a man chosen  for  her
by her family, who turned  out  to  be  unsuitable,  and  having  thereafter
brought up the four children of the marriage on her  own,  she  was  on  the
lookout for a good man of her own choice, and was sure that  she  had  found
him  in  the  appellant.   Having  seen  and  heard  the  sponsor  give  her
testimony, I have no doubt that she sincerely loves the appellant and  wants
to live with him in this country.  She gave perfectly good reasons  why  she
would not take her four children, who are all British and are all at  school
here, to live in Abu Dhabi.

(16)  The real stumbling block for this appeal,  as  Mr  Collins,  with  his
customary realism, candidly recognised, is  not  whether  a  proxy  marriage
took place, but whether the sponsor was free to marry  the  appellant.   The
sponsor has made it clear, both today and at the previous hearing, that  she
has no intention of ever going back to Somalia.  She regards  this  country,
of which she is a citizen,  as  her  home.   Plainly,  she  has  acquired  a
domicile of choice in England.  She  cannot  therefore  enter  a  polygamous
marriage that would be recognised as valid in the United  Kingdom.   If  the
appellant was married to someone else when the  proxy  wedding  is  said  to
have taken place on 25th July 2011, then he is not  entitled  to  enter  the
United Kingdom as a husband under the Immigration Rules.

(17)  The appellant has previously maintained that  he  divorced  his  first
wife in 2005, and  that  his  use  of  the  word  'separated'  in  his  Visa
Application Form was an unfortunate slip.  But  just  in  time  for  today's
hearing, he says in a witness statement,  taken  over  the  phone  by  Ahmed
Hersi on 21st November, that his first marriage  "was  an  informal  Islamic
marriage.  My first wife and I separated in 2005.  I divorced my first  wife
informally in 2011."  There  are  two  problems  with  the  appellant's  new
stance.  First, there is no reason to suppose  that  the  appellant's  first
marriage was not recognised  as  a  lawful  marriage  in  the  UAE,  so  the
appellant would have needed a divorce.  He does not  say  when  in  2011  he
divorced his first wife.  The sponsor believes,  no  doubt  sincerely,  that
the appellant was divorced before he married her.  She has no wish to  share
him with another woman.  But something more is needed than  the  appellant's
bare assertion, especially in the light of the change in his position.

(18)  The second problem is that there is no corroborative evidence  of  the
divorce.  What the appellant goes on to say in his statement does  not  help
his case : "There was nothing legally to stop Najma and I from  marrying  in
the UAE or Somalia because  in  both  countries  men  are  permitted  to  be
married to up to four wives at a time."  That does  not  assist  in  showing
that his marriage  to  the  sponsor  was  monogamous.   What  is  needed  is
information about when, and how, and before whom the appellant obtained  his
divorce.  I  presume  that  by  'informal',  the  appellant  means  that  he
divorced his first wife by a 'bare' talaq.  But I  do  not  know  whether  a
bare talaq suffices in the United Arab  Emirates,  or  whether  the  divorce
also has to be registered with some official body in order to be  effective.
 If a bare talaq does  suffice,  it  still  has  to  be  pronounced  in  the
presence of witnesses.  Who were those  witnesses,  and  when  did  it  take
place?  In the absence of any information, I cannot be  satisfied  that  the
sponsor was able to contract a marriage with the appellant that would  be  a
valid marriage for the purpose of obtaining entry clearance as a spouse.

(19)  If the appeal could not be allowed under  the  Immigration  Rules,  Mr
Collins asked me to consider allowing it under Article  8.   I  have  indeed
given this possibility serious consideration, because I do  not  doubt  that
the sponsor sincerely desires to live with the appellant in this country  as
a married couple, and that the protracted  litigation  which  she  has  gone
through is not a contrivance to bring somebody to this  country  purely  for
economic betterment.  But when Article 8 falls for consideration, it is  not
just the private and family life of the appellant and the sponsor that  must
be taken into account.  The best interests of any children must also  be  'a
primary consideration'.  Section 55 of the 2009 Act requires the welfare  of
children who are in the United Kingdom to be promoted.  The  sponsor's  four
children obviously fit the bill.  But the appellant also has four  children,
and Entry Clearance Officers  are  enjoined  to  apply  the  spirit  of  the
section 55 duty to children who are outside the United Kingdom.  I  have  no
idea how the appellant's departure would  impinge  upon  his  children.   In
short, a proper Article 8 assessment would require me  to  range  much  more
widely than I have done in the present appeal, which has focused on  whether
the appellant is validly married to the sponsor.

(20)  On the evidence before me,  I  have  no  choice  but  to  dismiss  the
appeal.  It may be that the sponsor  can  (re)marry  the  appellant  in  Abu
Dhabi, and that a fresh application can be made, but that is  a  matter  for
them and their advisers.


DECISION

The appeal is dismissed.


Richard McKee
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                          23rd November 2013
                                    [pic]
