
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number OA/13370/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons promulgated     |
|On 31 October 2014                   |On 29 April 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis


                                   Between

                                 Lujun Zhang
                          (No anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Entry Clearance Officer,
                                   Beijing
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms.  S.  Panagiotopoulou  of  Counsel  instructed  by
Edwin Coe LLP.
For the Respondent:    Ms. J. Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal was previously before  me  on  23  September  2014  when  I
    determined that First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain had erred in  law  in
    his determination allowing the Appellant's appeal against a decision of
    the Respondent dated 3 June 2013 to refuse to grant entry clearance  as
    an adult dependent relative. In consequence, I set aside  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal Judge, and issued Directions for the  future
    conduct of the appeal, including that the decision in the appeal  would
    be remade before the Upper Tribunal. (For ease of reference the text of
    my 'Error of Law' decision and the Consequent Directions is  reproduced
    at Annex A below.)

Background

 2. The procedural background to the appeal is summarised at paragraphs 3-5
    of the Error of Law decision.

 3. The Appellant's medical history  forms  a  significant  aspect  of  the
    factual background of this case. The history is helpfully summarised at
    paragraphs 7-12 of the Skeleton Argument settled by Ms  Panagiotopoulou
    for today's hearing.

 4. Further to this I note the following by way of chronology.

|28 DEC 2012:     |Appellant admitted to Shenzhen hospital; diagnosed    |
|                 |with bipolar disorder. In-patient for 14 days.        |
|11 JAN 2013:     |Appellant discharged from Shenzhen hospital.          |
|3 FEB 2013:      |Appellant readmitted to Shenzhen hospital having      |
|                 |experienced manic disorder episodes with psychotic    |
|                 |symptoms. In-patient for 18 days.                     |
|21 FEB 2013:     |Appellant discharged from Shenzhen hospital.          |
|                 |Appellant admitted to Sun Yat University Cancer       |
|                 |Centre; diagnosed with malignant tumours in her       |
|                 |uterus.                                               |
|28 FEB 2013:     |Appellant underwent a total hysterectomy.             |
|8 MAR 2013:      |Appellant discharged from Sun Yat University Cancer   |
|                 |Centre.                                               |
|3 APR 2013:      |Appellant readmitted to Sun Yat for chemotherapy.     |
|7 APR 2013:      |Appellant discharged.                                 |
|1 MAY 2013:      |Online visa application form submitted.               |
|3 JUN 2013:      |Notice of Immigration Decision refusing the           |
|                 |Appellant's application for entry clearance with      |
|                 |reference in particular to paragraphs E-ECDR2.4 and   |
|                 |2.5 of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.          |


 5. The relevant requirements of  the  Rules  -  including  the  evidential
    requirements of Appendix FM-SE - and  the  essential  reasons  for  the
    Respondent's decision are summarised at paragraphs 6-8 of the error  of
    law decision.

 6. As identified in the discussion set out in the Error  of  Law  decision
    the issues under the Rules in this case focus upon:

   (i) the extent to which the Appellant has identified and shown by way of
         specified medical evidence long term personal care needs in respect
         of the performance of everyday tasks; and further

   (ii) the extent to which the Appellant has identified and shown  by  way
         of specified evidence that  the  required  level  of  care  is  not
         available to her in China  because  there  is  no  person  in  that
         country who can reasonably provide it, or it is not affordable.

 7. In considering such issues because this is an appeal against refusal of
    entry clearance, I remind myself of the applicability of sections 85(5)
    and 85A(2) of the 2002  Act,  and  that  I  should  consider  only  the
    circumstances appertaining at the  date  of  the  decision  to  refuse.
    However, I note that this does not prevent me from considering evidence
    that post-dates the decision, providing that evidence  assists  in  any
    assessment of the circumstances as they existed  at  the  date  of  the
    Respondent's decision.

 8. Similarly, as was acknowledged by Ms Panagiotopoulou, the relevant date
    for an assessment of the Appellant's alternative Article  8  submission
    (Skeleton  Argument  paragraphs  22-23)  is  also  the  date   of   the
    Respondent's decision - AS (Somalia) [2008] EWCA Civ 149.

 9. Further to the identification of the issues summarised above,  although
    at the 'error of law' hearing it was the  sponsor's  instructions  that
    the sort of evidence identified at paragraph 34 of Appendix  FM-SD  was
    not available in China, and a direction was issued to  file  supporting
    evidence of such a circumstance (Directions at  paragraph  15(i)(b)  of
    the 'Error of Law' decision), it is to be noted that nothing  has  been
    filed in this regard, and consequently  Ms  Panagiotopoulou's  Skeleton
    Argument  does  not  provide  a  written  submission  of   the   nature
    contemplated in the Direction at paragraph 15(iii).

Consideration

10. The Rules under Appendix FM  introduced  a  less  generous  regime  for
    elderly dependent relatives such as parents and grandparents  than  had
    existed previously. In the premises  it  is  necessary  to  demonstrate
    through the production of specified evidence significant level of  care
    needs. However, even then, if the care needs are being met, or  can  be
    met where the applicant is living, then an  applicant  is  expected  to
    remain where they are.

11. It has not been argued before me that the requirements of the Rules are
    themselves   incompatible   with   human   rights.   In   any    event,
    notwithstanding their stringency, individual decisions are required  to
    respect Article 8 - and so there may be cases that are  exceptional  on
    their own particular facts that warrant the grant of entry clearance on
    human rights grounds even though the requirements of the Rules are  not
    met.

12. The starting point is to consider the Appellant's care needs as of  the
    date of the Respondent's decision in the context of the wording of  the
    Rules - "as a result of age, illness  or  disability  [she]  require[s]
    long-term personal care to perform everyday  tasks"  (E-ECDR.2.4).  The
    Rules require that any such care needs be evidenced by  the  production
    of medical evidence from a doctor or other  healthcare  professional  -
    "Medical evidence that the applicant's  physical  or  mental  condition
    means that  they  cannot  perform  everyday  tasks"  (paragraph  34  of
    Appendix FM-SE).

13. It may be, and I say no more than that,  that  in  some  cases  medical
    evidence as to the  fact  of  the  underlying  medical  condition  will
    inevitably establish that there is a concomitant care need. As such,  I
    do not rule out as a matter of principle the possibility that a medical
    report that is silent  on  care  needs  is  nonetheless  sufficient  to
    establish that a care need is more  likely  than  not  because  of  the
    extreme nature of the underlying condition eg  paraplegia.  I  envisage
    such a case is likely rare. I am clear that the  instant  case  is  not
    such a case.

14. Although there is  medical  evidence  in  respect  of  the  Appellant's
    medical histories and treatments, in my judgement there  was  no  clear
    relevant supporting evidence of a sort  identified  in  Appendix  FM-SE
    relating the Appellant's care needs. The matter became one  essentially
    of inference from the available medical evidence and largely subjective
    assertions of the sponsor. It seems to me that the scheme of the  Rules
    exactly seeks to avoid the difficulties  and  issues  that  arise  from
    inference  and  evaluation  of  subjective  opinion  by  requiring  the
    production of an objective assessment  from  an  independent  qualified
    medical source.

15. Be that as it may, I make the following observations  and  findings  in
    respect of the available evidence.

   (i) The Appellant has identified two medical conditions in the course of
         her application and appeal: a mental health  diagnosis  of  bipolar
         disorder (including  episodes  of  manic  disorder  with  psychotic
         symptoms); a  diagnosis  of  malignant  uterine  tumours  requiring
         hysterectomy and chemotherapy.

   (ii) In her application form, which focused on the ongoing  chemotherapy
         to the seeming exclusion of any mental health diagnosis (Appendix 1
         (VAF) section 1.7),  the  Appellant  declared  in  respect  of  her
         ability to care for herself on a daily basis "I  have  difficulties
         in washing myself, walking out to do food shopping, and  travelling
         to hospital for treatment" (section 1.8).

   (iii) The supporting medical evidence  submitted  with  the  Appellant's
         application  -  a  'CT  Image  Inspection  Report',  two   'Disease
         Diagnosis Certificates', two 'Gynaecological  Records  for  Leaving
         the Hospital', and Cardiograph details - is entirely silent on  the
         Appellant's care needs, whether by reference to her  current  needs
         pending chemotherapy, or more particularly in respect of  long-term
         care needs as envisaged under the Rules (See Respondent's bundle at
         annexes F-G.)

   (iv) On appeal the Appellant's sponsoring daughter,  Ms  Wanling  Huang,
         referred in her witness statement to the  Appellant  having  become
         wheelchair-bound following the hysterectomy  operation,  and  being
         "no longer able to complete simple everyday tasks such as going  to
         the toilet by herself or put on her clothes", and being  unable  to
         go to the supermarket. It was also said that the Appellant had lost
         confidence, was "occasionally suicidal", and reference was made  to
         her bipolar disease and that she suffered from  hallucinations  and
         was "not able to tolerate people around her".  (The  Appellant  did
         not provide any additional detail by way of her witness  statement,
         essentially endorsing the contents of the sponsor's statement.)

   (v) The supporting medical evidence in the Appellant's bundle before the
         First-tier Tribunal comprises predominantly documents  in  relation
         to  the  Appellant's  cancer  diagnosis  (comprising  both  Chinese
         language documents and translations). These documents  set  out  in
         some considerable detail the history of the Appellant's  diagnosis,
         and  include  records  of  physical  examinations,  test   reports,
         surgical records, pathology reports, echocardiogram  reports,  lung
         function  reports,  imaging  reports,  and  the  discharge  records
         included in the application. There are also documents in respect of
         the Appellant's bipolar disorder.

   (vi) In the main part the documents do not refer  to  any  ongoing  care
         needs; however there are some limited references,  particularly  in
         the  context  of  guidance  on  discharge.  Matters  of  particular
         relevance either drawn to my attention  or  otherwise  identifiable
         are:

        (a) "Sometimes, the patient is afraid to stay home alone  and  feels
             safe when staying with others. Sometimes, the patient dare not
             go to open wild place  or  are  afraid  to  be  together  with
             strangers. However, the patient can restrain or  disguise,  so
             not obviously affecting the  work";  and  "The  patient  often
             thinks that others are against or persecute him  or  her,  and
             often feels  being  followed  or  monitored  by  others";  and
             "Occasionally, the patient has hallucinations. In most  cases,
             the patient feels been criticised,  blamed  or  persecuted  by
             others. Sometimes, the patient feels that others know what  he
             or she is thinking about. The patient often  is  hostile,  and
             may be self-blamed or feel lonely" (page 147).

        (b) "She still lacked of insight."; and  "Discharge  Instructions  -
             Custody of drugs was by the family member who should supervise
             the patient in medication according to  the  doctor's  advice.
             Pay attention to  side  effects  of  drugs,  and  in  case  of
             discomfort, please see the doctor" (page 153).

        (c) I pause to note that in my judgement  the  fact  that  a  family
             member was mentioned as  having  custody  of  the  Appellant's
             medication is not to be read as  a  requirement  that  only  a
             family member could undertake such a  responsibility,  but  is
             rather a reflection of the reality  that  it  was  a  specific
             family member to whom the Appellant's medication was passed at
             the time of discharge. There  is  nothing  intrinsic  in  this
             report, and it is not a matter  of  reasonable  inference,  to
             suggest that any other suitably responsible individual  -  for
             example a paid carer - would be unable  to  ensure  compliance
             with the Appellant's medication regime by providing  her  with
             the appropriate tablet at the appropriate time. The suggestion
             to the contrary is without any foundation.

   (vii) Since  the  Error  of  Law  hearing  the  Appellant  has  filed  a
         supplementary bundle which includes four further items  of  medical
         evidence: further extracts from the Appellant's hospital records, a
         further diagnosis  report,  a  correction  of  the  translation  in
         respect of an earlier document, and a report prepared by a UK-based
         Consultant Psychiatrist on the basis of the available  translations
         of the Chinese  medical  documents  and  a  conversation  with  the
         sponsor.  An  accompanying  witness  statement  from  the  sponsor,
         amongst other things, seeks to identify  various  passages  in  the
         supporting medical evidence wherein reference  is  made  to  family
         members'  roles  during  the  Appellant's  various   treatments   -
         including in particular acts of the sponsor.

   (viii) I have not found this latter approach to the evidence  to  be  of
         any particular assistance in identifying the Appellant actual long-
         term care requirements at the date of the Respondent's decision. In
         my judgement it is of no particular consequence, for example,  that
         when the Appellant was admitted to hospital on 3 February  2013  it
         was consequent upon her daughter having sent her  there  which  had
         required the assistance of an ambulance. Whilst I  understand  that
         the sponsor would like me to infer that  the  Appellant  would  not
         have been able to access any treatment without her intervention,  I
         do not find the circumstance to support such a conclusion; nor,  in
         any  event,  does  it  go  to  the  question  of   long-term   care
         requirements with everyday tasks. It  seems  to  me  in  any  event
         entirely reasonable to  infer  if  there  are  any  long-term  care
         requirements that were to be met with  the  assistance  of  a  paid
         carer, such a person would be able to  identify  any  incidents  of
         crisis in the Appellant's mental or physical health and  facilitate
         an appropriate admission to hospital if necessary.

   (ix) In my judgement none of the references to the actions of either the
         sponsor or other family members that are to be  found  incidentally
         in the various medical documents is  of  any  great  assistance  in
         identifying  the  long-term  care  needs  at  the   date   of   the
         Respondent's decision.  Far  less  do  such  incidental  references
         support the contention that any such care needs could only  be  met
         through the assistance of the sponsor, and could not  otherwise  be
         met through some form of paid carer.

   (x) The report of Dr  A  Okolie,  a  UK-based  Consultant  Psychiatrist,
         constitutes for the main part a short summary of the  diagnoses  to
         be gleaned  from  the  medical  evidence  from  China.  The  report
         contains a generalised observation to the effect  that  a  person's
         bipolar affective disorder may severely impact on others  including
         in particular family members and caregivers - an observation that I
         find of no particular value in the abstract. Otherwise I  note  the
         following in respect of the passages that may have any relevance to
         the issue of ongoing care requirements:

        (a) Dr Okolie identifies the consequences for the Appellant  of  her
             bipolar affective disorder as  being  "frequent  disengagement
             from treatment, lack of insight, difficulty  getting  on  with
             neighbours in China, hallucinations and suspiciousness".

        (b) Although Dr Okolie also observes "There  also  seems  to  be  an
             issue of personal neglect and  inability  to  look  after  her
             personal hygiene", he does not identify the particular  source
             for this comment and I have not been able to identify any such
             passage  in  the  supporting  documents,  and   nor   has   Ms
             Panagiotopoulou  directed  my  attention   to   any   relevant
             extracts.

        (c) "Management of this illness requires a partnership  between  the
             mental health professionals and the caregivers". This  on  the
             face  of  it  is  uncontroversial.  It  does   not,   however,
             particularly assist in identifying  what  the  long-term  care
             needs actually are, or how they might be met, or by whom.

        (d)  Although  Dr  Okolie  opines  "in  this   instance   the   only
             identifiable caregiver at this time is her  daughter",  it  is
             not apparent on what basis he has reached  such  a  conclusion
             except perhaps on the mere say-so of the sponsor. In any event
             it is not a matter directly within his expertise, it  being  a
             matter of practical support rather than medical  opinion.  For
             the avoidance of any doubt in this context I do  not  read  Dr
             Okolie's  opinion  as  being  one  to  the  effect  that   the
             particular features  of  the  Appellant's  underlying  medical
             conditions make it imperative that her daughter be her  carer,
             as opposed to it  being  his  opinion  that  it  is  only  the
             daughter who has put herself forward as a person in a position
             to offer care. If it were indeed Dr Okolie's opinion that  for
             medical reasons the Appellant  could  only  satisfactorily  be
             cared for by her daughter, I would have expected him to  state
             so in terms and also to  offer  a  clear  reason  for  such  a
             conclusion. He has not done so, and accordingly I find that it
             is more likely than not that he does not hold such an  opinion
             on medical grounds.

        (e) In this latter regard and generally I do not consider  that  the
             general observation taken from a 'science direct'  website  to
             the effect  that  generally  clinicians  can  rely  on  family
             members as caregivers, to be of any particular  assistance  in
             determining the key issues in this appeal. More particularly I
             am not prepared to infer from such a passage that  it  is  the
             opinion of Dr Okolie that no other caregiver might be able  to
             provide the Appellant with the care that she requires.

   (xi) I have  noted  the  sponsor's  evidence  to  the  effect  that  the
         Appellant  is  currently  refusing  to  comply  with   her   cancer
         treatment. However, it appears that this is  a  matter  that  post-
         dates the Respondent's decision, is not matter in respect of  which
         there is any particular  supporting  medical  evidence  as  to  the
         underlying reasons, and in any event does not  relate  to  everyday
         tasks of living.

16. The very real difficulty I have had in this  case  is  identifying  any
    supporting medical evidence as to the Appellant's long-term care  needs
    in respect of everyday tasks. The Appellant's cancer, which was at  the
    forefront of the initial application  seems  over  the  course  of  the
    appeal to have become marginalised in favour of arguments based on  the
    Appellant's mental health. Be that as it  may,  no  specific  long-term
    care need has been identified by reference to the Appellant's  physical
    condition. As regards the Appellant's mental health, I accept that  she
    has a chronic  underlying  condition  which  is  variable,  and  indeed
    episodic, in nature. I also accept that at or about  the  time  of  the
    application the Appellant had experienced a period of recent crisis.  I
    accept that during periods of crisis her care needs might alter, and in
    particular she may require the intervention of a third party to  ensure
    she accesses professional  treatment.  I  am  not  satisfied  that  any
    particular  long-term  care  need  has  been  clearly  and   adequately
    identified,  or  clearly  and  adequately  proved  on  a   balance   of
    probabilities - by reference to the supporting medical evidence. In any
    event, were it otherwise I am not persuaded that there is  anything  in
    the supporting evidence that demonstrates any specific  long-term  care
    needs with everyday tasks  -  such  as  washing,  toileting,  dressing,
    shopping, cooking, feeding, getting  in  and  out  of  bed,  or  taking
    medication - could not be adequately met through the  assistance  of  a
    relatively lowly skilled paid carer. Far less  is  there  any  evidence
    from a relevant health authority, a local authority, a doctor or  other
    healthcare professional to demonstrate such care could not be  obtained
    in China.

17. In this context I am not  persuaded  that  the  Appellant's  underlying
    conditions are such that she would not accept the assistance of a  non-
    family member. I approach her circumstance as it was at the date of the
    Respondent's decision, and subsequent to her discharge from hospital at
    a time when she was in the process of recovery and  had,  as  it  were,
    calmed down from the manic episode that had led to her hospitalisation.
    Whilst there are references to an element of paranoia and suspicion,  I
    am not persuaded that there is anything in the evidence to  demonstrate
    that when the Appellant's condition is under control - as it is for the
    vast majority of the time - that this would prevent her engagement with
    a paid carer. Certainly there is nothing by  way  of  medical  evidence
    that demonstrates that the Appellant could not adequately engage with a
    non-family member carer.

18. I am reinforced in this conclusion by the circumstance that at the time
    of application the sponsor proposed that the Appellant be looked  after
    by a paid carer during the daytime in the UK: "My daughter is  planning
    to find an outside care for me during week days'  day  time.  She  will
    look after me in the evenings and weekends" (Appendix 1  (VAF)  section
    1.17). The sponsor denied that this would now  be  the  arrangement.  I
    accept  in  the  abstract  that  plans  may  indeed  change  with   the
    surrounding circumstances and needs. However the sponsor told  me  that
    it had been the plan all along that the Appellant would be looked after
    by her in the UK  rather  than  a  paid  carer.  Necessarily,  this  is
    inconsistent with what was said in the application - which in any event
    on its face was not based on issues relating to mental health.  In  the
    circumstances I do not accept the sponsor's evidence in this regard.

19. In my judgement the inconsistency is of significance. This  is  because
    on the one hand it is said that care in China is unsuitable because the
    required care to be provided to the Appellant needs to be provided by a
    family member - and in particular the sponsor - and that her care needs
    cannot be met by the employment of  a  carer  because  the  Appellant's
    mental health condition makes her suspicious and/or fearful; yet on the
    other hand it was exactly proposed in the application from that care in
    the UK would be provided in significant part (during the  working  week
    when the sponsor has left home for  work  until  she  returned)  by  an
    employed carer. I find the arrangement was advanced in support  of  the
    visa application because at that time there was no perception that  the
    Appellant would not cooperate with a non-family carer. I  consider  the
    subsequent assertions to the contrary essentially to  be  driven  by  a
    combination  of  untested  and  thereby  unfounded  pessimism  and  the
    expediency of the desired appeal outcome.

20.  In  this  context  it  is  appropriate  to  pause  to  note  that   Ms
    Panagiotopoulou raised an objection during the course of the hearing to
    one line of Ms Isherwood's cross-examination on the  basis  that  there
    had been no challenge to the credibility  findings  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. That may be so, but as I observed to Ms  Panagiotopoulou  the
    decision of Judge Hussain had been set aside. In as much as some of his
    findings might be preserved and taken forward to the considerations  in
    remaking the decision in the appeal they could  not  be  considered  as
    binding. Where - as here  -  there  was  a  clear  discrepancy  in  the
    evidence it could not be disregarded merely because there had  been  no
    express challenge to the findings of fact: it would be  in  neglect  of
    the duty  of  independent  judicial  scrutiny  to  simply  ignore  such
    matters: they required to be addressed.

21. That said, on the whole I found the sponsor - perhaps not  surprisingly
    - to be well versed in the details of her mother's  conditions,  and  a
    reliable witness as to historical fact. However, in  terms  of  matters
    that amounted essentially to opinion,  and  matters  of  intention  and
    future planning, in my judgment she demonstrated a propensity  to  give
    expedient answers - most likely arising from her understandable anxiety
    over her mother's condition. In particular, for example, her  assertion
    at the 'error of law' hearing that certain types of evidence were quite
    simply not obtainable in China, was not supported in  any  way  by  the
    production of independent evidence. For the avoidance of  any  doubt  I
    find the sponsor's assertion that it  was  not  possible  to  obtain  a
    report from a medical source in China identifying a person's particular
    care  needs  to  have  been  no  more  than  an  assertion  of  opinion
    representing a pessimism in respect of the matter, and not to have been
    based on any actual experience or  knowledge.  However,  the  sponsor's
    readiness to express such an opinion without proper or due enquiry  is,
    in my judgement, indicative of an unreliability in respect  of  matters
    of secondary fact where she has no direct knowledge or  experience.  In
    particular in this  regard  I  am  not  prepared  to  accept  her  mere
    assertion as to the  unavailability  of  suitable  paid  care  for  the
    Appellant. In my  judgement  the  sponsor  preferred  to  deny  such  a
    possibility as any alternative position would necessarily undermine the
    prospect of seeking to achieve the goal of securing entry clearance for
    her mother.

22. Even so, I understand  and  recognise  what  is  said  about  emotional
    support - adequately summarised in the following passage taken from the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal, "[A]side  from  the  physical
    help her mother needs she can also provide her with  emotional  support
    that she desperately needs. One cannot  provide  the  same  support  by
    hiring others. The appellant's quality of life would improve  by  being
    in this country with the daughter" (paragraph 11).  The  sponsor  again
    alludes to such matters in her supplementary witness  statement  signed
    24 October 2014: "I do not accept that my mother's physical care  needs
    will be met in China even though paid care might be available as  I  do
    not believe that such care in itself would be suitable" (paragraph  3).
    This,  in  the  sponsor's  opinion,  is  because  the  Appellant  needs
    "emotional, psychological and moral support". However,  notwithstanding
    my acknowledgement of the possible significance  of  emotional  support
    and the different nature of being cared for by a family member and by a
    paid carer, this does not  go  so  far  as  to  demonstrate  that  this
    particular Appellant has satisfied the requirements of the Rules.

23. For completeness I note that Ms Isherwood provided me with  a  copy  of
    extracts from the Respondent's COIR on China dated  20  December  2013,
    specifically section 11 'Medical issues', paragraphs  11.01-11.20.  (Ms
    Panagiotopoulou after taking instructions raised  no  objection  to  me
    admitting this material into evidence notwithstanding that it  had  not
    been served in accordance with the Directions previously issued.) In my
    judgement the evidence in the COIR is of limited value  in  considering
    the  availability  of  personal  care  for  everyday  tasks,  focussing
    primarily  on  the  availability  of  medical  treatment  rather   than
    provision of personal care for everyday tasks.

24. In this context it is not suggested as part  of  the  Appellant's  case
    that relevant medical care is not available: indeed the  Appellant  has
    accessed treatment in respect of both her underlying mental health  and
    physical health conditions. Whilst I  note  the  extent  to  which  the
    Appellant is prepared to access  further  such  treatments  as  may  be
    available in China has been raised as a concern by the sponsor, this is
    distinct from personal care with everyday tasks.

25. I do note that the COIR at paragraph 11.01, quoting from a  2012  World
    Health Organisation  report,  'The  Health  Service  Delivery  Profile,
    China',  makes  a  non-specific  reference  to  outpatient  care:  "For
    outpatient care, the private sector has increased its market  share  in
    recent years, with concomitant increases  in  out-of-pocket  payments".
    Whilst in isolation this tells me little about the sort  of  care  that
    might be available, it does indicate the existence of a private sector,
    and it is to be borne in mind on the facts of this particular case that
    the specific care needs appear likely to be limited, but in  any  event
    have  been  identified  with  no  particularity  or  by  reference   to
    admissible supporting evidence.

26. For the avoidance of any doubt  I  have  disregarded  the  untranslated
    documents submitted by the Entry Clearance Officer which were  said  to
    demonstrate the availability of private sector care. In  any  event  in
    this context and generally I remind myself that the burden of proof  is
    on the Appellant.

27. In conclusion:

   (i) It seems to me that the only matter of any real substance in respect
         of long-term care needs  that  emerges  from  any  of  the  medical
         evidence is that the Appellant will need help from  another  person
         to ensure that she takes her medication in  order  to  control  her
         bipolar disorder.

   (ii) I am unable to identify anything else by way  of  evidence  from  a
         doctor or other health care professional  that  demonstrates  on  a
         balance of probabilities that the Appellant has any other long-term
         care needs in respect of everyday tasks.

   (iii) The Appellant  has  not  provided  any  evidence  that  adequately
         supports the assertion made by the sponsor that it is only a family
         member - and more particularly ideally only the sponsor - who would
         be able to provide the relevant care to ensure compliance in taking
         her medication.

   (iv) The Appellant has not provided any evidence from a central or local
         health authority, or from a local authority, or from  a  doctor  or
         other healthcare professional, to the effect that the sort of  care
         required to ensure compliance with her medication regime could  not
         be obtained in China even with the practical and financial help  of
         the sponsor.

28. The Appellant has failed to demonstrate that she met  the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules at the date of the Respondent's decision.  The
    Respondent's decision was in accordance with the Immigration Rules. The
    appeal under the Rules is dismissed.

29. I turn to a consideration of the case in the alternative  by  reference
    to Article 8.

30. I note that Ms Panagiotopoulou acknowledged that in circumstances where
    Article 8 was only reached on the premise that it had  not  been  shown
    that the Appellant's care needs could not adequately be met  in  China,
    the case in respect of Article 8 was 'difficult'. She argued that there
    was a potential impact on the sponsor's own health  in  worrying  about
    her mother, and that she could not be expected to  relocate  to  China.
    She also emphasised the 'cultural aspect' of there being an expectation
    that children will look after  their  elderly  parents.  Otherwise  she
    relied upon the matter as set out  at  paragraph  22  of  her  Skeleton
    Argument, pleading  that  compelling  circumstances  existed  and  that
    irrespective of the  requirements  of  the  Rules  the  nature  of  the
    Appellant's illness was such that she was best looked  after  with  the
    personal care that only a daughter could provide.

31. I note and take in to account that the sponsor is a national of  China.
    She first came to the UK in 1999, when she was 16, to  study  for  'A'-
    levels. She remained in the UK, with leave, to pursue higher  education
    obtaining a degree from  Warwick  University,  and  thereafter  in  due
    course, qualified as an accountant. She is employed and  earns  �65,000
    per year. In her  witness  statement  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    signed  16  May  2014,  the  Appellant's  daughter  relates  that   her
    accountancy qualification gained in the UK is not recognised in China -
    "and I cannot use my skills there", explaining that there  is  a  "very
    different accounting system". The sponsor refers to having spent almost
    10 years building up a career  in  the  UK,  and  having  lived  in  UK
    continuously since she was 16 years old. I accept that it would not  be
    reasonable to expect the sponsor to relocate to China.

32. In my judgement in considering the question of  family  life,  and  the
    quality of family life, it is of very particular  significance  that  a
    family decision, or 'election', was  made  to  live  continents  apart.
    Necessarily, in the first  instance,  the  decision  that  the  sponsor
    should study in the UK cannot be taken  to  be  an  entirely  voluntary
    decision of her own: she was a child. However, it seems to me  that  at
    the  point  that  it  was  decided  that  the  sponsor   would   pursue
    qualifications in the UK not recognised in China,  in  the  absence  of
    evidence to the contrary - and there was none - it must be  assumed  to
    have been in contemplation that  it  was  thereafter  likely  that  the
    Appellant and her daughter would spend most of the rest of their  lives
    apart - including into the Appellant's old age.

33. The effect of the Respondent's decision does no more than  reflect  the
    circumstances and consequences of the decision that the sponsor  should
    pursue  a  career  through  qualifications  not  recognised  in  China.
    Accordingly, notwithstanding that the sponsor is the  Appellant's  only
    child, and notwithstanding the  sponsor's  financial  support  for  her
    mother, I am not persuaded that the nature  of  the  family  life  that
    exists between the Appellant and the sponsor is such that the second of
    the Razgar questions is to be answered in  the  Appellant's  favour.  I
    find that the  impact  of  the  Respondent's  decision  does  not  have
    consequences of such gravity as potentially to engage the operation  of
    Article 8. The Appellant and the  sponsor  are  left  in  no  different
    situation from that they reasonably envisaged  would  be  their  family
    life in consequence of the family decision to live as they do.

34. There is no issue between the parties  in  respect  of  the  third  and
    fourth Razgar questions. However, in light of my conclusion in  respect
    of  the  second  Razgar  question   the   fifth   Razgar   question   -
    proportionality  -  is  not  reached.  In  such  circumstances  it   is
    unnecessary for me to consider where the balance between the  Appellant
    and the sponsor's respective and/or mutual Article  8  rights  and  the
    public interest concern represented by the  imperative  of  maintaining
    effective immigration control, is to be struck. In the circumstances it
    is not necessary for me  to  undertake  an  evaluation  of  the  public
    interest  considerations  pursuant  to  part  5A  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. In any event, were it necessary for me
    to consider proportionality I would reach the conclusion that given the
    stringent nature of the requirements of the Rules both in terms of  the
    test and the  specified  evidence  -  that  the  Appellant's  case  was
    essentially completely answered by the Rules and the Appellant had  not
    shown there to be present any particular  or  compelling  circumstances
    that  would  justify  departure  from  the  Rules:  in   all   of   the
    circumstances the respondent's decision was both in accordance with the
    Rules and proportionate by reference to Article 8.

35.  I  conclude  that  the  Respondent's  decision  did  not  breach   the
    Appellant's, the sponsor's, or anybody else's human rights. The  appeal
    is also dismissed on human rights grounds.

Notice of Decision

36. The appeal is dismissed.



Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     21 April 2015






    To the Respondent
    Fee Award (This is not part of the determination)


    I have dismissed the appeal and in the circumstances make no fee award.






    Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis 21 April 2015


         Annex A: Text of Error of Law Decision of 23 September 2014

1.    This is an appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Hussain promulgated on 25 June 2014 allowing Ms Zhang's appeal  against
    the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer ('ECO') dated 3  June  2013
    to refuse to grant entry clearance as an adult dependent relative.

2.    Although before  me  the  ECO  is  the  appellant  and  Ms  Zhang  the
    respondent, for the sake of consistency with the proceedings before the
    First-tier Tribunal  I  shall  hereafter  refer  to  Ms  Zhang  as  the
    Appellant and the ECO as the Respondent.

Background

3.    The Appellant is a national of China born on 1 February 1951.  By  way
    of an on-line application form completed on 1 May 2013 she applied  for
    entry clearance as the dependent relative of her daughter,  Ms  Wanling
    Huang ('the sponsor'). The application was refused for reasons set  out
    in a Notice of Immigration Decision dated 3 June 2013  with  particular
    reference to paragraphs E-ECDR.2.4  and  2.5  of  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules. A subsequent Review by an  Entry  Clearance  Manager
    ('ECM') dated 13  January  2014  additionally  made  reference  to  the
    evidential requirements specified in Appendix FM-SE at  paragraphs  34-
    37.

4.    The Appellant appealed to  the  IAC.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    allowed the Appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules for  reasons
    set out in his determination. No human rights grounds  were  raised  in
    the Notice of Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, and the Judge  in  any
    event did not consider such grounds in the alternative.

5.    The Respondent sought permission to appeal which was granted by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Page on 11 August 2014.

Consideration: Error of Law

6.    An applicant for entry clearance as an adult dependent  relative  such
    as the Appellant must, pursuant to paragraphs  E-ECDR.2.4  and  2.5  of
    Appendix FM demonstrate that "as a result of age, illness or disability
    [she] require[s] long-term personal care to perform everyday tasks" (E-
    ECDR.2.4), and is "unable, even with the practical and  financial  help
    of the sponsor, to obtain the required level of  care  in  the  country
    where [she lives] because (a) it is  not  available  and  there  is  no
    person in that country who can reasonably provide it; or (b) it is  not
    affordable" (E-ECDR.2.5).

7.    Appendix FM-SD "sets out the specified  evidence  applicants  need  to
    provide to meet the requirements of rules  contained  in  Appendix  FM"
    (paragraph A of Appendix FM-SD). Paragraph 34 of Appendix FM-SD relates
    to the requirements of paragraph E-ECDR.2.4, and paragraph  35  relates
    to E-ECDR.2.5. Both  paragraphs  stipulate  evidence  from  independent
    sources: in respect of the applicant's care needs this should take  the
    form of medical evidence from a doctor  or  other  health  professional
    that the applicant requires long-term personal care; in respect of  the
    inability to obtain the required level of care, this should be  from  a
    health authority, a local  authority,  or  a  doctor  or  other  health
    professional.

8.    The Respondent has not disputed the  Appellant's  medical  history  or
    her underlying medical conditions. It was not accepted,  however,  that
    the Appellant had demonstrated any particular  care  needs  arising  in
    consequence. Moreover, in the Notice of  Immigration  Decision  it  was
    noted that the Appellant had not provided evidence to suggest that  she
    could not receive any care required in China -  in  particular  it  was
    noted that she had family members living close by; further, in the  ECM
    review it was  asserted  that  provision  of  care,  including  nursing
    support, was available in the Appellant's area.

9.    Regrettably, for the following reasons, I have  little  hesitation  in
    concluding that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not  engage  properly
    with the issues in this appeal, and thereby erred in law.

   (i) At paragraphs 31-33 the Judge  accepts  the  Appellant's  underlying
         diagnoses. However, beyond the brief reference at paragraph 34, and
         the stated general conclusion at paragraph 35, he makes no findings
         as to care needs.

   (ii) The Judge states  at  paragraph  34,  that  he  is  satisfied  "the
         appellant finds it difficult to move about without physical support
         of others", adding that "that is why  she  has  taken  to  using  a
         wheelchair". The Judge acknowledges that this is  "not  objectively
         evidenced" and is based on "the sponsor's  testimony".  Necessarily
         the sponsor's testimony does not satisfy the  'specified  evidence'
         requirements of the Rules as set out in Appendix FM-SE. In fairness
         Ms Panagiotopoulou acknowledged that 'difficulties' were  presented
         by the Judge's failure to have regard to Appendix FM-SE, and indeed
         that the requirements of Appendix FM-SE presented  difficulties  to
         the application and appeal more generally.

   (iii) Moreover, it  is  not  clear  from  the  sponsor's  testimony,  as
         summarised at paragraph 8 of the determination, the extent to which
         any mobility issues arose by reason of being in a period  of  post-
         operative recovery, there being  nothing  else  in  the  underlying
         medical conditions that would suggest a mobility issue. As such the
         Judge does not consider  or  analyse,  and  makes  no  findings  in
         respect of, long-term care needs in this - or indeed  any  other  -
         regard.

   (iv) Further, it is to be noted that the testimony  was  to  the  effect
         that the Appellant remedied  any  mobility  needs  by  use  of  her
         wheelchair; there was no suggestion that the Appellant required the
         assistance of another person to make use of her wheelchair. As such
         it is not clear what,  if  any,  care  needs  existed  relating  to
         mobility: far less is there an adequate analysis undertaken by  the
         Judge, and far less are there any clear findings.

   (v) There is no finding as  to  any  other  care  needs.  I  invited  Ms
         Panagiotopoulou to identify amongst  the  various  medical  reports
         that were filed before the First-tier Tribunal  any  passages  that
         indicated specific care needs. Although my attention  was  directed
         to a list of symptoms (Appellant's First-tier Tribunal bundle  page
         147) I was not satisfied that the symptoms listed under the heading
         'Guidance' were anything other than a list of general symptoms that
         might be  exhibited  by  a  person  with  a  diagnosis  of  bipolar
         disorder, and I was wholly  unable  to  interpret  the  figures  or
         'scores' that appeared to relate to the Appellant: far less was  it
         possible, in my judgement, to infer anything about care needs  from
         such figures in the absence of expert evidence.

   (vi) Consideration of the ability to meet care needs within China is, in
         light of the error of approach and the absence of clear findings as
         to what those care  needs  might  be,  inevitably  premised  on  an
         inadequate foundation.  The  ability  to  meet  care  needs  cannot
         properly be evaluated if  those  care  needs  themselves  have  not
         properly be evaluated.

   (vii)  Whilst  the  Judge  reasonably  concludes  that  the  Appellant's
         relatives  cannot  be  expected  to  provide  care,  there  is   no
         consideration given to the  requirements  of  Appendix  FM-SE,  and
         otherwise no consideration of healthcare provision in  China,  save
         the 'blind alley' reference  to  institutional  care  which  it  is
         acknowledged is not required.

   (viii) Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  in  part
         because it was considered arguable that the Judge  had  misdirected
         himself at paragraph  35  of  the  determination  in  stating  "The
         question is whether that care could be  provided  in  China  or  be
         better provided in the United Kingdom". This appears to introduce a
         comparative test inconsistent with the test stated in the Rules. Ms
         Panagiotopoulou directed my attention to paragraphs 29 and 40 where
         the Judge had, consistent with the Rules, identified the  issue  as
         being "whether that care can be provided in China" (paragraph  29),
         and concluded that he was  "satisfied  that  this  care  cannot  be
         suitably provided in China" (paragraph 40). I am  not  prepared  to
         accept that the question the Judge poses at paragraph 35 represents
         an  aberrant  anomaly   in   circumstances   where   he   otherwise
         appropriately directed himself to and in accordance with the Rules.
         Rather, in my judgement, it renders the determination unclear as to
         what test the Judge actually was applying. In any event, even if it
         were otherwise, I am not satisfied that the Judge's approach to the
         issue of the ability to meet the Appellant's care  needs  in  China
         was adequate for the reasons already given.

10.   In all such circumstances I find that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    materially erred in his approach to  the  appeal  under  the  Rules.  I
    conclude that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  must  be  set
    aside.

Remaking the Decision / Future Conduct of the Appeal

11.   Both representatives acknowledged that the  appeal  was  suitable  for
    consideration by the Upper Tribunal.

12.   Ms Panagiotopoulou requested more time essentially  for  two  reasons.
    It was suggested that some  further  evidence  might  be  available  to
    enable a better understanding of aspects of the medical evidence  (such
    as the scores recorded at page 147) and suitable expert opinion  as  to
    the likely  consequent  care  needs.  Further,  it  was  the  sponsor's
    instructions that the sort of evidence identified at  paragraph  34  of
    Appendix FM-SD quite simply was not available  in  China:  doctors  and
    hospitals did not routinely issue reports as to care needs, it was  not
    possible to commission such a report privately, and/or in any  event  a
    doctor would not be prepared to visit a mental health patient  at  home
    because of risk of harm to the doctor. If that were the case -  and  in
    effect no dependent adult relative living in China  would  be  able  to
    comply with the requirements of the Rules - then it might be  necessary
    for the Tribunal to consider the extent to which  the  Rules  might  be
    relaxed, or whether any alternative resolution might  be  available  by
    reference to Article 8.

13.   With some hesitation - conscious of the limitations of  the  scope  of
    the appeal under the Rules  by  reference  both  to  the  date  of  the
    decision and the requirements of Appendix FM-SE -  I  was  prepared  to
    grant an adjournment to provide the Appellant with  an  opportunity  to
    obtain any further evidence upon which she might wish to rely. I  issue
    directions accordingly: see below.

Decision

14.   The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  contained  material
    errors of law and is set aside.

15.   The decision  in  the  appeal  is  to  be  re-made  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

         Consequent Directions

         (i) The Appellant is to file and serve by 24 October 2014 all  such
         further evidence upon which she wishes to rely. So  far  as  it  is
         available such evidence should address:

             (a) The extent to which it  is  possible  to  identify  and/or
             infer  long-term  care  needs  from  the   available   medical
             evidence.

             (b) The availability or otherwise of reports from  doctors  or
             other health professionals in China concerning an individual's
             care needs.

         (ii) The Respondent is at liberty to file  and  serve  any  similar
         evidence - perhaps in particular  in  respect  of  (i)(b)  above  -
         within the same time limit.

         (iii) In the event that  the  Appellant  obtains  evidence  to  the
         effect that it is not possible in China  to  obtain  evidence  that
         would meet the requirements of paragraph 34 of Appendix FM-SE,  the
         Appellant is to file  and  serve  by  24  October  2014  a  written
         submission as to how this impacts upon the appeal herein.

         (iv) The appeal will be re-listed for  hearing  at  Field  House  -
         reserved to me - on 31 October 2014.

