
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/13594/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On Tuesday 20 October 2015           |On Wednesday 21 October 2015         |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MR MARKUS BAKO MAKAN
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:           Mrs Williock-Briscoe, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:          Ms Cole, Legal Representative


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal. I find that no
particular issues arise on the facts of this case that give rise to the
need for a direction. For this reason no anonymity direction is made.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

      1. This is  an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State.   For  ease  of
         reference, I refer below to the parties as they were in the  First-
         Tier Tribunal albeit that the Secretary of State is technically the
         Appellant in this particular appeal.

      2. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria.  He appeals the Respondent's
         decision to refuse to admit him on 18 September 2014 as the  family
         member of an EEA (Romanian) spouse.

      3. The Appellant was in the UK previously from 2001.  He was  arrested
         in 2004 in connection with a sham marriage which he  was  about  to
         contract in a false name and charged  with  conspiracy  to  make  a
         false statement.  He was  convicted  and  sentenced  to  21  months
         imprisonment.  The sentencing Court recommended deportation action.
          He was deported to Nigeria on 4 August 2005.

      4. The Appellant then spent a period of time in the United States.  In
         2010, he married his Romanian spouse in Romania and was issued with
         an EEA residence permit on that account.  They  have  two  children
         who are Romanian citizens.

      5. The Appellant's wife has found work in the United Kingdom  and  the
         family arrived on 18 September  2014.   The  Appellant's  wife  and
         children were admitted but the Appellant was refused  admission  on
         the basis of the extant deportation order.

      6. The Appellant's appeal against the decision was allowed  by  First-
         Tier Tribunal Judge Hodgkinson in a decision promulgated on 27 July
         2015 ("the Decision")  under  The  Immigration  (European  Economic
         Area) Regulations 2006 (as amended) ("the  EEA  Regulations).   The
         Respondent sought permission to appeal relying on the case of Latif
         (s120 - revocation of deportation order)  [2012] UKUT 78  (IAC)  on
         the basis that the Appellant was required to seek revocation of the
         extant deportation order prior to seeking admission and  could  not
         circumvent this requirement by raising the issue on appeal.

      7. Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Andrew on 14 September 2015 on the basis  that  the  Judge  had  no
         jurisdiction to allow the appeal, the Appellant not having  applied
         to revoke the deportation order against  him.    The  matter  comes
         before the Upper  Tribunal  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Decision involved the making of an error of law.

    Decision and reasons

      8. The essence of  the  Respondent's  appeal  is  that  by  reason  of
         regulation 19(1A) of the EEA Regulations, the decision to refuse to
         admit the Appellant whilst he was  the  subject  of  a  deportation
         order was correct and  the  Judge  therefore  materially  erred  in
         allowing the appeal under  the  EEA  Regulations.    Mrs  Williock-
         Briscoe submitted that the reference  there  to  deportation  order
         encompassed  not  simply  a  deportation  order   under   the   EEA
         Regulations but also a deportation order made under the Immigration
         Acts.

      9.  Mrs  Williock-Briscoe  founded  her  submissions  on  Latif.   She
         accepted that the case is not directly on point as it relates to  a
         refusal of entry clearance based on the mandatory grounds under the
         Immigration Rules which do not apply to the Appellant's case.   She
         submitted however that it applied by analogy  procedurally  on  the
         basis that the Appellant should first have sought revocation of the
         deportation order before seeking admission.

     10. Ms Cole founds her submission that there is no  material  error  of
         law in the Decision on Home Office guidance to Criminal Caseworkers
         which was in force at the date of decision and  before  the  Judge.
         That guidance makes clear that where re-entry is sought to  the  UK
         in EEA cases where  a  deportation  order  remains  in  force,  the
         application for admission is to be determined on the principles  in
         the EEA Regulations and not rejected outright on the basis  of  the
         extant  deportation  order.   In  other  words,  the  reference  to
         "deportation  order"  in  regulation  19(1A)  is  restricted  to  a
         deportation  order  under  those  Regulations.  Latif  is   of   no
         assistance to the Respondent.  It follows that the decision not  to
         admit the Appellant was made on the wrong basis and to that  extent
         there  is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the   Decision.    The
         Respondent's decision was on that view not in accordance  with  the
         law for failing to follow the guidance and refusing to admit simply
         on the basis of the extant deportation order.

     11. That is however not the end of the  matter.   Mrs  Williock-Briscoe
         submitted that if I found that the Respondent had refused to  admit
         on the wrong basis under the EEA Regulations, then, relying on  the
         guidance referred to above the proper course was for the  Judge  to
         remit to the Respondent to re-take the decision  whether  to  admit
         based on a consideration of  whether  the  Appellant  represents  a
         genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat to the  UK  rather
         than going on to make the decision himself on  the  basis  of  very
         limited evidence as to that risk and where criminal records  checks
         had not been carried out by the Respondent.  Ms Cole accepted  that
         this course was open to the Judge.   The issue is whether there was
         an error of law in not taking that course.

     12. There was no dispute between  the  parties  before  the  First-Tier
         Tribunal that the Appellant's  relationship  with  his  spouse  was
         genuine.  The issue of whether the Judge was wrong not to remit  to
         the Respondent relates  to  the  issue  of  whether  the  Appellant
         represents a current threat.  Although  there  was  evidence  of  a
         criminal records  check  in  relation  to  Romania,  there  was  no
         evidence of checks in relation to his  time  in  Nigeria  following
         deportation or during the period that  he  resided  in  the  United
         States.  The guidance to which I refer above indicates  that,  when
         considering whether to admit a person in the Appellant's  position,
         the issue of whether they constitute the requisite level of  threat
         on public policy or public  security  grounds  should  be  assessed
         under the EEA  Regulations.   There  was  no  such  assessment  and
         limited evidence of any checks for  further  offences.   The  Judge
         relied solely on the Appellant's evidence that he had not committed
         any further  offences.   Although  the  offence  of  which  he  was
         convicted occurred over ten years ago, the Appellant has  not  been
         in the UK for that period and there was limited evidence to  permit
         an assessment by the Judge as to the risk which the Appellant might
         now pose.

     13. I am satisfied that the Decision contained a material error of  law
         in not remitting the matter to the Respondent for a decision  under
         regulation 21 of the EEA Regulations. The proper course is  to  set
         aside the Decision and  to  allow  the  appeal  to  the  extent  of
         remitting  the  matter  to  the  Respondent  to  re-determine   the
         application to admit by reference to that regulation. I was told by
         Ms Cole that an application to revoke the deportation order has now
         been made by the Appellant to the  Home  Office  and  the  decision
         whether to admit can presumably be  re-taken  in  conjunction  with
         that application.

     14. I note that the Appellant is currently residing in Romania with his
         children who  are  therefore  separated  from  their  mother.   The
         decision should  therefore  be  re-taken  as  soon  as  practically
         possible.  I have considered whether to give a direction as to  the
         timescale in which a further decision  should  be  taken.   I  have
         however concluded that this would not be appropriate as I recognise
         that when that can be done may be dependent on matters outside  the
         control of the Respondent such as the response to criminal  records
         checks.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did involve the making of  an  error  on  a
point of law to the extent of failing to remit the matter to the  Respondent
for further decision. I set aside the Decision and re-make the  decision  in
the appeal by allowing it to the extent of remittal to  the  Respondent  for
her to re-take the decision whether to admit in accordance  with  regulation
21 of the EEA Regulations.


Signed      [pic]      Date 21 October 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

