



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/13206/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London                    |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 5th August 2014                              |On 20th August 2014        |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                        miss enkh uchral altanshagai
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Jack, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss Revill, of Counsel


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Respondent Enkh Uchral Altanshagai was born on 7th August 1997  and
    is a minor  citizen  of  Mongolia.  I  shall  hereafter  refer  to  the
    Respondent as "the Appellant" and to the Appellant (the SSHD on  behalf
    of the ECO Beijing) as  "the  Respondent"  as  they  were  respectively
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant had appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the
    decision of the Respondent dated 13th May 2013 refusing  to  grant  her
    entry clearance to the United Kingdom as the  dependent  child  of  her
    mother Unurbayer Buyanbaatar "the Sponsor".

 3. The main issue before the First-tier Tribunal revolved  around  whether
    the Appellant's Sponsor had sole responsibility  for  her  as  claimed.
    When the appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal the Judge stated at
    [12] that he had followed the  guidance  in  TD  (paragraph  297(i)(e):
    "sole responsibility") Yemen [2006] UKAIT  00049,  where  it  was  held
    that: "Sole responsibility is a factual matter to be decided  upon  all
    the  evidence.  Where  one  parent  is  not  involved  in  the  child's
    upbringing  because  he   (or   she)   had   abandoned   or   abdicated
    responsibility, the issue may arise between the  remaining  parent  and
    others who have day-to-day care  of  the  child  abroad.  The  test  is
    whether the parent  has  continuing  control  and  direction  over  the
    child's upbringing, including making all the important decisions in the
    child's life..."

 4. The First-tier Judge allowed the appeal.

 5. The Respondent sought and was granted permission to appeal. The grounds
    seeking permission argue that the Judge erred in his approach  to  sole
    responsibility under paragraph 297 of the Rules.  In  addition  he  had
    made a finding that the Appellant lived in the Philippines when in fact
    she lived in Mongolia. It was claimed that the  Judge's  reasoning  for
    his conclusion that the Sponsor exercised sole responsibility  for  the
    Appellant, was defective in  that  it  identified  only  one  important
    decision made by the Sponsor on behalf of the Appellant which  was  the
    decision for the Appellant to live in the UK  if  her  application  was
    successful. There was no analysis of the  evidence  to  show  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal had  turned  its  mind  to  TD  and  addressed  the
    contradictory evidence which had  been  placed  before  it.  Permission
    having been granted the matter came before me to determine whether  the
    First-tier Tribunal decision contained legal error such that it  needed
    to be set aside and the decision remade.

The Hearing Before Me

 6. Mr Jack on behalf of the  Respondent  relied  on  the  grounds  seeking
    permission. He submitted that the  determination  contained  a  genuine
    lack of reasons and that the evidence before the Judge clearly  pointed
    to the Appellant living with and being looked after day-to-day  by  her
    grandparents not the sponsor.

 7. Furthermore in [14] the Judge said that,

         "This application is very nicely poised but what ultimately decides
         the matter is my finding that it is the Sponsor  who  controls  the
         child's  destiny,  in  particular  whether  she  resides   in   the
         Philippines (sic) or in the United Kingdom if she is permitted..."

 8. Mr Jack submitted that it would seem that the Judge had  confused  this
    case with another and even if he had not, his approach  was  incorrect.
    What he had to decide was whether the Sponsor could be  shown  to  have
    continuing control and direction over the  Appellant's  upbringing  and
    that could only be shown by reference  to  the  evidence  of  what  had
    occurred in the past. The determination should be  set  aside  and  the
    matter remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for full and clear  findings
    of fact to be made. There was nothing that could be preserved from this
    determination.

 9. Miss Revill on behalf of the Appellant  unsurprisingly  submitted  that
    the determination should stand. She accepted that paragraphs  [13]  and
    [14] contained errors in that the Judge confused the  Philippines  with
    Mongolia but said that those errors were not material  because  if  one
    read the determination as a whole it was clear that the Judge  had  the
    Appellant's case in mind. The decision should not be set aside on  that
    basis.

10. She further submitted that paragraph [13] contained findings which were
    adequate to show firstly that the Appellant's level of contact with her
    father was according to the Judge something that would not detract from
    the Sponsor's sole responsibility. The Judge had identified that if the
    Sponsor does not have sole responsibility it is because  it  is  shared
    with the Appellant's grandparents. Having formed  the  conclusion  that
    the Sponsor controlled the Appellant's  destiny,  the  Judge's  reasons
    could be said to be concise but were enough to justify his decision.

Has the Judge Erred?

11. I am satisfied that the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  must
    be set aside for legal error. My reasons for this are as follows. It is
    clear that the main issue in this appeal revolved  around  whether  the
    Sponsor could be said to have sole  responsibility  for  the  Appellant
    within the meaning of the Immigration Rules. The Judge referred to  the
    test in TD and identified in [13] that if the  Sponsor  does  not  have
    sole responsibility  it  is  because  it  is  shared  either  with  the
    Appellant's father or with her grandparents. He discounted her father's
    involvement but did state that clearly her grandparents have day-to-day
    control but that is merely one factor to consider.

12. Therefore what was before  the  Judge  was  the  need  to  resolve  the
    question of whether the Sponsor had continuing  control  and  direction
    over the Appellant's upbringing  or  whether  such  responsibility  was
    shared with the grandparents who had the day-to-day care of  her.  What
    the Judge has failed to do is carry out a  fact  specific  analysis  of
    that evidence and resolve those issues.

13. All that he has done is to say that the application  is  nicely  poised
    but what ultimately decides the matter is a  finding  that  it  is  the
    Sponsor who controls the child's destiny. That is an incorrect approach
    and I find force in Mr Jack's submissions that the determination  lacks
    clear reasons for the conclusions given. That lack of reasoning amounts
    to legal error such that  the  decision  needs  to  be  set  aside  and
    reheard.

14. Because of the lack of a factual matrix  in  this  appeal,  I  find  it
    necessary to remit this matter for fully analysed findings of  fact  to
    be made.



DECISION

15.  The First-tier Tribunal determination is set aside  for  legal  error.
    The matter is remitted to that Tribunal (not Judge M R  Oliver)  for  a
    full rehearing of the appeal and for fresh findings of fact to be made.




No anonymity direction is made


Signature                                             Dated
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

