


                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)            Appeal Number: OA/13215/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard                   at                    Field                    House
                                             Determination promulgated
On  4  September   2014                                               On   8
                                             September 2014


                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                          Entry Clearance Officer,
                                    Rabat
                                                              Appellant
                                     and

                                Naoual Mounim
                          (Anonymity direction not made)
                                      Respondent
Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr. I. Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    No appearance.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. Although  before  me  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  ('ECO')  is  the
      appellant and Ms Mounim is the respondent, for the sake of consistency
      with the proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal I shall  hereafter
      refer to Ms Mounim as the Appellant and the ECO as the Respondent.


   2. The Appellant is a citizen of Morocco born  on  28  October  1983.  An
      application for entry clearance as the spouse of  Mr  Javaid  Mustaqim
      ('the sponsor') was refused  for  reasons  set  out  in  a  Notice  of
      Immigration Decision dated 14 June 2013 with reference to paragraphs E-
      ECP.3.1 and EC-P.1.1(d) of Appendix  FM   of  the  Immigration  Rules.
      Essentially the Respondent was not satisfied that  the  Appellant  met
      the financial requirements of the Rules.


   3. The Appellant appealed to the IAC. Her appeal was  allowed  by  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge McMahon for reasons set  out  in  a  determination
      promulgated on 18 June  2014  -  notwithstanding  that  there  was  no
      attendance on behalf of the Appellant at the hearing.


   4. The Respondent applied for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal
      which was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth on 16 July
      2014.


   5. Although due notice of the hearing was given, there was no  appearance
      by or on behalf of the Appellant today. The Tribunal is in receipt  of
      a letter signed by the sponsor  dated  14  August  2014,  said  to  be
      written on behalf of both the Appellant and  the  sponsor  seeking  to
      withdraw the appeal listed today because  "having  resubmitted  a  new
      application, the visa was granted in December 2013". A reply was  sent
      to this letter from the Tribunal's  Correspondence  Section  dated  19
      August 2014 to the effect  that  a  sponsor,  even  if  an  authorised
      sponsor, is not a party to the appeal  and  as  such  could  not  give
      notice of withdrawal.


   6. Mr Jarvis indicated that he had been unaware  from  the  file  in  his
      possession that the Appellant had  been  granted  entry  clearance.  I
      afforded him time to take instructions, and he was able to verify  and
      confirm to me that the Appellant had been issued  with  a  visa  as  a
      spouse on 17 December 2013 pursuant to a further application.


   7. In the circumstances the failure of the Appellant to attend either  in
      person  or  by  way  of  the   sponsor   or   a   representative   was
      understandable. I was in any event satisfied that  the  Appellant  had
      been afforded an opportunity  of  attending  or  sending  any  written
      representations to the Tribunal, and  I  was  satisfied  that  it  was
      appropriate to proceed with the appeal in her absence.


   8. It is to be observed that although the Appellant would now  appear  to
      have been granted leave to enter the UK,  none  of  the  circumstances
      specified at rule 17A(2) of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
      Rules 2005 whereby an appeal is  treated  as  abandoned  have  arisen.
      Further, for the reasons already communicated to  the  sponsor,  there
      has  been  no  valid  notice  of  withdrawal  such  as  to  meet   the
      requirements of rule 17.


   9. It follows that notwithstanding the grant of entry clearance  pursuant
      to an application subsequent to the immigration  decision  upon  which
      the jurisdiction of the Tribunal is founded, it is necessary for me to
      consider the challenge to the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


  10.  I  have  little  hesitation  in  accepting  the  substance   of   the
      Respondent's challenge. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  determined  the
      appeal  under  the  Rules  in  complete  disregard  of  the  specified
      evidential requirements under Appendix FM-SE, and  further  failed  to
      take into account the relevant date - which in the context of Appendix
      FM was the date of application. Accordingly, the Judge's  approach  to
      the case under the Rules was premised on a  material  misdirection  of
      law. Further, in so far  as  the  Judge  allowed  the  appeal  in  the
      alternative on Article 8 grounds,  he  did  so  by  reference  to  the
      decision in MM [2013] EWHC 1900, which has now been overturned  in  MM
      [2014] EWCA Civ 985.


  11. Accordingly I find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
      was flawed for material error of law and requires to be set aside.


  12. Whilst in one sense little purpose is served in remaking the  decision
      in the appeal in  circumstances  where  the  Appellant  has  now  been
      granted  entry  clearance   pursuant   to   a   further   application,
      procedurally it is necessary to bring the proceedings to a  conclusion
      by some form of determination. Accordingly I  proceed  to  remake  the
      decision in the appeal.


  13. I uphold the Respondent's decision essentially for the  reasons  given
      in the  Notice  of  Immigration  Decision  dated  14  June  2013.  The
      materials submitted with the Appellant's application did not meet  the
      requirements of Appendix FM-SE in  all  respects,  and  the  Appellant
      failed to demonstrate that the  sponsor's  income  met  the  threshold
      requirement  of  Appendix  FM.  Whilst  the  decision  frustrated  the
      Appellant's attempts to establish family life with her husband in  the
      UK, there was nothing indicated to  suggest  the  application  of  the
      Rules  to  the  Appellant's  case  resulted  in   a   disproportionate
      interference with the mutual Article 8 rights of the Appellant and the
      sponsor.  In  my  judgement  there  was  nothing  disproportionate  in
      expecting the Appellant to provide evidential material  in  compliance
      with the Rules - and indeed it appears that this is what  she  in  due
      course did.


  14. In all the circumstances the Appellant's appeal against  the  decision
      of 14 June 2014 is dismissed.


  15. For the avoidance of any doubt, the decision herein in no way  affects
      the subsequent decision of the Respondent to grant the Appellant entry
      clearance to the UK: that decision has not been  the  subject  of  any
      challenge before me or the subject of any scrutiny  by  the  Tribunal,
      and accordingly stands and takes effect unimpugned.


Decision

  16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contained errors of  law
      and is set aside. I remake the decision in the appeal.


  17. The appeal is dismissed.




Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     4 September 2014
