

                                    [pic]



The Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal number: OA/13596/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated   |
|On September 8, 2014                 |On September 11, 2014       |
|                                     |                            |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   MISS hk
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Chipperfield, Counsel, instructed by Paul John &
      Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, born February 27, 2011,  is  a  citizen  of  India.  She
    applied for entry clearance as a child dependant on April 27, 2013. Her
    application was considered by  the  respondent  on  May  27,  2013  but
    refused for failing to meet the requirements of paragraph 297  HC  395.
    She lodged grounds of appeal on June 19, 2013 under  Section  82(1)  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 in  which  she  argued
    that she did satisfy the  requirements  of  paragraph  297  HC  395  or
    alternatively she should be granted admission under article 8 ECHR. The
    entry clearance manager reviewed the grounds of appeal and  upheld  the
    original decision and further concluded that any refusal under  article
    8 was both proportionate and appropriate.

 2. On June  23,  2014  Judge  of  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  AR  Williams
    (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ") heard her appeal and  dismissed
    it in determination promulgated on June 26, 2014.

 3. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on July 7,  2014  in  which  she
    argued that there had been a material error because:-

     a. The FtTJ had not considered Section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship
        and Immigration Act 2009 (referred in grounds  to  UK  Borders  Act
        2007)
     b. The maintenance and accommodation  requirements  of  paragraph  297
        were met.

 4. Permission to appeal was given by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Nicholson on July 18, 2014. He found that  it  was  arguable  the  FtTJ
    should have considered the best interests of the child and section  55.
    He did not refuse permission on the other ground but stated  it  lacked
    merit.

 5. A Rule 24 response was filed in which the respondent stated:

     a. The grounds raised a matter that was not argued before the FtTJ and
        consequently there was no error.
     b. In any  event  based  on  the  findings  there  could  not  be  any
        meaningful discussion on the issue.

 6. The appellant's mother attended the hearing.

    SUBMISSIONS


 7. Mr Chipperfield adopted his skeleton argument and  submitted  that  the
    FtTJ should have considered section 55. Whilst the child was not in the
    United Kingdom it remained arguable following Mundeba (section  55  and
    paragraph 297(i)(f) [2013] UKUT 00088 (IAC) that the FtTJ  should  have
    addressed this issue in his determination regardless of whether article
    8 ECHR was engaged. As regards the second ground he  accepted  the  new
    evidence post-dated the date of decision by over 12 months and was  not
    something the Tribunal could have regard to.

 8. Mr Avery submitted there was no error in law. He argued  the  Court  of
    Appeal made  clear  in  Sarkar  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2014] EWCA Civ 195 that where  submissions  were  not  made
    before the First-tier Tribunal in respect of  article  8  then  such  a
    claim could be treated  as  abandoned.  He  submitted  the  appellant's
    representative  declined  to  pursue  article  8  and  the   FtTJ   was
    dissatisfied with every aspect of the case placed before him and it was
    difficult to see what alternative conclusion could have been reached.

 9. Mr Chipperfield responded stating that the IDI's place an obligation on
    the respondent to consider Section 55 when considering  an  application
    under paragraph 297(i)(f) HC 395.

10. I reserved my decision.

    ERROR OF LAW ASSESSMENT

11. The respondent considered this application under paragraph 297  HC  395
    and on review also considered it under article 8 ECHR. Mrs Anne Heller,
    Counsel, represented the appellant at the hearing on June 23, 2014. The
    FtTJ's assessment of the evidence  begins  at  paragraph  [18]  of  his
    determination and he found there were "serious concerns" regarding sole
    responsibility and accommodation.

12. His findings on accommodation in  paragraphs  [19]  to  [22]  are  well
    reasoned and were perfectly open  to  him  on  an  examination  of  the
    evidence. His reasons for refusing this appeal on "sole responsibility"
    are adequately contained in paragraph [23].

13. At paragraph [25]  of  his  determination  the  FtTJ  recorded  in  his
    determination-

             "As Mrs Heller quite properly  conceded  she  could  not  raise
             article 8 of the European Convention on Human  rights  in  this
             case if the appeal was going  to  fail  under  the  Immigration
             Rules."

14. Mr Chipperfield, against this background, has sought to argue that  the
    FtTJ erred for the reasons contained in his skeleton  argument  and  as
    set out above.

15. The Tribunal in Mundeba considered an appeal under paragraph  297(i)(f)
    and the relevance of Section  55.  From  paragraph  [39]  onwards  they
    considered whether there had been an error in law.

16. Following their approach it can be seen that the correct approach is to
    assess the assessment of the evidence for  the  purposes  of  paragraph
    297. In this current appeal the FtTJ had regard to all of the  evidence
    including the child's circumstances and who was caring for her. He also
    set out in detail Mrs Heller's submissions and was clearly aware of the
    submissions being advanced. Clear and sustainable findings were made in
    paragraph  [23]   on   the   appellant's   claim   relating   to   sole
    responsibility. The findings made by the FtTJ were clearly ones open to
    him on the evidence presented.

17. It is in considering article  8  the  Tribunal  in  Mundeba  considered
    Section 55. The difference between that case and the  case  before  the
    FtTJ was that counsel for the applicant in  Mundeba  argued  article  8
    whereas counsel in this current case did not and the  FtTJ  noted  that
    counsel accepted that if the appeal did not  succeed  under  the  rules
    then it would not succeed under article 8.

18. In any event the FtTJ clearly had regard to the facts of the  case.  He
    rejected sole responsibility because he was not satisfied  the  sponsor
    was financially supporting her daughter as she claimed and there was no
    evidence from the sponsor's sister or any other member of the family of
    what was happening in India. Against this background there was evidence
    the appellant's father had returned to India. The FtTJ was  unimpressed
    with the sponsor's evidence and made that clear in  paragraph  [22]  of
    his determination.

19. I am therefore  satisfied  that  the  assessment  of  the  claim  under
    paragraph 297 was properly conducted and the FtTJ had regard to all  of
    the circumstances.

20. The issue  of  section  55  would  become  relevant  in  an  article  8
    assessment but none was argued in this appeal.  In Sarkar  v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2014]  EWCA  Civ  195  the  Court  of
    Appeal stated in paragraph [13]

             "... Mr. Malik felt obliged to accept,  correctly  in  my  view
             that an appellant before the First-tier Tribunal is entitled to
             abandon any grounds of appeal that he does not wish to  pursue.
             If he does abandon a ground of appeal the  tribunal  cannot  be
             criticised for failing to deal with it. In this case the  third
             appellant's argument that the Secretary of State had failed  to
             consider his welfare as required by section 55 of the 2009  Act
             was not pursued.... No evidence or argument was  placed  before
             the First-tier Tribunal in support of it and  in  my  view  the
             tribunal was entitled to treat it  as  having  been  abandoned,
             although it did not formally do so. Even if that were  not  the
             case, however, there was no evidential basis on which the First-
             tier Tribunal could have found that that ground of  appeal  had
             been made out. It follows that if there were an error of law in
             failing formally to dispose of it, it was not material ....."


21.  The  FtTJ's  record  of  proceedings  records  Mrs  Heller's   closing
    submissions and she  did  not  advance  any  section  55  argument.  It
    therefore follows that  just  because  article  8  was  raised  in  the
    original grounds did not mean it was being pursued.


22. In  Azimi-Moayed  and  others  (decisions  affecting  children;  onward
    appeals) [2013] UKUT  197  (IAC)  the  Tribunal  held  that  where  the
    evidence gives no hint of a suggestion that the welfare of the child is
    threatened by the immigration decision in question, or that the child's
    best interests are undermined  thereby,  there  is  no  basis  for  any
    further judicial exploration or reasoned decision on the matter.

23. The FtTJ in this appeal was not satisfied that the Sponsor  financially
    supported the appellant as claimed and made findings  on  the  evidence
    that were clearly  open  to  him  on  this  issue  and  in  respect  of
    accommodation. In light of his findings there was no reason for him  to
    carry out a separate section 55 consideration  in  circumstances  where
    the appellant's own representative was not inviting him to because  the
    natural conclusion was the child's best interests were status quo and a
    section 55 assessment would not have altered the fact the appellant did
    not meet the Rules.

24. I am not  persuaded  the  FtTJ  erred  in  not  carrying  out  his  own
    assessment because even if he had I  am  satisfied,  in  light  of  his
    findings,  he  would  have  reached  the  same   conclusion.   In   the
    circumstances I do not find a material error in law.

Decision

25. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not disclose  an  error.  I
    uphold the original decision.


26. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended) the  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. An
    order for anonymity was made in the First-tier Tribunal and  I  do  not
    vary that decision.

Signed:                                 Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis


TO THE RESPONDENT

I make no fee award as the appeal was dismissed.

Signed:                                                   Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
