
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/13797/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 1st August  2014                             |On 4th August 2014         |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN

                                   Between

                          mr husen ali hasam musaji
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                      Entry Clearance Officer - mumbai
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss A Carver (instructed by Westkin Associates)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Respondent with regard to a determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Kainth) promulgated on 20th May 2014. For the  sake  of  clarity
    and continuity  however,  I  shall  continue  to  refer  to  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer as the Respondent and Mr Musaji as the Appellant.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of India born on 26th January 1984. He  made
    an application for leave to enter the UK as a spouse under Appendix  FM
    of the Immigration Rules. The application was rejected  in  a  decision
    dated 29th May 2013.

 3. The Appellant appealed  and  the  appeal  came  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 6th May 2014.

 4. The refusal was on the basis that the Entry Clearance Officer  was  not
    satisfied that  the  Appellant's  relationship  with  his  Sponsor  was
    genuine and subsisting  or  that  they  intended  to  live  permanently
    together in the UK. That was the sole issue.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal heard oral evidence from the  Sponsor  and  was
    shown wedding and engagement photographs together with evidence of  the
    Sponsor's  visits  to  India  and  of  text,  e-mails  and   "WhatsApp"
    communications.  At paragraph 31 the Judge says:-

         "Both the Sponsor and Appellant provided a  wealth  of  documentary
         evidence in support of their relationship which commenced as  early
         as March 2012. I have been provided with itemised telephone records
         for both parties for the period 31st  January  2013  to  1st  March
         2014. This covers a period of 396  days  of  telephone  calls  made
         between the parties to each other. Save  for  55  days,  (sic)  the
         Sponsor had not called the Appellant, only 18 of those days have no
         documentary evidence in the  bundle  showing  alternative  contact,
         i.e.,  the  use  of  e-mails,  "WhatsApp"   or   other   electronic
         communication. The itemised telephone calls clearly  identify  that
         many calls last in excess of one hour and there are multiple  calls
         on most days, often at different periods throughout the day."

6.   At paragraph 32 judge says:-

         "In addition to the above there is also evidence of e-mail  contact
         for the relevant period which can be found within  the  Appellant's
         bundle at pages 35 to 44 and covers  the  period  16th  April  2013
         through to 9th September 2013.

7.   At paragraph 33 the judge states:-

         "The Appellant's bundle identified  an  exchange  of  communication
         between the parties by "WhatsApp" and via the communication vehicle
         "Tango" which I am told and I  have  no  reason  to  disbelieve  is
         similar to Skype."

8.   At paragraph 34 the judge refers to having  seen  evidence  within  the
    Appellant's bundle of a  joint  holiday  between  the  parties  and  he
    accepted evidence that the Sponsor's daughter had spent time  with  the
    Appellant.

9.   At paragraph 36 the Judge comments  that  the  Respondent  had  made  a
    quantum leap in determining the marriage is not  subsisting  by  making
    reference to weak and unsupported reasons for refusal.  The  Respondent
    had failed to follow her own guidelines, which the Judge  set  out,  in
    assessing and addressing such matters. He found the Sponsor a  credible
    witness  who  provided  detailed  and  comprehensive  answers  to   all
    questions that were asked of  her.  He  also  noted  that  the  various
    witness statements, relied upon dealt with all the  fundamental  issues
    and questions which were raised within the adverse decision letter. The
    Judge commented that "this is  not  one  of  those  appeals  where  the
    Appellant and Sponsor failed to address all or part of the  grounds  of
    refusal".

10.  On the basis of the documentary evidence  and  the  oral  evidence  the
    judge  found  that  the  Appellant  had  clearly  shown  he   met   the
    requirements of appendix FM and allowed the appeal under the Rules.

11.  The grounds on which the Respondent sought and was  granted  permission
    to appeal are:-

      i) That the wife had previously been married in  an  Islamic  ceremony
         and there was no documentary  evidence  of  the  divorce  and  that
         whilst such a marriage is not recognised under UK law, the question
         of whether or not it had terminated went directly  to  whether  the
         new marriage is genuine and subsisting.

     ii) The Sponsor and Appellant had failed to  discharge  the  burden  of
         showing they intended to live together as husband and wife.

    iii) The judge allowed the Appellant's representative to hand in, at the
         hearing, a large volume of further evidence, after the close of the
         Home Office  Presenting  Officer's  submissions.  The  Home  Office
         Presenting Officer  was  not  given  the  opportunity  to  see  the
         majority of that evidence as it had not been disclosed to him. That
         was a procedural error.

     iv) It is open to the Sponsor to travel to India to see  the  Appellant
         and their relationship can  be  maintained  by  visits  and  modern
         methods of communication and the circumstances are  not  compelling
         or exceptional.

      v) The Secretary of State relies on Gulshan (Article 8 - new  Rules  -
         correct approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC) and Nagre [2013] EWHC 720
         (Admin)    submitting  that  the  judge  failed  to  identify   any
         exceptional circumstances

12.  So far as Ground 1 is  concerned,  it  is  wholly  without  merit.  The
    validity of the marriage was not questioned in the refusal and  neither
    was there any suggestion that  she  was  still  married  to  her  first
    husband under Islamic law. In any event the judge found at paragraph 41
    that he accepted the Sponsor's  evidence  that  she  had  undergone  an
    Islamic marriage and an Islamic divorce in 2009 and  pointed  out  that
    her evidence was not challenged when she said that her  former  husband
    had remarried and had children.

13.  With regard to Ground 2, this does not identify any  error  of  law  on
    the part of the judge and  is  merely  a  general  assertion  and  thus
    without merit.

14.  Ground 3 refers to what, if it had happened, would have amounted  to  a
    procedural error and thus  an  error  of  law.  However,  there  is  no
    evidence  before  me  from  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  who
    represented the Entry Clearance Officer before the First-tier Tribunal.
    There is nothing in the determination, the file  or  more  particularly
    the judge's Record of  Proceedings  to  indicate  that  there  was  any
    objection at the hearing to any documentation being  admitted  nor  any
    application for an adjournment. It is too late to make a complaint  now
    if none was made at  the  time  and  furthermore,  in  the  absence  of
    evidence from the Home Office Presenting Officer  I  am  not  satisfied
    that a large volume of further evidence was  in  fact  submitted  after
    submissions.

15.  Grounds 4 and 5 are irrelevant as this appeal  was  allowed  under  the
    substantive Immigration Rules and not on the basis of family life.  The
    Appellant met the substantive requirements of the Rules for entry as  a
    spouse and so Grounds 4 and 5 are misconceived.

16.  Mr Deller accepted in particular, that Ground 2 could not  be  advanced
    and did not seek to persuade me that Ground 1 had  force,  particularly
    as it do not form part of the refusal.

17.  The judge of the First-tier Tribunal made a  decision  based  upon  the
    evidence, oral and documentary which is fully reasoned. I could discern
    no error of law.

18.  The appeal to the Upper Tribunal  is dismissed.




Signed                              Date 1st August 2014




Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
