

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: OA/13498/2013
                                                   OA/13499/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                 |Determination Promulgated |
|On 1 July 2014                         |                          |
|Prepared on 1 July 2014                |On 10 July 2014           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                                   F. S..
                                    A. A.
                            (ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER ISTANBUL

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Mendoza, Counsel instructed by Brar & Co
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Dewison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellants are citizens of Iran who applied on 12 March 2013
           for entry clearance for settlement as the spouse and son of  the
           sponsor, who had been granted humanitarian protection in the UK.
        2. By separate decisions made on 22 May 2013 the Respondent refused
           those applications by reference to  paragraphs  352A  (iii)  and
           352D (iii) of the Immigration Rules. He was not  satisfied  that
           the sponsor and the First  Appellant  were  free  to  marry  one
           another at the date of the marriage relied  upon,  alternatively
           that the marriage of the sponsor and  the  First  Appellant  was
           subsisting at the date the sponsor had fled Iran.
        3. The Appellants lodged an appeal with  the  First  Tier  Tribunal
           against those decisions, and as a result the decisions were  the
           subject of review by the ECM on 7 January 2014. The  ECM  upheld
           the decision.
        4.  The  appeals  were  heard  and  allowed  by  Judge  Cope  in  a
           Determination promulgated on 1 April 2014. Although the  parties
           were agreed that the Respondent had considered the  applications
           by reference to the wrong provisions of the  Immigration  Rules,
           they were also agreed that  the  material  parts  of  paragraphs
           352FA and 352FG were in  identical  terms.  The  parties  agreed
           therefore that this  was  not  a  situation  that  required  the
           decision to be simply set aside as not in  accordance  with  the
           law,  leaving  outstanding  applications   awaiting   a   lawful
           decision. The Respondent invited the Judge to treat  this  as  a
           typographical error of no  consequence,  and  to  determine  the
           appeals on their merits,  and  the  Appellants  agreed  to  this
           course, and thus nothing turns on the Respondent's error.
        5. The Respondent applied to the First Tier Tribunal for permission
           to appeal on two grounds, and permission was  granted  by  Judge
           Plumptre on 9 May 2014.
        6. The Appellants filed no Rule 24 Notice and neither party made  a
           Rule 15(2A) application to introduce further evidence.
        7. Thus the matter comes before me.
        8. I accept as Ouseley J did in CJ (on  the  application  of  R)  v
           Cardiff County Council [2011] EWHC 23,  the  importance  of  the
           approach in Tanveer Ahmed v SSHD [2002] Imm AR 318.  Documentary
           evidence along with its provenance needs to be  weighed  in  the
           light of all the evidence in the case. Documentary evidence does
           not carry with it a presumption of authenticity, which  specific
           evidence must  disprove,  failing  which  its  content  must  be
           accepted. What is required is its appraisal in the light of  the
           evidence about its nature,  provenance,  timing  and  background
           evidence and in the light of all the other evidence in the case,
           especially that given by the claimant. The same can properly  be
           said for a witness' oral evidence.


           The grounds
        9. The grounds are not well drafted, but do appear to assert  first
           that the Judge made an inconsistent or perverse finding of fact,
           and, second that the Judge failed to resolve a disputed issue of
           fact.
       10. Mr Dewison began by conceding that the draftsman had  overlooked
           the fact that there had been reference to  contact  between  the
           First Appellant and the sponsor by mobile phone at the interview
           of the sponsor in the  course  of  his  asylum  claim.  Thus  he
           withdrew the second ground.
       11. Mr Dewison then accepted that there was no viable  challenge  to
           the Judge's finding of fact that the  sponsor  had  indeed  been
           divorced from his first wife, before the date  of  the  marriage
           relied upon to the First Appellant. Thus the sponsor was  indeed
           free to marry the First Appellant at the date  of  the  marriage
           relied upon.
       12. It was not in issue before the Judge that the  Second  Appellant
           was the son of the sponsor and the First Appellant.
       13. Although the draftsman of the grounds appears to have been under
           the impression that a genuine and subsisting marriage could  not
           exist at the same time that  one  party  to  that  marriage  was
           conducting an extra-marital  affair,  or,  that  a  genuine  and
           subsisting marriage could not  survive  the  discovery  of  that
           affair by the other party to that marriage -  Mr  Dewison  quite
           properly accepted that he could advance no such argument.
       14. In all of these circumstances I am satisfied that  there  is  no
           merit in the first ground either.


           Conclusions
       15.  In  my  judgement,  and  notwithstanding  the  terms  in  which
           permission to appeal was granted,  there  is  no  merit  in  the
           grounds. It was open to the Judge to make the findings  of  fact
           that he did, for the reasons that he  gave,  and  to  reach  the
           conclusions that he did. The complaints made about  the  Judge's
           approach reveal no material  error  of  law  that  requires  his
           decision to be set aside and remade.





   DECISION


      The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated  on
      13 January 2014 contained no error of law in his decision to allow the
      Appellants' appeals, which requires those decisions to  be  set  aside
      and remade, and it is accordingly confirmed.


Signed






Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes                              Dated 1
July 2014







Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
      Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
        granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of  these
        proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  her.   This
        direction applies both to the  Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.
        Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to  proceedings
        being brought for contempt of court.





   Signed


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes


Dated 1 July 2014





