









Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/13943/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 8 October 2014                             |On 15 October 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M LEWIS

                                   Between

                             Mrs Sarmila Mahesan
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      Entry Clearance Officer - CHENNAI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Babarinde of Hatten Wyatt Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss S L Ong, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The History of the Appeal

1.   The Appellant, Mrs Sarmila Mahesan, was born on 24 July 1986 and  is  a
    citizen of Sri Lanka.

2.   On 18 January 2013 the Appellant applied for entry clearance to the  UK
    as the partner of her  husband,  Mr  Mahesan  Varatharajaperumal.   Her
    application was refused on 21 May 2013.  The Appellant gave  Notice  of
    Appeal on 26 June 2013.  On 10 December 2013  the  Respondent  reviewed
    and adhered to the decision.  The Appellant's ensuing appeal was  heard
    by Judge Miller sitting at Taylor House on 19 June 2014.  Both  parties
    were represented, the Appellant by Counsel instructed by  her  previous
    solicitors.  In a determination promulgated on 7 July  2014  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules and on Article 8 human
    rights grounds.

3.   Permission to appeal was granted to the Appellant on 19 August 2014  by
    Judge Ford in the following terms:

         "1.  The Appellant seeks permission to appeal, in time,  against  a
             decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Miller  dated  07  July
             2014 whereby he dismissed the Appellant's appeal  against  the
             Secretary of State's decision to refuse  her  application  for
             spousal entry clearance.


         2.   It is  arguable  that  Judge  Miller  erred  in  refusing  the
             adjournment application by the Appellant.  The adjournment was
             sought  because  the  Respondent  had  failed  to  supply  the
             documents that were submitted with the  application  including
             money transfer receipts and a photo  album.   It  is  arguable
             that those documents could  have  made  a  difference  to  the
             outcome of the appeal.  Judge Miller was  not  satisfied  that
             the Appellant and the sponsor were  in  a  genuine  subsisting
             relationship.  It is arguable that it was unfair to refuse the
             adjournment and direct the Respondent to produce  the  missing
             documents (SH (Afghanistan) 2011 EWCA Civ 1284).


         3.   There is an arguable material error of law."

4.   Procedural directions followed.  On 4  September  2014  the  Respondent
    submitted a response under Rule 24  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Procedure
    Rules, submitting that Judge Miller directed himself appropriately  and
    did not need to consider a further adjournment request on conclusion of
    the evidence because no such request was made at that stage.

5.   The Sponsor attended the error of law  hearing.   Both  representatives
    made submissions on the issue of error of law.  I retired, in the event
    for fifteen minutes, to consider this issue.

Error of Law

6.   I took into account the application for permission to appeal, the  Rule
    24 response and the oral submissions of both parties.  When I  returned
    to the hearing room, I said that I had concluded that the determination
    did reflect a material error of law, for the following reasons.

7.   Some of the documents submitted by the Appellant with her  application,
    including money transfer receipts, letters and cards, were not included
    in the evidence submitted to the Tribunal by the Respondent under  Rule
    13 of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005, which
    requires the inclusion of unpublished  documents  referred  to  in  the
    refusal decision.  Judge Miller recorded that  at  the  outset  of  the
    hearing the Appellant's representative sought an  adjournment  on  that
    basis.  Judge Miller declined the adjournment, stating  that  he  would
    reconsider any application at the conclusion of the case.  He  recorded
    that none was made at that time.  He was entitled, and indeed bound,  I
    said, to decline the adjournment application if he considered that  the
    appeal could be justly  determined  without  an  adjournment.   So  the
    refusal of the adjournment was not legally erroneous.

8.   At paragraph 22 the judge expressed a  number  of  concerns  about  the
    evidence which led him to the view that the Appellant and  the  Sponsor
    were not in a  genuine  relationship.   These  included,  at  paragraph
    22(iv), that although the Appellant stated in  her  grounds  of  appeal
    that she had produced various items including  letters  and  cards,  no
    letters or cards had been produced at  the  hearing,  which  the  judge
    would have expected.   This,  I  concluded,  was  procedurally  unfair.
    Having declined to grant an adjournment sought on this  basis,  it  was
    unfair to hold against the Appellant her failure to  produce  documents
    which she had supplied to the Respondent, who had not  placed  them  in
    evidence.  As Miss Ong submitted, the judge had other concerns as well;
    but his overall assessment of the evidence might have been affected  by
    the material which the Appellant had sought to place in  evidence  and,
    through no fault of her own, had been unable to do so.

9.   When the judge stated at  the  outset  that  he  would  reconsider  any
    adjournment application at the conclusion of the case, he can have  had
    in mind only an adjournment of the hearing part heard.  This  was  open
    to him to direct, even without an application for it.  He had not  done
    so.

10.  I concluded that the determination reflected a material  error  of  law
    and was not reliable.  I said that I set it aside and  would  hear  the
    appeal again on all issues.

11.  On the application of the Appellant, I admitted in  evidence  an  album
    of photographs of her wedding to the Sponsor and a bundle of  telephone
    records, and during the hearing some other photographs.

Rehearing the Appeal: the Legal Background

12.  The decision was made under  Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules,
    which contains the  requirements  necessary  for  a  family  member  to
    establish family life.   Specifically  in  point  in  the  decision  is
    paragraph EC-P.1.1(d), requiring an applicant for entry clearance as  a
    partner to meet all of the requirements  of  Section  E-ECP,  including
    Section E-ECP.2.7 requiring that, if  the  applicant  and  partner  are
    married, it must be a valid marriage as specified.  This is  the  issue
    in the  appeal,  the  remainder  of  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    referring to aspects of the evidence leading to the conclusion that the
    marriage was not valid.

13.  Section 86 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  ("the
    2002 Act") provides that I must allow the appeal  insofar  as  I  think
    that the decision against which it is brought  was  not  in  accordance
    with the  law  (including  Immigration  Rules)  or  that  a  discretion
    exercised  in  making  the  decision   should   have   been   exercised
    differently.  I may consider evidence about any matter which I consider
    relevant  to  the  substance  of  the  decision,   including   evidence
    concerning a matter arising after the date of the  decision.   However,
    where the appeal is  against  the  refusal  of  entry  clearance  or  a
    certificate of entitlement,  I  may  consider  only  the  circumstances
    appertaining at the time of the decision: Sections 85(4) and (5) of the
    2002 Act; LS (Gambia) [2005] IAR 310.  In the latter cases, evidence of
    subsequent actions which casts light upon the position at the  date  of
    the decision is admissible; evidence  of  subsequent  events  differing
    from the position  at  that  time,  even  if  predicted  or  reasonably
    foreseeable  (e.g.  changed  intention  to  live  together;   obtaining
    employment which was predicted or reasonably foreseeable)  is  not:  DR
    (ECO - post-decision evidence) Morocco [2005] UKIAT 00038*.

14.  The  onus  of  proof  in  establishing  these  matters  lies  upon  the
    Appellant.   The  standard  of  proof  is  that  of  the   balance   of
    probabilities, as it is also for any related human rights issues,  save
    in relation to issues of  removal,  where  it  is  that  of  reasonable
    likelihood or real risk: Box [2002] UKIAT 02212.

The Evidence

15.  At the hearing the Sponsor gave evidence through an interpreter in  the
    Tamil language in chief, in which  he  adopted  his  statement,  cross-
    examination and re-examination.  Submissions  followed,  which  I  have
    taken into account.  I reserved my determination.

16.  I summarise the evidence compendiously and so far as relevant.

17.  Born on 30 December 1977 in Sri Lanka, the Sponsor arrived  in  the  UK
    in December 1999 and claimed asylum.  In 2009 he was granted indefinite
    leave to remain.  He works in the UK.

18.  The Sponsor and the Appellant first spoke by telephone in 2007, at  the
    time when the Sponsor's cousin married the  Appellant's  brother.   The
    Sponsor telephoned from the UK to congratulate them and  the  Appellant
    answered the telephone.  They spoke again on the telephone in 2008  and
    2010 as friends.  In December 2011 a broker  arranged  their  marriage,
    speaking with both sets of parents.  The Appellant and the Sponsor  did
    not speak together about this.  They met  for  the  first  time  on  29
    January 2012 at the airport at Chennai, when the  Sponsor  arrived  for
    their wedding.

19.  The Sponsor stayed in India until their wedding, which took place on  4
    February 2012 in Madras.  He remained in India for a month  afterwards,
    living with the Appellant as husband and wife, before returning to  the
    UK on 28 February 2012.

20.  The Sponsor made two further visits to India, on 9  February  2013  and
    15 March 2014.  During each visit he spent half of his  time  with  his
    parents and half with his wife, the Appellant.

21.  When the Sponsor is in the UK, he  and  the  Appellant  communicate  by
    telephone, sometimes using calling cards which do not record calls, and
    by Skype.  The Sponsor suffers from stress, for which he takes tablets.

22.  In evidence is a large and impressive album with  many  photographs  of
    the wedding of the Appellant and the Sponsor.   There  are  also  other
    photographs, taken during the Sponsor's visit in 2013 at a gathering in
    his wife's family's house.  Also in evidence are  several  cards  which
    the Appellant had sent to the Sponsor for Diwali and for his  birthday,
    some with their envelopes; the Sponsor said that he had not  kept  some
    of her earlier cards.  In evidence  too  are  the  Sponsor's  extensive
    telephone records, frequently showing  a  telephone  number  which  the
    Sponsor said was that of the Appellant and which is the same number  as
    she gave in her application  form.   There  are  also  statements  from
    several relatives about the relationship between the Appellant and  the
    Sponsor and about their having attended the wedding.

23.  The decision and the  review  of  it  contend  that  at  interview  the
    Appellant did  not  remember  dates  and  basic  information  and  gave
    information which  was  inconsistent.   The  record  of  the  interview
    records the Appellant saying that she was tense and confused.   In  her
    grounds of appeal she says that she was  very  nervous.   The  decision
    argues that she did not know the Sponsor's telephone  number;  to  this
    she replies that she did not need to memorise it because she had it  as
    an automatic dial on her telephone.  The decision  says  that  she  was
    confused about the details of two passports which she had lost  in  the
    past.  On her behalf it is submitted that she may have been,  but  that
    this is not material.  The  decision  also  argues  that  she  did  not
    remember details of two previous  entry  clearance  applications  which
    were, Mr Babarinde said at the hearing, applications in connection with
    her intended marriage to somebody else.

24.  There are indeed  inconsistencies  and  admitted  inaccuracies  in  the
    Appellant's responses at interview.  However the broad  thrust  of  her
    responses is consistent and plausible.  Her evidence and  that  of  the
    Sponsor are broadly consistent.   Their  evidence  is  supported  by  a
    significant volume  of  documentary  evidence,  including  that  of  an
    obviously elaborate wedding ceremony and gathering,  attended  by  many
    people including the relatives who made statements to that effect.   At
    the hearing the Sponsor had a good and consistent recollection of dates
    and even times, and appeared to me to be a witness of truth.

25.  Weighing all of these considerations, I  accept  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant and of the Sponsor.  Specifically I find that their  marriage
    was at the date of the decision and indeed remains a valid one.

26.  This is the only issue in the appeal, because  the  decision  does  not
    invoke any of the other requirements of Appendix FM of the  Immigration
    Rules.  I accordingly allow the appeal.

Decision

27.  The previous determination contained an error of law and is set aside.

28.     The appeal is allowed under the Immigration Rules.

Signed
Dated: 14 October 2014



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Lewis

