
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
OA/13028/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 9 May 2016                             | On 20 May 2016                   |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF

                                   Between

                           Lateefat onyinye salami
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER- sheffield


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Bahja of Counsel instructed by Samuel Ross,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin of the Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS


The Appellant

 1. The Appellant, Lateefat Onyinye Salami, is a citizen of Nigeria born on
    30 March 1999.  She sought entry clearance to join her parents  in  the
    United Kingdom and is sponsored by her father, Saka Oyesola Salami.  He
    and his wife, Joy Nkemdim Salami, have two daughters. The elder is said
    to be married and living with her  husband  in  Nigeria  with  his  two
    younger brothers in the same house.

 2. The Appellant's parents state they have three other  children  who  are
    deceased, most recently a son in 2013.

The Respondent's decision

 3. On 1 September 2014 the Respondent refused the Appellant's  application
    under paragraph 297 of  the  Immigration  Rules  because  she  was  not
    satisfied that the Appellant and her father were  related  as  claimed;
    that he had sole responsibility for her upbringing or that  there  were
    serious and compelling family or other considerations making  exclusion
    of the Appellant undesirable.  She also considered the Appellant  would
    not be adequately  maintained  and  accommodated  without  recourse  to
    public funds.  On receipt of the appeal the Entry Clearance Manager  on
    17 December 2014 reviewed the decision and  noted  that  no  additional
    evidence  had  been  provided  and  that  there  were   no   particular
    circumstances which  amounted  as  sufficient  to  justify  a  separate
    consideration of the Appellant's claim outside the Immigration Rules by
    reference to Article 8 of the European Convention, after having  regard
    to any  extended  duty  of  care  the  Respondent  might  have  to  the
    Appellant.

The Original Appeal

 4. On 15 October 2014 the Appellant lodged notice of appeal under  Section
    82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended  (the
    2002 Act).  The grounds are generic and formulaic.  Reference  is  made
    to amplified grounds to be submitted but none have.

The First-tier Tribunal Proceedings

 5. By a decision promulgated on 10 September 2015 Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Kennedy  found  that  there  was  adequate  maintenance   and
    accommodation  without  recourse  to  public  funds  available  to  the
    Appellant if she came to the United Kingdom.

 6. The Judge went on to consider  the  issue  of  sole  responsibility  at
    paragraphs 48-52 of his decision and whether there were any serious and
    compelling family or other considerations making exclusion  undesirable
    under paragraph 297(i)(f).  Having made certain findings  of  fact,  he
    dismissed the appeal under the Immigration  Rules  and  went  on  to  a
    consideration of the claim under Article 8 of the  European  Convention
    outside the Immigration Rules and found there was  insufficient  reason
    to proceed on that basis. In the alternative he concluded the  decision
    was proportionate to the  need  to  maintain  immigration  control  and
    having regard to the public interest  considerations,  he  went  on  to
    dismiss the appeal.

 7. On 17 February 2016 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Pooler refused the
    Appellant permission to appeal.







Application to the Upper Tribunal for Permission

 8. The Appellant renewed her application for permission  to  appeal.   The
    grounds are the same as the grounds before Judge Pooler with additional
    grounds challenging the decision of Judge Pooler.

 9. On 6 April 2016 Upper Tribunal Judge  McGeachy  granted  permission  to
    appeal on the ground that it was arguable the Judge h erred in law when
    considering the issue of sole responsibility and serious and compelling
    reasons for exclusion.  Further,  it  was  arguable  he  had  erred  by
    placing insufficient weight on the presence in the  United  Kingdom  of
    the Appellant's mother with limited leave to remain.

The Hearing

10. The Appellant's parents were present and I explained  the  purpose  and
    procedure to be  followed  at  an  error  of  law  hearing.   Mr  Bahja
    identified two issues to be considered, whether the Judge had erred  in
    his consideration of the matter of sole responsibility or whether there
    were compelling reasons why the Appellant should not be  excluded  from
    the United Kingdom.  He asked me to note the Respondent had  failed  to
    file a bundle.  The Judge  had  accepted  the  Appellant's  father  had
    subsequent to her mother's departure in 2009 to join him in the  United
    Kingdom made transfers of money for her benefit. At  paragraph  44  the
    Judge had referred to the Respondent's  acceptance  in  the  Notice  of
    Decision that money transfers had been made.  He also referred  to  the
    Judge's conclusion at paragraph 40 of his decision, that he was  unable
    to make extensive findings of fact because of the absence of supporting
    documentation and this included a full bundle from the Respondent,  the
    lack of which the Judge identified at paragraph 8.

11. He referred to paragraph 20 of the determination in OA (ECO: service of
    documents) Nigeria [2007] UKAIT 00009 which states:-

        Where an Immigration Judge is faced with a party's failure to comply
        with  directions,  his  first  question  must  be  whether  he   has
        sufficient material before  him  to  enable  him  to  determine  the
        appeal, notwithstanding such failure.  The absence  of  respondent's
        documents, as in this  appeal,  causes  particular  difficulties  in
        assessing whether  the  decision  reached  by  the  Entry  Clearance
        Officer is sustainable in law, but documents submitted by  the  non-
        defaulting party may enable the appeal to  be  determined.   Whether
        that  is  so  in  any  particular  appeal  is  a  question  for  the
        Immigration Judge hearing the appeal.

     He also referred to the determination  in  Cvetkovs  (Visa  -  no  file
    produced - directions) Latvia [2011] UKUT 00212 (IAC) which states:-

         10.  For the future, we consider that  Immigration  Judges  of  the
             First-tier  Tribunal,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber   are
             entitled to be robust in determining Entry  Clearance  appeals
             where the Visa Officer is not satisfied as to the  purpose  of
             the visit from the documents produced  but  fails  to  provide
             those documents to the Tribunal.  We trust that Visa  Officers
             will give effect  to  Rule  13  and  provide  the  application
             documents. The importance of doing so will  become  even  more
             apparent when s.85A of the Nationality Immigration and  Asylum
             Act 2002 inserted by s.19 of the UK  Borders  Act  2007  comes
             into force on 23 May 2011.  That section  has  the  effect  of
             significantly reducing the opportunity for supply of documents
             that were not before the decision maker at the material time.

         11.  In our judgment, where the Visa Officer has not  provided  the
             documents that he is required to provide, it is  open  to  the
             First-tier Judge to issue directions that  if  such  documents
             are not provided within a prompt timetable the appeal will  be
             decided on the basis that the Visa Officer no  longer  opposes
             the appeal or supports any contention that  he  makes  in  the
             decision letter.  The  appeal  can  then  be  decided  on  the
             papers, and in the  absence  of  evidence  of  some  mandatory
             ground for refusal it is likely that the appeal will succeed.

     He submitted that as the Respondent had failed to provide a bundle  the
    Judge should have adjourned the hearing and made directions.

Submissions for the Respondent

12. Mr Melvin submitted it was clear from the Notice of Decision that  what
    documents had been provided and that those which had been provided were
    not considered sufficient to  establish  either  that  the  Appellant's
    parents had had sole  responsibility  or  that  there  were  compelling
    circumstances that the  Appellant's  exclusion  was  undesirable.   The
    Judge at paragraphs 36ff. had made  a  clear  finding  on  the  limited
    evidence before him that the Appellant had never lived with her father.
     The Judge had noted the lack of evidence for  the  Appellant  and  had
    nevertheless given a detailed decision making clear findings  of  fact.
    In short, the appeal was simply an attempt by the Appellant to re-argue
    her case.  The Judge's fully reasoned decision disclosed  no  error  of
    law and should stand.

Response for the Appellant

13. Mr Bahja accepted that the Judge had referred to some of the  documents
    which were  before  the  Respondent  and  in  the  Appellant's  bundle.
    Although the Judge had had the Appellant's bundle before  him,  he  had
    had no bundle from the Respondent and without the  Respondent's  bundle
    his decision was based on mere speculation.  Mr Melvin noted there  was
    no evidence what documents had been submitted to the  Respondent  other
    than those mentioned in the decision.  Mr Bahja referred  to  documents
    which had been handed to him just  before  the  hearing  and  which  he
    wished now to submit as  evidence.   These  were  various  photographs,
    letters, receipts and school certificates.  I  enquired  whether  these
    included a copy of the Appellant's Visa Application Form and he  stated
    that they did not.

14. Mr Melvin referred to the copy of the Appellant's  on-line  application
    of three pages of which there was a  copy  in  the  Tribunal  file.   I
    enquired of Mr Bahja whether there were any reasons why these documents
    should be accepted so late as evidence, particularly having  regard  to
    the principles in Ladd v Marshall [1954] 1 WLR 1489 and E v SSHD and  R
    v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 49.   Mr  Bahja  submitted  the  documents  were
    before the Respondent when the application was originally  decided.   I
    noted  that  neither  the  original  grounds  of  appeal  nor  the  two
    applications  for  permission  to  appeal  the  First-tier   Tribunal's
    decision referred to these documents.

15. I reminded myself that the purpose of  the  hearing  was  to  establish
    whether there was a material error of law in the Judge's  decision  and
    considered that although it was regrettable the Respondent  had  failed
    to file a full bundle, there was insufficient evidence to show that the
    documents had been produced to the Respondent with the application.  If
    they had been produced with the application there  was  no  explanation
    why the bundle which was evidently in the possession of the Appellant's
    parents could not have been produced to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   If
    the Judge's decision contained a material error of law then  the  issue
    of their admission in evidence could then be considered.   I  therefore
    refused to admit them at the hearing before me.

Consideration

16. The burden of proof before the Judge was on the Appellant.  It was  for
    her to show that she and her parents satisfied the requirements of  the
    relevant Immigration Rules  on  the  balance  of  probabilities.   Mere
    assertion with a lack of documentary evidence which  without  too  much
    difficulty can be obtained  will  in  many  cases  be  insufficient  to
    discharge the evidential burden.  For these reasons I do not accept the
    submissions in paragraphs 10 and 11 of the skeleton  argument  for  the
    Appellant.

17. Paragraph 12 of the Appellant's skeleton argument refers to the Judge's
    mention of the absence of photographs of the wedding of the Appellant's
    elder sister.  These might have assisted the Judge because  they  would
    have gone someway to supporting  the  assertion  that  the  Appellant's
    older sister was married and  living  with  her  husband  and  his  two
    younger brothers.  There was little, if any, evidence  to  support  the
    assertions of the circumstances of the Appellant's older sister and her
    husband.  More importantly the Judge at paragraph 45  referred  to  the
    lack of evidence of the involvement of the Appellant's parents  in  her
    life.

18. Paragraph 13 of the skeleton argument fails to explain whether there is
    any material difference between  the  wording  used  by  the  Judge  at
    paragraphs 49 and 50 and the extract from the determination in TD (Para
    297(i)(e): sole responsibility) Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049.

19. Taking account of paragraphs  31-46  of  his  decision,  the  Judge  at
    paragraph 51  summarised  the  reasons  for  his  conclusion  that  the
    Appellant's parents had not had sole responsibility for  the  Appellant
    for which he gave sustainable reasons.

20. Paragraph 14 in the skeleton argument is based on a challenge  to  what
    the Judge found at paragraphs 36 and 44 of his decision.  It is  to  be
    noted that these paragraphs relate only to the transfer of funds.   The
    transfer of funds does not in itself support or corroborate  the  other
    claims made by or for the Appellant's father which  paragraph  14  then
    repeats.

21. The Judge had in mind the relevant burden and standard of proof as  set
    out at paragraph 22 of his  decision.  Paragraph  15  of  the  skeleton
    argument together with the determination in Cvetkovs does  not  address
    the fact that although the Judge noted there was  no  bundle  from  the
    Respondent (but he was incorrect to state that there was no copy of the
    Entry Clearance Manager's review because I found one in the file when I
    prepared it for the hearing) he was satisfied  the  Appellant's  bundle
    contained sufficient for him to decide the appeal which indeed he  did.
    I read the opening part of paragraph 55 of the Judge's decision in  the
    light of the standard and burden of proof to which he had  referred  at
    paragraph 22 as tantamount to a finding that the Appellant  had  failed
    to discharge the burden of proof upon her to the requisite standard.

22. Paragraph 16 of the skeleton argument again relies on the assertions of
    the Appellant's father and fails to address the  fact  that  there  was
    insufficient  evidence  before  the  Judge  to  satisfy  him  that  the
    Appellant through her father had discharged the burden of proof on her.



23. The consequence is that I find that the decision of Judge  Kennedy  did
    not contain a material error of law such that it should be  set  aside.
    It shall therefore stand.

Anonymity

24. The Appellant is a minor.  There was no request for an anonymity  order
    and having read the papers in the  Tribunal  file  and  considered  the
    appeal, I find there is no need for an anonymity order.

SUMMARY OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  contain  a  material
    error of law and shall stand.


    The effect is that the Appellant's appeal is dismissed.


Signed/Official Crest                                              Date  19.
v. 2016




Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

