
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/13435/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 June 2016                               |On 23 August 2016             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                          MRS HANIFE IDRIZ KRASNIQI
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                      v

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Daniel Coleman of Counsel, instructed by Suriya &
                    Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1.     The Appellant is a national of Kosovo, born on 25 November 1979.
    On 16 September 2014, she applied for entry clearance for settlement in
    the UK as the spouse of Mr Arben Krasniqi. This application was refused
    on 9 October 2014 on the basis  that  it  was  not  accepted  that  the
    relationship was genuine and subsisting nor that they  intended  living
    together permanently in the United Kingdom and that the  Appellant  had
    not satisfied all the financial requirements of the Immigration Rules.

    2.     The Appellant appealed against this decision and her appeal came
    before Judge of the First tier Tribunal  Bradshaw  for  hearing  on  15
    October 2015. In a decision and reasons promulgated on 27 October  2015
    the Judge dismissed the appeal. At [11] the Judge "found Mr Krasniqi to
    be an entirely credible witness about his relationship with  his  wife,
    their meetings and contact  between  them  and  ...  was  satisfied  on
    balance that the relationship between the appellant and him is  genuine
    and subsisting and that they intend to live together permanently in the
    UK thus meeting the requirements of paragraph E-ECP  3.6  and  3.10  of
    Appendix FM." However, the Judge went on  to  find  at  [16]  that  the
    specified requirements of Appendix FM- SE 7(d) and  (h)  had  not  been
    complied with in that the Appellant  had  not  produced  her  husband's
    Unique Tax Reference number [7(d)] nor unaudited accounts along with an
    accountant's certificate of confirmation [(h)(i)(bb)]. The Judge  found
    at [16] that the Appellant "must and can provide unaudited accounts for
    her husband's self-employed business."

    3.     An application for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    was made in-time on 4 November 2015. The  grounds  in  support  of  the
    application asserted  inter  alia  at  [2]  that  the  judge  erred  in
    according no weight to the income  and  tax  details  provided  by  the
    Appellant's sponsor husband, which was a material error as it  affected
    the outcome of the appeal and at [3] that the Judge erred in  assessing
    the accounts made available immediately following the hearing and prior
    to his determination which seriously impacted on his  determination  to
    refuse the appeal and at [11] that  the  Immigration  Judge  failed  to
    consider the impact upon the appellant as regards her family life under
    Article 8. The appellant pleaded Article 8  and  it  should  have  been
    considered by the Immigration Judge.

    4.     Permission to appeal was granted by  Judge  of  the  First  tier
    Tribunal PJM Hollingworth on the basis that an arguable  error  of  law
    had arisen in that Article 8 was invoked in the grounds of  appeal  but
    has not been considered by the Judge  who  dismissed  the  appeal  only
    under the Immigration Rules.

    Hearing

    5.     The appeal came before me for hearing on 13 June 2016, by  which
    time Mr Coleman had shown Mr Duffy the  Sponsor's  accounts.  Mr  Duffy
    accepted that he had seen these and that if  the  First  tier  Tribunal
    Judge had had them then there was a material error of law.  Mr  Coleman
    stated that his instructions are that at the end  of  the  hearing  the
    Judge gave 3 weeks to send in the accounts. In respect of  the  reasons
    given for permission to appeal, Mr Coleman stated that the decision had
    been made under the Rules and article 8 had been raised in  the  appeal
    brought against the refusal. The witness evidence contained family life
    and article 8 as did the grounds  of  appeal.  The  only  reference  to
    article 8 is at [5] where the Judge said that it was not argued  before
    her at the hearing but there was no indication or reference to it being
    conceded and it was, therefore, a live issue and the Judge was bound to
    deal with it absent an express concession. Thus  the  failure  to  deal
    with it was therefore material and is an error of law.

    6.     Mr Duffy stated in terms that he accepted that the  requirements
    of Appendix FM SE are met. In terms of the Article 8  point,  his  view
    was that the grounds of appeal are generic and do not advance an appeal
    outside the Rules cf. Sarkar [2014] EWCA Civ 195 and that it was not  a
    material error not to deal with  unparticularised  grounds  before  the
    First tier Tribunal.

    7.     In his reply, Mr Coleman stated that the  Sponsor's  unique  tax
    reference number was before the Judge which she has overlooked.

    Decision

    8.     It is the case that permission to appeal was granted  only  with
    reference to Article 8 of  ECHR  albeit  a  challenge  to  the  Judge's
    findings regarding Appendix FM-SE and the financial requirements of the
    Rules was clearly raised in the grounds of appeal at [2] and [3] -  [3]
    above refers. In Ferrer (limited  appeal  grounds;  Alvi)  [2012]  UKUT
    00304 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal held inter alia that if  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge nevertheless intends to grant permission only in respect
    of certain of the applicant's  grounds,  the  judge  should  make  this
    abundantly plain, both in his or her decision under rule 25(5)  of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and by  ensuring
    that the Tribunal's administrative staff send out  the  proper  notice,
    informing the applicant of the right to apply to the Upper Tribunal for
    permission to appeal  on  grounds  on  which  the  applicant  has  been
    unsuccessful in the application to the  First-tier  Tribunal.  In  this
    case, no reference is made in the grant of permission  to  the  grounds
    relating to Appendix FM-SE and there is no  refusal  of  permission  in
    respect of those grounds  nor  was  a  notice  sent  to  the  Appellant
    informing her of her right to apply for permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal. In these circumstances  and  in  light  of  Mr  Duffy's
    helpful agreement that all the grounds raised  were  arguable,  I  find
    that it is open to me to consider paragraphs [2] and [3] of the grounds
    of appeal.

    9.     In so doing, I note  that  there  is  no  reference  within  the
    decision  and  reasons  of  First  tier  Tribunal  Judge  Bradshaw   to
    permitting the Appellant three weeks to send in her husband's accounts,
    however, on the Court file is a fax dated 21 October 2015 from Suriya &
    Co solicitors containing a letter dated 21  October  2015  attaching  a
    copy of the Sponsor's accounts for the year ending 5 April  2014.  This
    document is stamped as having been  received  at  Hatton  Cross  on  21
    October 2015. The covering letter also confirms service upon  the  Home
    Office Presenting Officer, Mr Grennan.  Therefore,  in  light  of  this
    evidence and given that Mr Duffy did not seek to argue to the contrary,
    I accept Mr Coleman's statement that, whilst he was not counsel at that
    hearing, he is instructed that the Judge directed  that  the  Sponsor's
    accounts might be sent within 3 weeks following the end of the  hearing
    on 15 October 2015.

    10.    I find that the faxed accounts also contain the Sponsor's Unique
    Tax Reference number, which matches that on the SA302 tax  calculations
    previously submitted to the ECO.  Whilst  the  accounts  were  sent  to
    Hatton Cross  hearing  centre  on  21  October  2016,  marked  for  the
    attention of First tier Tribunal Judge Bradshaw I find that, whilst his
    decision was not promulgated until 27 October  2015,  the  decision  is
    signed and dated 20 October 2015, which was only five  days  after  the
    hearing and did not permit sufficient time for receipt of the documents
    he had permitted to be sent in after the hearing.

    11.    For these reasons I find that First tier Tribunal Judge Bradshaw
    erred materially in law in  proceeding  to  determine  the  Appellant's
    appeal without giving her the opportunity to present evidence after the
    hearing, in accordance with his direction to that effect. In  obtaining
    a copy of her husband's accounts and submitting them to the First  tier
    Tribunal on 21 October 2015, the Appellant was doing so  on  the  clear
    understanding that these documents would be  considered  by  the  Judge
    prior to reaching a decision on her appeal and the fact that they  were
    not so considered is in breach of natural justice and is unfair.

    12.    Mr Duffy was provided with a  copy  of  the  Sponsor's  accounts
    prior to the hearing before me and expressly accepted that, in light of
    these documents, the requirements of Appendix FM-SE were met.

    13.    Applying the  principle  in  DR  (ECO:  post-decision  evidence)
    Morocco* [2005] UKIAT 00038 I remake the decision and allow the  appeal
    on the basis that the requirements of the Immigration Rules are met.

    Notice of decision

    14.    The appeal is allowed.




    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman


    22 August 2016
