
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/13698/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 11th July 2014                               |On 16th July 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              ALI MOHAMED FARAH


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Jaisri, Counsel, instructed by Freemans
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. Mr Farah is a citizen of Somalia whose date of  birth  is  recorded  as
    20th February 1970.   He made application for entry  clearance  as  the
    spouse of a refugee but  on  31st  October  2012  the  application  was
    refused.  The relevant Rule of the Immigration Rules is paragraph 352A.
     For reasons which are  not  entirely  clear,  although  the  Appellant
    appealed, the appeal was not heard by Judge Stokes  sitting  at  Taylor
    House London until 24th March 2014.  The Secretary  of  State  was  not
    satisfied that the marriage certificate relied  upon  was  genuine  and
    indeed inferred from that that  the  Appellant  and  Sponsor  were  not
    married.  Upon a consideration of the  evidence,  Judge  Stokes  having
    regard to paragraph 320(7A) relied upon the Secretary of State, came to
    the view that whilst it had been established that the document was  not
    genuine, nevertheless  came  to  the  view  that  there  had  not  been
    dishonesty on the part of  the  Appellant  and  having  regard  to  the
    totality of the evidence then available went on to allow the appeal.

 2. Not content with that  decision  by  notice  dated  8th  May  2014  the
    Secretary of State made application for permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  The essential point taken by the  Secretary  of  State
    was that it was, she submitted, perverse of the judge to  find  on  the
    one hand that the certificate was not genuine and  then  to  find  that
    there had not been dishonesty.  A further  point  was  that  the  judge
    applied too high a standard of proof, it was said, for at paragraph  32
    of the determination, having considered some authorities which are  now
    somewhat out of date, he said, "I do not find that the  Respondent  has
    shown to the higher standard of proof required,  that  the  Appellant's
    identity cannot be established by his passport  despite  alleging  that
    ...". The passport in fact bore the name  of  a  person  named  by  the
    Sponsor when  first  interviewed  as  long  ago  as  December  2010  in
    circumstances in which the  Sponsor  was  recognised  eventually  as  a
    refugee and where the judge found that the evidence given at that  time
    in relation to her relationship to the Appellant was not in issue.

 3. On 23rd May 2014 Judge Frankish granted permission noting that  it  was
    arguable that the Respondent has "achieved" [sic] the  higher  standard
    of proof in alleging forgery.   Thus the matter comes before me.

 4. There is common ground that there is no higher  standard  of  proof  in
    these proceedings.  Where the  civil standard is to be applied then  it
    is  on  the  balance  of  probabilities  and  the  authority  for  that
    proposition now somewhat trite is the House of  Lords  case  of  Re:  B
    [2008] UKHL 35.

 5. The question for me is whether that error, recognised on both sides  in
    this appeal, is material.  In my judgement it is not  and  even  if  it
    were so that I had to remake the  determination,  applying  the  proper
    standard on the facts as found by the judge  based  upon  the  evidence
    that was before him, I would come to the same  view.  That  is  because
    there is a very careful analysis by the  judge  of  the  evidence.   He
    noted that the  Sponsor  had  given  detailed  answers  in  her  asylum
    interview regarding her husband, the Appellant, and he noted  that  her
    credibility was not challenged at that time.  He noted further that the
    Ugandan authorities had  accepted  that  the  Appellant's  passport  as
    genuine.

 6. The judge at paragraph 33 noted that once there was an opportunity  for
    the Sponsor and Appellant to reunite they did so almost immediately and
    I refer here to paragraph 33 of the determination. The judge also found
    the evidence regarding the marriage was consistent  internally,  having
    considered the Appellant's application.  Further, applying the  correct
    standard of proof, the judge at paragraph 33 said: "It  seems  unlikely
    that, in the circumstances which have been accepted as to when and  why
    the Appellant and  the  Sponsor  left  their  home  in  Mogadishu,  the
    original certificate would have been taken by either of them."

 7. Now the Secretary  of  State  submits  that  there  is  an  element  of
    perversity in this  case.  She  submits  that  having  found  that  the
    document itself was not genuine it was perverse to find that it had not
    been proved that there had been dishonesty but indeed that was the very
    issue in the Court of Appeal decision in AA (Nigeria)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2010] EWCA Civ 773 to which the judge at
    paragraph 31 properly directed himself.

 8. The judge found that there  was  no  dishonesty  on  the  part  of  the
    Appellant and also found that it had not been  established  that  there
    was dishonesty on the part of  any  agent  acting  for  the  Appellant,
    simply that the system had fallen down.  In my  judgement  that  was  a
    finding that was open to the judge.  It is a finding of fact.  For  the
    Secretary of State  to  succeed  in  this  appeal  she  would  have  to
    demonstrate that the finding was either perverse or irrational.   As  I
    have already said, there clearly was an error of law in this case  but,
    as I have also already said, it was not material, and even if it were I
    would remake the decision on the basis of the available  evidence  such
    that the outcome would be the same.

 9. In the circumstances the appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.








Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker



