
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/13521/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 22nd July 2014                               |On 5th August 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                          Mr Sumit Shantilal Gohel
               (no ANONYMITY ORDER being applied for or MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No Representative

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
                             EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT

 1. The Appellant was the Respondent in the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  for
    convenience I refer  to  the  parties  as  they  were  known  in  those
    proceedings.

 2. The Respondent appeals with permission the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Napthine promulgated on 7th January 2014  in  which  the
    judge upheld or allowed the  Appellant's  appeal  against  his  removal
    pursuant to Section 10 of the Immigration and  Asylum  Act  1999.   The
    Appellant had brought the appeal on the grounds that the  decision  was
    not in accordance with the  law  because  it  was  predicated  upon  an
    unlawful decision in the context of the Immigration Rules.

 3. The grounds  before  me  challenging  the  decision  on  the  basis  of
    jurisdiction rely on  the  Appellant  having  failed  to  establish  by
    evidence that at the time of the Respondent seeking  to  take  his  fee
    that he had the sufficient funds in his bank account.  I find no  merit
    in that ground as the evidence before the judge and referred to in  the
    decision indicates that the judge took into  account  that  there  were
    sufficient funds in his bank account at the relevant time.

 4. The Respondent had sought to adduce  additional  evidence  and  I  have
    refused that application.  The evidence was available to the Respondent
    to adduce before the First-tier Tribunal Judge and there was no  proper
    good reason as to why that evidence should be admitted now.

 5. With  regard  to  Ground  2  of  the  grounds  relying  on  a  material
    misdirection in terms of Rodriguez [2013]  UKUT  00042.   I  find  that
    there is significant merit.  The Appellant's  position  falls  squarely
    within the factual matrix of the Appellant Mr Mandalia in the Rodriguez
    case, and as such his position is of an applicant  who  has  failed  to
    provide the specified documentation. In the Rodriguez case Mr  Mandalia
    had failed to  provide  bank  statements  covering  the  whole  of  the
    relevant period in that he failed  to  provide  bank  statements  which
    covered the period of the last seven days  within  the  28  day  period
    prior to the application, and the court held  in  that  case  that  the
    failure to adduce the specified evidence was of itself a  factor  which
    would mean that the appeal would be bound to fail.

 6. Applying that  case  to  the  circumstances  of  this  Appellant  I  am
    satisfied that his appeal before Judge Napthine was bound  to  fail  on
    the basis that he had failed to provide the specified evidence required
    under the Immigration Rules, to the point that the removal decision was
    not predicated  on  an  incorrect  or  unlawful  application  of  those
    Immigration Rules, and that the removal decision was lawful.

 7. There are no other Grounds of Appeal concerning  the  decision  of  the
    judge and accordingly I am satisfied that the  judge  made  a  material
    error of law such that the decision needs to be set aside and I  remake
    it dismissing the appeal of the Appellant for all of the reasons that I
    have given.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge

