
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/13861/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 6 July 2016                        |On 12 July 2016                       |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                 EVA KITOKO
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                     THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICE, NAIROBI

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Charly Baraka (Sponsor)
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Eva Kitoko, was born on 7 January 1996 and is  a  female
    citizen of the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC).  She appealed to the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Kelly) against a decision dated 15 September
    2014 of the Entry Clearance Officer, Nairobi, to refuse her application
    to join for settlement in the United  Kingdom  her  paternal  aunt,  Ms
    Charly  Baraka  (hereafter  the  sponsor).   She  now   appeals,   with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There are two grounds of appeal.  The first ground of  appeal  concerns
    alleged procedural unfairness arising from the judge's decision not  to
    adjourn the appeal in the First-tier Tribunal to allow the case of  the
    appellant to be linked with that of her minor sisters.   Those  sisters
    (born in 1997 and  1999  respectively)  had,  it  was  claimed  by  the
    appellant, also appealed against decisions  to  refuse  them  leave  to
    enter to settle with the sponsor.  The appellant and her  two  siblings
    resided together in DRC as a family unit.

 3. I am not satisfied the judge erred in law  as  alleged.   At  [7],  the
    judge noted, "the appellant's sisters applied for  entry  clearance  to
    join the sponsor at the same time as the appellant.  Their  cases  have
    not been linked to the present appeal because  there  is  no  trace  of
    their  appeals  on  the  Tribunal  system."   In  the  light  of   that
    information it was difficult to see why the judge should  have  delayed
    dealing with the one appeal  which  was  before  him.   The  judge  was
    undoubtedly right when he observed at [19] that it was "far from  clear
    if [the appeals of the other sisters] would ultimately be  determined".
    Indeed, when I made enquiries of  Mr  McVeety  at  the  Upper  Tribunal
    hearing, he told that he had no record of appeals having been submitted
    by the other sisters.  After the hearing, on 11 July 2016 I received an
    email from Mr McVeety as follows:

         'Dear Sir

         Following the hearing for Miss Kitoko, I have searched the database
         and have been unable to locate any appeals in the  system  for  the
         two siblings. From the information I have on file it  would  appear
         no appeal has been lodged  as  far  as  we  can  see  for  the  two
         siblings.

         Kind Regards

         Andy McVeety

         SPO  Specialist Appeals Team.'

 4. In the circumstances, I cannot find that the judge  acted  unfairly  in
    proceeding with the hearing.

 5. The second ground of appeal deals with the judge's finding  that  there
    was no family life for the purposes  of  Article  8  ECHR  between  the
    sponsor and the appellant.  This ground has no merit.  The judge made a
    number of detailed findings at [22] et seq attaching little weight to a
    single money transfer from  the  sponsor  to  the  appellant  and  also
    observing inconsistencies between the evidence  regarding  the  child's
    regular attendance at school  and  the  evidence  of  the  sponsor  and
    querying why, if the sponsor supposedly had parental responsibility for
    the appellant, the child's school reports were not  forwarded  to  her.
    It is true that at [27],  the  judge  observed  that  the  sponsor  and
    appellant had "lived together in the same household  for  a  period  of
    nine years between 2002 and 2011 and that they have now been  separated
    for a period of over four years.  I  therefore  find  the  contents  of
    [correspondence evidence] to be heartfelt and sincere."  However,  that
    observation is not in any way contradicted by  the  judge's  subsequent
    finding at [28] that there was no family life between the  sponsor  and
    the appellant.  Making that finding, the judge observed that

         "... although the appellant had reached  the  age  of  majority,  I
         accept she has not established an independent life of  her  own  by
         the date of the decision.  I nevertheless find that her  continuing
         dependency (over and above ordinary emotional ties) is not upon the
         sponsor but rather was (and remains) upon Mr  John  Kimbudila  whom
         she describes as her 'angel and protector'."

    The judge concluded that "I am  entirely  satisfied  that  it  was  [Mr
    Kimbudila] alone who was discharging parental  responsibility  for  the
    appellant at the date of the  decision".   Quite  properly,  the  judge
    considered the circumstances appertaining at the date of  the  decision
    and, although he observed that the  sponsor  and  appellant  had  lived
    together for a number of years, the appellant's principal  family  life
    was now enjoyed in the household of Mr Kimbudila.  I am satisfied  that
    the judge has given clear and cogent reasons for the  findings  he  has
    made as part of his Article 8 analysis.  In  any  event,  at  [29]  the
    judge went on to observe that, even if family life were found to  exist
    between the appellant and sponsor,

         "... the  consequences  of  the  decision  ...  are  insufficiently
         serious  to  engage  the  potential  operation  of  Article  8;  or
         alternatively, that any family ties as may exist are so loose  that
         prevention of family union in the United Kingdom  is  proportionate
         in furtherance of the economic wellbeing  of  the  country  by  the
         consistent application of immigration control."

    In other words, even if the judge was wrong  as  to  the  existence  of
    family life, his alternative finding is sound in law  and  defeats  the
    appeal.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 11 July 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 11 July 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
