


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
      (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
                                                               OA/13929/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal   |Decision & Reasons promulgated   |
|on 26 July 2017                           |on 16 October 2017               |



                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                  XIANYU YU
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (BEIJING)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:          Mr M Sowerby instructed by Corbin & Hassan
Solicitors
For the Respondent:       Mrs Aboni Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Nicholls promulgated  on  23  December  2016  in  which  the  Judge
        dismissed the appellant's appeal.



Background


     2. The appellant is a national of the People's Republic of China  born
        on 9 March 2000. When aged  14  the  appellant  applied  for  entry
        clearance to settle in the UK as the child of a person present  and
        settled here, which was refused on 15 October 2014.  The  appellant
        appealed against that refusal.
     3. The pre-hearing procedural history shows that on 8  September  2015
        First-tier Tribunal Judge  Talbot  heard  the  appeal  against  the
        refusal which was dismissed under both the Immigration Rules and on
        Article 8 grounds. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the
        Upper Tribunal which was granted on 8 June 2016. On 2  August  2016
        Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Campbell found Judge Talbot had made  a
        material error of law such that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal was set aside and the matter remitted.
     4. The case was listed before Judge Nicholls for  the  purposes  of  a
        further hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.
     5. The Judge notes that DNA profiling evidence was now available which
        established the near probability that the UK sponsor is the  father
        of the appellant. As a result, the Presenting Officer confirmed the
        respondent did not challenge the paternity of the appellant but did
        dispute  whether  the  application  met  the  requirements  of  the
        Immigration Rules in force at the date of decision [3].
     6. The Judge considered  the  evidence  provided  before  setting  out
        findings of fact between [14 - 26] of the decision under challenge.
     7. At [16] the Judge states "I am not  persuaded  that  the  terms  of
        paragraphs 297 and 301 of the Immigration Rules envisage  a  person
        in receipt of discretionary leave to remain in the UK as  a  person
        with leave to enter (with a view to settlement).  The  Judge  noted
        that in this case the sponsor, the appellant's father, was  granted
        discretionary leave under the Legacy  Program  because  his  asylum
        claim was not properly decided and that the appellant's mother  was
        later granted discretionary leave under the Refugee Family  Reunion
        policies.
     8. The Judge finds at [18] the grant of  discretionary  leave  to  the
        appellant's mother does not qualify as a grant  of  leave  "with  a
        view to settlement" and  that  it  had  not  been  shown  that  the
        appellant's application met the terms of either paragraph 297(i)(f)
        or paragraph 301(i)(a).
     9. The Judge then notes an alternative submission  that  as  both  the
        appellant's parents have been in the UK together for some time they
        have  together  had  sole  responsibility   for   the   appellant's
        upbringing  which  met  the  alternative  provision  of   paragraph
        297(i)(e)  or  301(i)(b),  which  was  not  accepted.  The  Judge's
        reasoning is that it cannot be argued  that  two  persons  exercise
        sole responsibility  together  and,  secondly,  that  the  relevant
        provisions of the Immigration Rules referred to "one parent" who is
        either present and settled in the UK or being admitted  to  the  UK
        for the purposes of settlement. The Judge finds this  wording  does
        not envisage two parents except where both are present and  settled
        in the UK or being admitted together on the same occasion, in which
        case there is no additional condition for sole responsibility.
    10. At [19] the Judge continues after the above reasoning  "I  have  no
        reason to doubt the Appellant's  parents  have  remained  in  close
        touch  with  him  and  have  been  instrumental  in  arranging  the
        important factors of his life, such as schooling  and  his  general
        support. Nevertheless, I  find  that  the  ordinary  words  of  the
        Immigration Rules are not ambiguous in any sense, even though  they
        are  not  required  to  be  interpreted  strictly  as  an  act   of
        Parliament, and that they do not cater for a situation  where  both
        parents  remain  involved  in  a  child's  life,  making  important
        decisions in providing fundamental support but one of those parents
        does not have leave to remain in the UK which either  qualifies  as
        settled or is clearly with a view to settlement".
    11. The Judge thereafter went on to consider article 8 ECHR outside the
        Rules before concluding that although the appellant's parents  have
        been involved in the key decisions about him thus far, and provided
        financial support for both the appellant and his grandparents  with
        whom he has lived in China, those factors  do  not  constitute  the
        sort of  exceptional  or  compelling  circumstances  that  required
        assessment of proportionality outside the terms of the  Rules.  The
        Judge accordingly found that the refusal of entry clearance was  in
        accordance with the law and not a breach of the article 8 rights in
        light of any individual involved in this appeal.
    12. Permission to appeal was sought on the appellant's behalf which was
        granted by another judge on the First-tier Tribunal in the briefest
        terms that the grounds are arguable for the reasons set out in  the
        application.
    13. There is no rule 24 response filed on behalf of  the  Secretary  of
        State.



Error of law finding


Submissions

    14. It was submitted on the appellant's behalf, by Mr Sowerby, that  he
        is currently 17 years of age and reaching adulthood  (in  terms  of
        the way the same is assessed in the United Kingdom) next year.  The
        appellant's father has indefinite leave to remain  and  the  mother
        discretionary leave to December 2017. As this was a  pre-July  2012
        grant it was argued the appellant's  mother  will  be  entitled  to
        indefinite leave to remain in December 2018.
    15. Mr Sowerby  also  submitted  the  Judge  erred  in  that  paragraph
        301(i)(a) of the Rules is satisfied on the  basis  the  appellant's
        mother had a grant of discretionary leave prior to the  changes  to
        these provisions of the Rules which means her leave  will  continue
        to settlement. The appellant argues that the grant of leave to  his
        mother is, therefore, for the purposes of settlement.
    16. In relation to paragraph 297(1)(f), as  this  provision  is  silent
        regarding the  other  parent's  status  that  is  'one  parent'  is
        settled, this is sufficient to satisfy the requirement of the rule.
        In this appeal, it is only the father who has  settled  status.  It
        was also submitted on the appellant's behalf that paragraph 297 was
        not dealt with although in light of findings made by the  Judge  it
        should have been found that the appeal is allowed on this basis.
    17. On behalf of the Secretary of State Mrs Aboni submitted no material
        error had been made in relation to paragraph 301 as it is  accepted
        the appellants mother's discretionary leave is not on the 'route to
        settlement', that term being defined in the Rules as  a  person  on
        either the prescribed 5 or 10 year routes which does not  apply  to
        the appellant's mother.
    18. In relation to 297,  in  the  alternative,  it  was  submitted  the
        appellant cannot succeed as the appellant's father  does  not  have
        sole responsibility as it  is  shared  between  the  parents.  Sole
        responsibility is said to mean 'one parent'.
    19. It was accepted  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  consider  the
        question of compelling circumstances under paragraph 297 but it was
        submitted on the respondent's behalf that  circumstances  were  not
        compelling as all the circumstances had been considered.
    20. At [23 - 24] of the decision under challenge,  article  8  and  all
        relevant circumstances were taken into account including  the  best
        interests of the child. Nothing was found that was  detrimental  to
        the appellant remaining in China. It  was  argued  the  failure  to
        refer specifically to paragraph 297(i)(f) was not material  as  the
        Judge would not have reached a different conclusion in relation  to
        whether there were compelling circumstances  by  reference  to  the
        Rules rather than article 8.
    21. In reply, Mr Sowerby submitted the 297(i)(f) question was in  issue
        and submitted there are exceptional  and  compelling  circumstances
        although this was not the main element. It was  submitted  that  on
        the basis of findings made the Judge should have applied  his  mind
        to whether these conditions were satisfied which could  lead  to  a
        different outcome. On that basis, any error is arguably material.

Findings

    22. Several rules are arguably relevant to this appeal.  The  first  of
        which are asserted to be paragraph 279 and 301. These rules, at the
        date of decision (the relevant date), stated:


        Requirements for indefinite leave to enter the  United  Kingdom  as
        the child of a parent, parents or a relative present and settled or
        being admitted for settlement in the United Kingdom


        297. The requirements to be met  by  a  person  seeking  indefinite
        leave to enter the United Kingdom as the child of a parent, parents
        or a relative present and settled or being admitted for  settlement
        in the United Kingdom are that he:


        (i) is seeking leave to  enter  to  accompany  or  join  a  parent,
        parents or a relative in one of the following circumstances:
        (a) both parents are present and settled in the United Kingdom; or
        (b) both parents are  being  admitted  on  the  same  occasion  for
        settlement; or
        (c) one parent is present and settled in the United Kingdom and the
        other is being admitted on the same occasion for settlement; or
        (d) one parent is present and settled  in  the  United  Kingdom  or
        being admitted on the same occasion for settlement  and  the  other
        parent is dead; or
        (e) one parent is present and settled  in  the  United  Kingdom  or
        being admitted on the same occasion for settlement and has had sole
        responsibility for the child's upbringing; or
        (f) one parent or a relative is present and settled in  the  United
        Kingdom or being admitted on the same occasion for  settlement  and
        there are serious and compelling  family  or  other  considerations
        which  make  exclusion  of  the  child  undesirable  and   suitable
        arrangements have been made for the child's care; and
        (ii) is under the age of 18; and
        (iii) is not leading an independent life, is unmarried and is not a
        civil partner, and has not formed an independent family unit; and
        (iv) can, and will,  be  accommodated  adequately  by  the  parent,
        parents or relative the child is seeking to join  without  recourse
        to public funds in  accommodation  which  the  parent,  parents  or
        relative the child is seeking to join, own or  occupy  exclusively;
        and
        (v) can, and will, be maintained adequately by the parent, parents,
        or relative the child is  seeking  to  join,  without  recourse  to
        public funds; and
        (vi) holds a valid United Kingdom entry clearance for entry in this
        capacity; and
        (vii) does not fall for  refusal  under  the  general  grounds  for
        refusal.




        Requirements for limited leave to enter or  remain  in  the  United
        Kingdom with a view to settlement as  the  child  of  a  parent  or
        parents given limited leave  to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United
        Kingdom with a view to settlement


        301. The requirements to be met by a person seeking  limited  leave
        to enter or remain in the United Kingdom with a view to  settlement
        as the child of a parent or parents given limited leave to enter or
        remain in the United Kingdom with a view to settlement are that he:


        (i) is seeking leave to enter to accompany or join or remain with a
        parent or parents in one of the following circumstances:
        (a) one parent is present and settled  in  the  United  Kingdom  or
        being admitted on the same occasion for settlement  and  the  other
        parent is being or has been given limited leave to enter or  remain
        in the United Kingdom with a view to settlement; or
        (b) one parent is being or has been given limited leave to enter or
        remain in the United Kingdom with a view to settlement and has  had
        sole responsibility for the child's upbringing; or
        (c) one parent is being or has been given limited leave to enter or
        remain in the United Kingdom with a view to  settlement  and  there
        are serious and compelling family  or  other  considerations  which
        make exclusion of the child undesirable and  suitable  arrangements
        have been made for the child's care; and
        (ii) is under the age of 18; and
        (iii) is not leading an independent life, is unmarried and is not a
        civil partner, and has not formed an independent family unit; and

        (iv) can, and will, be accommodated adequately without recourse  to
        public funds, in accommodation which the parent or parents  own  or
        occupy exclusively; and
        (iva) can, and will, be maintained  adequately  by  the  parent  or
        parents without recourse to public funds; and
        (ivb) does not qualify for limited leave to enter as a child  of  a
        parent or parents given limited leave  to  enter  or  remain  as  a
        refugee or beneficiary of humanitarian protection  under  paragraph
        319R; and
        (v) (where an application is made for limited leave to remain  with
        a view to settlement) has limited leave to enter or remain  in  the
        United Kingdom; and
        (vi) if seeking leave to enter, holds a valid United Kingdom  entry
        clearance for entry in this capacity.




        The test in paragraph 297 (i) (f) contains a number of  interlinked
        elements. The specific wording requires an applicant to prove  that
        they have one parent or a  relative  present  and  settled  in  the
        United  Kingdom  or  being  admitted  on  the  same  occasion   for
        settlement and there are serious and  compelling  family  or  other
        considerations which make exclusion of the  child  undesirable  and
        suitable arrangements have been made for the child's care; and  (my
        emphasis) an ability to satisfy the other specified requirements.


    23. The  Judge  considered  the  specific  submissions  but  found  the
        appellant had not made out that he had one  parent  or  a  relative
        present and settled in the United Kingdom or been admitted  on  the
        same occasion for settlement on the basis  the  appellant's  father
        was granted discretionary leave under the Legacy  Program  and  the
        appellant's  mother  was  granted  discretionary  leave  under  the
        Refugee Family Reunion policies. The appellant's father was said by
        the appellant to have indefinite leave to remain  at  the  relevant
        date. In the application for leave to enter the United  Kingdom  it
        is stated the appellant's father has permanent residence granted on
        17 January 2014 which was therefore the situation existing at  both
        the date of application and date of decision.
    24. The primary requirement of the proof of a  parent  settled  in  the
        United Kingdom appears to have been satisfied.
    25. If one considers the other requirements of paragraph  279;  it  was
        not submitted that other than  279(i)(f)  were  relevant.   I  find
        there  is  no  legal  error  in  the  Judge  concluding  the  other
        requirements could not be met.  In particular, the finding  by  the
        Judge that 'sole responsibility' could  not  be  exercised  by  two
        parents simultaneously is finding in accordance with the law.
    26. Under 279(i)(f) the appellant was required to show  he  could  meet
        the requirements of (ii - vii) of this rule. In that regard, it  is
        not disputed the appellant is under the age  of  18  and  that  the
        appellant at the relevant date was in education with no evidence he
        had formed an independent family unit.  The  accommodation  in  the
        United Kingdom occupied by his parents appears to be a  two-bedroom
        flat in which the  appellant's  mother,  father,  and  two  younger
        siblings live. No issue appears to have been taken with  regard  to
        the question of adequacy of accommodation or the issue of  adequacy
        of available funds. In relation to whether the appellant  could  be
        maintained adequately by his  father  without  recourse  to  public
        funds, the evidence indicates the father is employed and no  issues
        relating to inability to maintain appear to arise. If the appellant
        succeeds he will be granted valid United Kingdom entry clearance in
        this capacity and it is not  suggested  his  application  would  be
        refused under the general grounds of refusal set out in the  Rules.
        The only issue therefore that needs to be considered further is the
        second aspect of 297(i)(f) which requires, in addition to a  parent
        and relative being present and settled in the United Kingdom, there
        being serious and compelling family or other  considerations  which
        make  exclusion  of  the  child  undesirable  and   that   suitable
        arrangements have been made for the child's care.
    27. The Judge considered the situation of the appellant in the decision
        under challenge. The Judge recognises this is a  similar  situation
        to the so called "stranded sibling" problem where an adult  sibling
        may not settle in the UK with younger siblings  and  their  parents
        thus being left alone in the original country of  nationality.  The
        Judge continues at [24] "The Appellant is not, of course, an adult,
        nor is he living alone and I have no evidence to show that he would
        not continue to live with  his  grandparents  for  the  foreseeable
        future. There is no confirmatory evidence to support the  sponsor's
        claim that his education is not going well, much less is there  any
        evidence to suggest that those  difficulties  may  be  due  to  his
        separation from his parents and siblings and that now moving him to
        the UK would help to promote his education and, thus,  support  his
        best interests. It was the Appellants parents who took the decision
        to leave him behind in China, not the actions of  any  official  or
        other authority. It has long been recognised that instability is  a
        detrimental factor in the continuing development  of  children  and
        that the older they are, the more  difficult  it  is  for  them  to
        adjust and integrate.  Ordinarily,  his  best  interests  would  be
        served by him living with his parents but in view of the disruption
        that such a change would have at this time, I find that those  best
        interests are not of such weight to show that they would  unbalance
        the requirements of good immigration control".
    28. The Judge notes that reliance was placed by the appellant upon  the
        decision in Mundeba (s.55 and para 297(i)(f)) [2013]  UKUT  88(IAC)
        (Blake J) in which the Tribunal held that (i) the exercise  of  the
        duty by the Entry Clearance Officer to assess an application  under
        the Immigration Rules as to  whether  there  are  family  or  other
        considerations making the child's exclusion undesirable  inevitably
        involves an  assessment  of  what  the  child's  welfare  and  best
        interests require;  (ii)  Where  an  immigration  decision  engages
        Article 8 rights, due regard must be had to the  UN  Convention  on
        the Rights of the  Child.  An  entry  clearance  decision  for  the
        admission  of  a  child  under  18   is   "an   action   concerning
        children...undertaken by...administrative authorities"  and  so  by
        Article 3 "the best interests of  the  child  shall  be  a  primary
        consideration"; (iii) Although the statutory  duty  under  s.55  UK
        Borders Act 2009 only  applies  to  children  within  the  UK,  the
        broader duty doubtless explains why the Secretary  of  State's  IDI
        invites Entry Clearance Officers to consider the statutory guidance
        issued under s.55.
    29. The Judge was clearly aware of the need to  properly  consider  the
        best interests  of  the  child  and  it  has  not  been  shown  the
        conclusions reached by the Judge are arguably irrational, perverse,
        or contrary to the evidence or infected by  arguable  legal  error.
        The assertion in the ground seeking permission to appeal  that  the
        Judge failed to provide any reasons why the appellant's application
        did  not  meet  the  terms  of  paragraph  297(i)(f)  is   arguably
        incorrect. The reason the appellant failed under this provision  is
        because the appellant had not made out that there were serious  and
        compelling family or other considerations which make  exclusion  of
        the child undesirable. Whilst the Judge  may  have  looked  at  the
        appellants situation in a section of  the  determination  in  which
        best interests  of  the  appellant  and  human  rights  issues  are
        considered, the factual analysis conducted  by  the  Judge  is  the
        similar, under which ever heading  it  is  placed.  The  Judge  was
        clearly assessing whether  there  is  anything  about  this  appeal
        which, on the facts, made the appellant's exclusion undesirable. It
        is unlikely, for example, the respondent's  decision  not  will  be
        found to be proportionate  in  excluding  a  person  if  there  was
        nothing that made exclusion from the UK undesirable. Based upon the
        individual's circumstances and the ability to  prove  or  establish
        serious and compelling family or other  considerations,  the  Judge
        acknowledges the impact of the decision will prevent the  appellant
        joining  the  family  in  the  United  Kingdom;   but   finds   the
        requirements of the Rules clearly specify  that  more  than  actual
        physical separation is required.
    30. Now arguable legal error material to the decision  to  dismiss  the
        appeal has been made out in relation to the assessment of paragraph
        297(i)(f) of the Rules.
    31. In relation to paragraph 301(i)(a), this required the appellant  to
        establish that he is seeking leave to enter to accompany or join or
        remain with a parent or parents in the following circumstances:


        a) one parent is present and settled in the United Kingdom or being
           admitted on the same  occasion  for  settlement  and  the  other
           parent is being or has been given  limited  leave  to  enter  or
           remain in the United Kingdom with a view to settlement.


    32. It is not disputed, as found above, that the appellant's father  is
        present and settled in the United Kingdom meaning that  element  of
        the rule is satisfied. There is, again, an  additional  requirement
        that the applicant also had to prove that  the  other  parent,  his
        mother, is being or has been given limited leave to enter or remain
        with a view to settlement. The Judge concluded that the  nature  of
        the  leave  granted  to   the   appellant's   mother,   which   was
        discretionary leave outside the Rules and a  matter  solely  within
        the  discretion  of  the  respondent,   does   not   satisfy   this
        requirement. The Judge notes at [17] that discretionary  leave  may
        be terminated at any time with no guarantee that it would  continue
        once it had reached its expiry date and that  although  the  Asylum
        Policy instructions identify two potential situations where further
        leave would not be granted, it remains the case  that  a  grant  of
        such leave is at all times discretionary. It was noted by the Judge
        that it was no accident that there was no right of appeal against a
        refusal to extend discretion unless it  could  be  shown  to  be  a
        breach of a right under the Refugee  or  Human  Rights  Convention.
        There was no evidence before the Judge that the appellant's  mother
        had been granted leave to enter and or remain in the United Kingdom
        with a view to settlement.
    33. I have considered whether there were any provisions  of  the  Rules
        that would have allowed the appellant's mother to apply for a grant
        of leave to enter with a view to settlement in  relation  to  which
        the appropriate provision appears to be paragraph 281 of the  Rules
        which sets out the requirements  for  leave  to  enter  the  United
        Kingdom with a view to settlement as the spouse [or civil  partner]
        of a person present and settled in  the  United  Kingdom  or  being
        admitted on the same occasion for settlement. Although  it  may  be
        possible to secure settlement based upon passage of time  following
        grants of discretionary leave, I do not find this is sufficient  to
        satisfy the requirements of paragraph 301 as it is not specifically
        leave granted 'with a view to settlement'.
    34. It is also recognised that in the circumstances of the  parents  of
        this appellant, and any other, in which one parent is  settled  and
        the other has only been granted  discretionary  leave  outside  the
        Rules, it is impossible for an applicant to succeed  as  the  Rules
        make no provision for relief on these facts.
    35. Article 8: the grounds of challenge  attack  the  Judge's  findings
        under the Rules rather than focusing upon article 8 ECHR  which  is
        not a criticism because the thrust of the decision relates  to  the
        ability of the appellant to succeed under  the  Immigration  Rules.
        Before the Judge article 8 was mentioned and it is clear the  Judge
        took into account the factual matrix relied upon  and  gives  ample
        reasons supporting the conclusion that the evidence relied does not
        constitute the sort of exceptional or compelling circumstances that
        required the Judge to make an assessment of proportionality outside
        the terms of the Immigration Rules [25].
    36. Whilst the Supreme Court have reinforced the fact the  jurisdiction
        of  the  tribunals  is  an  article  8  jurisdiction  and   not   a
        jurisdiction limited to consideration under the Immigration  Rules,
        this is clearly a finding by the Judge that the  conclusions  under
        the rules do not made out an arguable case for  succeeding  as  the
        appellant failed to establish the existence of anything  that  made
        his exclusion  undesirable.  That  assessment  required  a  rounded
        assessment of the competing interests in the same way  in  which  a
        proportionality exercise would. Indeed,  if  the  matter  had  been
        considered as a freestanding article 8 assessment the provisions of
        section 117 of the 2002 Act would also have been relevant.  It  has
        not been shown that the decision would have been any different.
    37. It is not made out the Judge erred in  a  manner  material  to  the
        decision to dismiss the appeal either under the  Immigration  Rules
        or article 8 ECHR on the facts of this appeal.  The decision of the
        First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

Decision

    38. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.




   Anonymity


    39. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008


Signed.......................................................
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Hanson

Dated the 13 October 2017




