

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/13407/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Sent to parties on:          |
|On 26 April 2016                              |On 17 May 2016               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                            MR SAID ABDI SULEIMAN

                       (Anonymity DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                    THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (NAIROBI)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the appellant's appeal to the  Upper Tribunal,  brought  with
permission, against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Roopnarine-
Davies hereinafter "the judge") promulgated on 10 October 2014, dismissing
his appeal against the respondent's decision  of  8 May 2013  refusing  to
grant  him  entry  clearance  to  come  to  the  UK,  for  the  purposes  of
settlement, as the spouse of a refugee.

2.    By way of background, the appellant is a national of  Somalia,  albeit
resident in Ethiopia, who  was  born  on  10 January 1979.   His  sponsor,
Mrs Sudi Sharif Ahmad is also a national of Somalia.  She arrived in the UK
in June 2006 and was granted asylum without the  need  to  appeal.   It  is
claimed that the appellant and sponsor are married to each  other  and  were
married to each other prior to the sponsor fleeing Somalia.   The  appellant
applied for entry clearance to join her in the  UK,  seeking  to  rely  upon
paragraph 352A of the Immigration Rules.

3.    The entry clearance officer, in fact,  refused  the  application  both
under paragraph 320 and paragraph 352A of the Immigration Rules.   As  to
paragraph 320, he took the view that the appellant had  failed  to  produce
documentation satisfactorily establishing his identity and nationality.   As
to paragraph 352A, he took the view that it had not been shown that the two
had contracted a valid marriage or that they were part of  the  same  family
unit at the time of the  sponsor's  departure  from  Somalia  or  that  they
intended to live together in the UK.  On review, though, an entry  clearance
manager conceded the  identity  point  but  the  other  concerns  (the  352A
points) remained.

4.    The appellant's appeal was heard on 29 September 2014.   Of  course,
being out of the county, he was unable to attend.  However, his sponsor  did
attend and  she  gave  oral  evidence  to  the  judge.   Both  parties  were
represented.  The judge did not accept  the  sponsor  as  being  a  credible
witness and thought there were  substantial  shortcomings  in  the  evidence
offered by and on behalf of the appellant which undermined  the  claim  that
the two had been married to each other  prior  to  the  sponsor's  departure
from Somalia in 2006.  Indeed, the judge was not persuaded  that  there  was
any form of genuine romantic relationship of  a  subsisting  nature  between
the two at all.  Accordingly, it was  concluded  that  the  requirements  of
paragraph 352A  of  the  Immigration Rules  were  not  met.   By  way  of
explanation as to all of that, the judge said this:

      "     5.   It is claimed that  the  sponsor  and  the  appellant  were
      childhood friends and neighbours in Mogadishu  where  they  lived  all
      their lives and went to the same school.  In  his  VAF  the  appellant
      stated that he and the sponsor were distant relatives.  This  was  not
      confirmed or articulated by the  sponsor.   The  name  of  the  school
      attended by the sponsor in  her  witness  statement  for  the  hearing
      (Muse Galal) is different from that given in her screening  interview
      in 2006 (Hamaar Jadeed).  It is claimed that the couple fell in  love
      after her previous husband died and the sponsor wanted someone to help
      her raise her  family  and  the  couple  married  in  a  "traditional"
      marriage in Mogadishu in February 2006.  No date in February is given
      for the marriage or evidence for example from the sheikhs or religious
      men who officiated  at  the  ceremony.   A  maternal  uncle  was  also
      present.  The sponsor  stated  that  she  could  not  afford  to  take
      photographs of the wedding because she came from a poor  family,  not,
      e.g. the circumstances of the marriage.  She  was  given  a  piece  of
      paper as proof of the marriage but had left this behind  in  Mogadishu
      having fled from the city in March 2006.  I did not find the claim to
      ring true because it is an important document not easily left  behind.
      She was anxious at her screening interview  to  give  the  appellant's
      name as that of her husband, his date of birth as "1979" and  marriage
      as February 2006.  In my view she knew it was an important part of her
      claim and if genuinely married she would not have forgotten to take it
      with her.

            6.   Miss Thirumaney submitted that the sponsor was  an  honest
      witness as demonstrated by  her  ability  to  give  the  name  of  the
      appellant and his date of birth at the time of her asylum claim.   The
      sponsor struck me as  an  intelligent  and  educated  person.   Having
      considered the evidence as a whole I find that  she  would  have  been
      alert to the possibility at that time that she could claim at a  later
      date for a husband.  Her exit from Somalia and entry to the UK had the
      hallmarks of a well-planned operation.

            7.   The alacrity  at  which  the  sponsor  was  able  to  leave
      Somalia and arrive in the UK undermined her repeated claims of poverty
      and the impression she sought to give that she  left  the  city  in  a
      hurry and the decision to do so was made only on  the  day  she  left.
      She left Mogadishu on 12 March 2006, arrived in Kenya on 14 March 2006
      and in the UK on 25 June 2006.  She could not afford  to  visit  the
      appellant in Ethiopia because she is a single mother with 2 children.
      This is plausible in part but, her journey to the UK was arranged  and
      paid for by an uncle who lives in Saudi Arabia, she  is  not  without
      means.  She was able to stay with a family in Kenya for  3 months  on
      her arrival there  from  Somalia.   They  arranged  for  her  and  the
      children to stay with a woman from Somalia on their arrival in the UK.
       She is in receipt of help from the State and has worked as a  cleaner
      but claimed that she is unable to get a similar job in Leicester where
      she lives at present, which did not ring true.  It emerged during  the
      hearing that she has been sending money to her mother who  was  living
      in Mogadishu but who went to Kismayo at the same time that the sponsor
      left Somalia and who continues to live  there.   In  cross-examination
      she stated that she has kept in touch with her mother since  she  left
      Somalia.  It beggars belief that her mother and the appellant (with or
      without the help of the Somali diaspora) were  not  able  to  keep  in
      touch or make contact with each other  since  2006  if  the  sponsor's
      claim that she married him before she left Somalia is genuine which  I
      find not to be the case.

            8.   The circumstances in which the sponsor  and  the  appellant
      are claimed by the sponsor to have become separated did not  withstand
      examination.  The sponsor sought  to  give  the  impression  that  the
      decision to flee Mogadishu was made on the day she left.  This did not
      ring true in light of the background  evidence  that  there  was  very
      heavy fighting in Mogadishu throughout 2006 between the government and
      Al-Shabab and the sponsor had only been married to the appellant for a
      few weeks and wanted to have a male figure to protect her and help her
      raise the children.  Her claim in cross examination that the appellant
      went to the market to sell fish (in the midst  of  serious  background
      fighting), fighting broke out that day whereupon she and the  children
      left the same day for Kenya is simply not credible.

            9.   Mr Panayi noted the lack of detail in important aspects of
      the claim, for example the manner in  which  the  sponsor  managed  to
      contact the appellant in July/December 2012, of whom  in  the  Somali
      community in the UK helped her or her claimed BBC radio appeal and the
      noticeable lack of  evidence  from  the  appellant  including  of  his
      circumstances since the sponsor left Mogadishu.  She gave  an  account
      that he had been hijacked by the rebels and made to work for them as a
      farmer but this was not supported by evidence from him.  The burden is
      on him to prove his case and he has not done so.  The sponsor  claimed
      to have contacted him  in  December 2012  that  conflicted  with  the
      information in the VAF that he arrived in  Ethiopia  from  Somalia  in
      July 2012 for the  purposes  of  the  application  (emphasis  added).
      Mr Panayi noted the lack of contact between  the  appellant  and  the
      sponsor since they claimed to have re-established contact.  There  was
      scant  evidence  of  letters,  emails  or  texts  between  them.    In
      December 2012 when the sponsor lived in London and had  access  to  a
      landline her telephone bill records only 3 calls to  the  appellant's
      mobile, one of 46 minutes and 2 of approx. 3 minutes each.  She stated
      that she now used telephone cards to call him on his mobile  telephone
      approximately twice a week.

            10.  The sponsor's evidence was  that  the  appellant  lived  on
      funds she remitted to him which were insufficient for him to afford to
      use the internet to contact her yet an email address is given  in  the
      VAF.  She stated that her daughters were very close to the  appellant,
      itself not credible given that they were only 8 years old and 2 years
      old (they are now 15 years old and 10 years old) when they last  saw
      him allegedly 8 years ago.  She stated that  she  took  them  to  the
      library when they wished  to  use  the  internet  but  there  was  not
      evidence of any emails between the appellant and the  children  and/or
      the sponsor.  The sponsor is only 35 years old.  It was  difficult  to
      accept that she was not able to text and use the internet which is the
      impression she sought to give.  It was also difficult to  accept  that
      she and the appellant would not  have  remained  in  mobile  telephone
      contact when she left Somalia in 2006 when that country is  known  for
      the proliferation in the use of mobile phones or as Mr Panayi noted, a
      country that is "techno savvy".  Her  claim  was  that  she  and  the
      appellant could not afford one.

            11.  The sponsor sent US$100 to the appellant  in  January 2013
      through Dahabshill,  details  of  which  are  fully  recorded  on  the
      Company's  receipt.  Receipts  for  similar  sums  sent  to  him  from
      June 2013 to the present lack the imprimatur of authenticity.  Details
      one would expect to see such as the address  of  the  transfer  agent,
      Olympic International, or the name of the cashier  are  not  apparent.
      If as claimed the sponsor is poor and has been sending  money  to  her
      mother it is difficult to understand how she is able to afford to send
      the appellant any money.  Mr Panayi noted that the remittances (except
      for January 2013) post dated the decision but as  rightly  noted  by
      Miss Thirumaney is evidence I can take into account  as  evidence  of
      intervening devotion  but  I  was  not  satisfied  that  the  receipts
      genuinely represented the facts.

            12.  The appellant has failed to  deal  substantively  with  the
      respondent's legitimate concerns.  I have found the sponsor not to  be
      a credible witness.  The evidence as  a  whole  lacked  coherence  and
      cogency.  There was  a  distinct  lack  of  evidence  of  contact  and
      intervening devotion since contact was re-established by the  parties.
      I concluded on the evidence that the appellant and  the  sponsor  were
      not married prior to the sponsor's departure from Somalia in 2006.   I
      am not  satisfied  that  the  relationship  has  begun  let  alone  is
      subsisting.  The appellant does not meet paragraph 352A of the  Rules
      for entry clearance as the spouse of a person with refugee status.  It
      follows from the above that I am satisfied that there  is  not  family
      life  between  the  parties  following  Razgar  for  the  purposes  of
      article 8 and that article 8 is not engaged let alone that there  is
      interference with family life.  The appellant has not  discharged  the
      burden  on  him  to  show  that  on  balance  there  is  an   unlawful
      interference with  his  rights  to  respect  for  his  family  life  -
      Naz (subsisting marriage-standard  of  proof)  Pakistan  (2012)  UKUT
      00040(IAC).  The appeal fails.

5.    An application for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper Tribunal  was
lodged on behalf of  the  appellant.   The  lengthy  grounds  suggested,  in
summary, that the judge had erred in failing to attach  "proper  weight"  to
aspects of the evidence, in attaching "inappropriate weight"  to  irrelevant
matters and in failing to properly engage with  the  evidence  as  a  whole.
Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was arguable that  the
judge had taken into account irrelevant considerations and applied too  high
a standard of proof.  Matters were then listed  for  a  hearing  before  the
Upper Tribunal (before me) for a consideration as to  whether  or  not  the
judge had erred in law and, if so, what should flow from that.

6.    The sponsor  did  not  attend  the  hearing.   The  appellant's  legal
representatives  did  not  attend  the  hearing  either.    Indeed,   nobody
attended, in any capacity, on behalf of the  appellant.   Mr Mills  was  in
attendance in order  to  represent  the  respondent.   It  does  appear,  in
looking at the Upper Tribunal file, that correct  notification  as  to  the
time, date and  place  of  the  Upper Tribunal  hearing  was  sent  to  the
appellant's current UK based legal representatives and also to the  sponsor.
 No explanation regarding the non-attendance was received.  Mr Mills, at my
request, checked Home Office records but having done so he indicated  there
was no trace  of  any  change  of  address  by  the  sponsor  or  change  of
representatives by the appellant.  In  the  circumstances  he  urged  me  to
proceed.  I considered his request in  light  of  rules 2  and  31  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and did decide, in  light  of
the above and in the face of there being no reason  to  think  the  position
regarding representation would be any  different  if  I  did  adjourn  to  a
different date, to proceed.

7.    Mr Mills addressed me.   He  urged  me  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
appeal.  The judge had not erred in law.  In particular, and in response  to
a concern I raised with him, Mr Mills submitted that it had  been  open  to
the  judge  to  conclude  that  the  sponsor  might  have  given   dishonest
information about her claimed marriage when she came to the UK  and  claimed
asylum (see paragraph 6 of the determination) and whilst what the judge had
said about that might amount to a bold finding, it  was  not  an  irrational
one.

8.    I have, in fact, decided that the judge did not make any error of  law
and that the determination shall stand.  I set out my reasoning below.

9.    In general terms I find that the grounds relied upon by the  appellant
do not go beyond mere disagreement with the judge's findings and an  attempt
to simply re-argue matters of fact.  It is clear that,  without  more,  such
grounds are incapable of establishing legal error.

10.   Further, in my judgment it was open to the judge to conclude that  the
appellant and sponsor had given differing information as to their  schooling
in Somalia.  The sponsor had said, at  one  stage,  that  she  had  attended
Hamar Jadeed Primary School from 1985 to  1991  but  had,  at  a  different
stage, said that both she and the appellant had attended a different  school
between 1984 and 1990.  There was an element of inconsistency as to  whether
the two were related or not which it was open to the judge  to  attach  some
weight to notwithstanding an explanation for that  subsequently  offered  in
the grounds.  The judge was not  obliged  to  accept  the  sponsor's  claims
regarding the relationship merely because she  had  been  accepted,  without
her credibility having been tested at  an  appeal  hearing,  as  a  refugee.
Such an acceptance does not, of itself, amount to an  authoritative  finding
as to credibility in relation to all aspects of an asylum  claim  or  future
credibility with respect to any subsequent claims that might be made in  the
context of a family reunion application.   It  was  open  to  the  judge  to
attach weight to the lack of evidence regarding ongoing contact between  the
two.

11.   As indicated, I did wonder about the judge's treatment of  information
the sponsor had given when she  claimed  asylum.   She  had  claimed  to  be
married to the appellant and had provided some personal details  about  him.
The judge, though, was not persuaded that  that  represented  a  significant
point in favour of the appellant (at least that is how I read what  is  said
in the determination) because  as  an  intelligent  and  not  wholly  honest
individual (in the  judge's  view)  the  sponsor  might  have  been  falsely
claiming to be married with an eye to securing future admission for  him  on
an artificial basis.  Mr Mills is right to acknowledge that that was a bold
finding on the part of the judge.  It does suggest a  manipulative  approach
and a considerable degree of forethought on the part of the sponsor if,  for
example, the appellant was simply a friend or  relative  or  other  type  of
associate who she thought she might be able to artificially assist  at  some
point in the future.  However, irrationality  and  the  perversity  do  have
strikingly high thresholds.  I am not able  to  conclude  that  the  judge's
finding, whilst perhaps not one many judges would have made,  quite  reached
the high threshold applicable.  I have to  conclude,  therefore,  that  that
finding was open to the judge.

12.   In light of all of the above, therefore, I  conclude  that  the  judge
did reach findings and conclusions which were open to her  on  the  evidence
and which were adequately  explained.   Accordingly,  I  conclude  that  the
determination does not contain legal error and that,  accordingly,  it  must
stand.   I  do,  therefore,  dismiss   the   appellant's   appeal   to   the
Upper Tribunal.

Decision

      The making of the First-tier Tribunal's decision did not involve  the
making of an error of law.  Accordingly that decision shall stand.

Anonymity

      I make no anonymity direction.

Signed                                             Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.

Signed                                             Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway
