
OA 13094 2013
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3 June 2014                                |On 4 June 2014               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (LAGOS)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             OMODESIRE O IFEBAJO
                        (No Anonymity Direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr N K Ifebajo (sponsor)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is the appeal of the Entry Clearance Officer but for  convenience
      I will refer to the original appellant, a citizen of Nigeria born on 5
      June, 2002, as the appellant herein.

   2. The sponsor is the father of the appellant. The sponsor is married  to
      an EEA national. The sponsor and his wife live in the  United  Kingdom
      and the appellant applied for an entry clearance on 16 April, 2013  as
      the family member of an EEA national. This application was refused  on
      16 May 2013 as the respondent was not satisfied that the appellant had
      submitted satisfactory evidence to  confirm  that  the  appellant  was
      related as claimed.  The  appellant's  birth  had  been  registered  a
      significant number of years after the date of birth. Documents of this
      kind were easily generated and readily available in Nigeria. There was
      insufficient photographic evidence and evidence of  contact  with  her
      sponsor. There was a discrepancy in the sponsor's marriage certificate
      which had been unexplained. The respondent was not satisfied that  the
      appellant met the requirements of  regulation  7  of  the  Immigration
      (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

   3. The appellant appealed and her appeal came before a  First-tier  Judge
      on 13 February, 2014.  The  judge  observed  in  paragraph  6  of  the
      determination that he found that the  respondent  "had  understandable
      concerns about whether the  appellant  was  related  to  her  father's
      claimed. This is  particularly  so  given  the  respondent's  duty  to
      protect children."

   4. In paragraph 7 of the determination the judge stated:

           "In my judgement however when the sole issue is that of  whether
           the parties are related as claimed it is unreasonable and unfair
           of the respondent to refuse an  application  for  family  permit
           without giving the appellant  the  opportunity  to  provide  DNA
           evidence. It is not  reasonable  to  expect  all  applicants  to
           provide this evidence unless it is requested. In light  of  this
           unreasonable conduct I find the respondent's  decision  refusing
           leave without an opportunity to  provide  this  evidence  to  be
           unlawful."

   5. The judge then referred to the respondent's  own  guidance  which  was
      available on the respondent's website. The  DNA  tests  were  provided
      free of charge and under  the  heading  "when  to  test?"  the  policy
      stated:

         . only for first-time Settlement or Family Reunion applications as
           a  last  resort  when  every  other  means  of   verifying   the
           relationship has been exhausted; and

         . Where "related as claimed" would be the sole reason for refusal.

   6. In paragraph 8 of the determination the judge stated as follows:

           In the light of the fact that the decision has been made without
           an opportunity to provide DNA evidence I find  the  decision  is
           otherwise than in accordance with the law. The  effect  of  this
           decision is that decision is  revoked  and  the  matter  remains
           before  the  respondent  awaiting  a  lawful  consideration  and
           decision."

   7. In declining to make a fee award the judge  did  not  consider  a  fee
      order to be appropriate: "although I have found the respondent  should
      have arranged and/or requested this information prior to the  decision
      nevertheless it could have been arranged independently by  the  father
      for the purposes of the appeal."

   8. There was an application for permission to appeal which  included  the
      full child settlement guidance (SET 7.11) and it  was  submitted  that
      the judge had misinterpreted the policy which did not apply  in  these
      circumstances-the appellant's application  was  for  a  family  permit
      under the EEA regulations and there was no policy requirement  to  ask
      for a DNA test in any event.

   9. Permission to appeal was  refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The
      application was renewed and Upper Tribunal Judge  Peter  Lane  granted
      permission finding it plainly arguable that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      had erred in misapplying a policy and paragraph 7 of the determination
      was of particular concern.

  10. Mr Bramble submitted that the issue  was  straightforward.  The  judge
      appeared to have reversed the  burden  of  proof.  There  was  nothing
      unlawful about the  decision.  The  policy  did  not  apply  to  these
      circumstances of this case, a case under the EEA regulations.

  11. The sponsor said he was law-abiding and referred  to  his  grounds  of
      appeal where he had said that he  would  not  attempt  to  claim  that
      someone was his daughter under a false pretext "when we are aware that
      in this age and time DNA test could be required to proof [sic] such  a
      claim."

  12. When he had made the application he assumed that there was a  file  in
      existence which would demonstrate the facts in relation to  his  other
      two children. He had made the application on the assumption that there
      was documentary evidence on the file.

  13. At the conclusion of the  submissions  I  reserved  my  decision.  The
      appellant admits to  an  oversight  in  submitting  documents  in  the
      grounds of appeal from the Entry Clearance  Officer's  decision.  This
      omission would have been rectified had he been advised  about  it.  He
      had recently  discovered  that  the  contact  e-mail  address  on  the
      application form was wrong as one letter was missing  and  any  e-mail
      correspondence would have  gone  to  the  wrong  person.  Evidence  of
      financial support might not be readily available on paper.  The  issue
      about the birth registration could be explained as the  original  that
      explanation had not been provided with the documentary evidence. A bag
      of photographs had been lost during relocation.

  14. In these circumstances the First-tier  Judge  correctly  observed  the
      appeal could not be allowed on the merits - the respondent's  concerns
      were understandable.

  15. It does not appear that the respondent's policy was mentioned  at  the
      hearing - Mr Bramble was not able to confirm this from the  Presenting
      Officer's notes. The judge's notes are unclear. The policy on its face
      plainly does not apply and no doubt the Presenting Officer would  have
      drawn that to the judge's attention had she been asked  about  it.  If
      this was an example of post-hearing research, then it should be  borne
      in mind that the parties have not been given a chance  to  comment  on
      the fruits of such research.

  16. Mr Bramble points out that the burden of proof was on  the  appellant.
      The application had numerous faults and omissions and the judge  found
      the respondent's concerns understandable. It does not appear that even
      if the policy  had  applied  (which  it  plainly  did  not)  that  the
      respondent would have erred in failing to volunteer a DNA  test  since
      the policy was a policy of last resort: it was not a policy set up  to
      deal with applications which contained  lacunae  as  this  application
      did. It could not be said that "every other  means  of  verifying  the
      relationship had been exhausted" given the failure to put all  salient
      material to the respondent with the application.

  17. It may also be observed that the sponsor was aware of  DNA  tests  and
      could have either requested one or provided one privately. The  First-
      tier Judge appears to acknowledge that such a  test  could  have  been
      arranged privately when declining to make a fee award.  I  agree  with
      the observations of Judge Lane that paragraph 7 of  the  determination
      is concerning. There  was  nothing  remotely  unreasonable  about  the
      respondent's decision or decision making process and the  sponsor  had
      had the opportunity to provide DNA evidence.

  18. The decision is materially flawed in law.

  19. The sponsor will no doubt wish to make a further application with  all
      available material, supported by DNA evidence if so advised.

  20. I re-make the decision:

  21. The appeal of the Entry Clearance Officer is allowed;  the  appeal  of
      the appellant is dismissed.

Signed
                               Upper Tribunal Judge Warr


                               3 June 2014



