


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/13530/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Sent           |
|On : 9 October 2013                           |On : 14 October 2013         |
|                                              |                             |



                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     MK
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                  Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Gilbert, instructed by Rahman & Company
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J Parkinson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The appellant is a citizen of Sierra Leone, born in 1998. Following a  grant
of permission to appeal against the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
dismissing his appeal against the respondent's decision to refuse him  entry
clearance to the United Kingdom under paragraph 297 of HC  395,  Lord  Burns
and I, sitting as a panel, found, at an error of  law  hearing  on  18  June
2013, that First-tier Tribunal Judge Brenells had made  material  errors  of
law in his decision on Article 8 of the ECHR. We directed that the  decision
be set aside and re-made by the Upper Tribunal with respect only to  Article
8.

Background to the Appeal

The appellant applied for entry clearance to settle in  the  United  Kingdom
with his father. His application was refused on 4 May 2012, on  the  grounds
that it was not accepted that his father had  sole  responsibility  for  his
upbringing. The respondent noted that the appellant's  father  had  gone  to
the United Kingdom in December 1998 when he (the appellant) was  only  seven
months old and had left  him  in  the  care  of  his  mother  with  whom  he
continued to reside. The respondent  did  not  accept  the  claim  that  his
mother and step-father were no longer able to care for him in Sierra Leone.

The appellant appealed against that decision and his  appeal  was  heard  in
the First-tier  Tribunal  before  Judge  Brenells  on  27  March  2013.  The
evidence before the judge was that the appellant's father had  made  regular
financial contributions towards his upkeep since  leaving  Sierra  Leone  in
1998. His mother had married in 2005 and had a  child  from  that  marriage.
The appellant had lived with his grandmother  until  2009  when  his  mother
decided that he should come to live with her and her  husband.  However  her
husband was not happy with him living with them and he had returned to  live
with his grandmother. The judge heard  from  the  sponsor,  the  appellant's
father, who was married with two children who were living with  him  in  the
United Kingdom and were British citizens. He concluded that the sponsor  did
not have sole responsibility for the appellant and he found  also  that  the
provisions of paragraph 297(f) of the rules had not been  met.  He  did  not
consider that Article 8 was engaged, finding that the sponsor  was  free  to
return to Sierra Leone and resume his family  life  with  the  appellant  in
that country. He accordingly dismissed  the  appeal  under  the  immigration
rules and on human rights grounds.

Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  was  sought  on  behalf  of  the
appellant on the grounds that the judge had erred  by  failing  to  consider
potential family life between the appellant and his father and had erred  in
finding that Article 8 was not engaged. It was  asserted  further  that  the
judge, in finding that the sponsor was free to return to Sierra  Leone,  had
failed to consider the sponsor's role as carer for his two  British  citizen
children.

Permission to appeal was granted on 13 May 2013 on those grounds.

Following the error of law hearing  on  18  June  2013,  Lord  Burns  and  I
reached the conclusion that the Tribunal had made a material error  of  law,
as set out in our decision:

  "Mr Gilbert, in his submissions, did not seek to  challenge  the  judge's
  findings under the immigration rules, but submitted that  errors  of  law
  arose in his consideration of Article 8, in particular in regard  to  the
  failure to consider the potential family life between the  appellant  and
  his father and the potential development  of  relationships  between  the
  appellant and the sponsor's British children.

  Mr Deller accepted that the judge  had  erred  in  his  consideration  of
  Article 8 and that there was no indication in his limited  findings  that
  he had taken all relevant matters into account.

  In view of  Mr  Deller's  concession,  we  considered  that  the  judge's
  decision had to be set aside and re-made, with respect to the  Article  8
  grounds.

  Our preliminary view was  that  we  could  go  on  and  immediately  hear
  submissions with a view to re-making the decision, given that this was an
  entry  clearance  case  and  thus  would  not  involve  any   change   in
  circumstances since the respondent's decision. However, in the  light  of
  Mr Gilbert's request for further relevant evidence to be adduced  and  Mr
  Deller's acquiescence, we decided to adjourn the proceedings and  re-list
  the appeal for a resumed hearing at a later date."

Appeal hearing and submissions

The appeal then came before me on 9 October 2013 in  order  to  re-make  the
decision with respect to Article 8. The  sponsor  and  his  wife  gave  oral
evidence before me and updated statements were adduced from  both  of  them,
together with two letters purporting to come from  the  appellant  and  from
the appellant's grandmother's doctor.

The sponsor confirmed that his statements were true and  accurate  and  said
that he had received the  letter  from  his  son  by  mail  at  the  end  of
September 2013. His son had sent it to him and had written it himself.  When
asked how his son would be taken care of in Sierra Leone if his  grandmother
was repeatedly being admitted to hospital, he said that  he  was  mostly  on
his own on those occasions. There were other family members living near  him
but they could not take care of him as they were not responsible enough  and
were not willing. If his grandmother was permanently unable  to  look  after
him he would be walking on the streets and would be left  to  make  all  the
big decisions in his life himself. The sponsor  said  that  the  appellant's
aunt, his grandmother's daughter, also lived in the house with them but  she
was unwilling to take care of him as she was a  businesswoman  and  was  out
all day at work. She had not had any role  in  his  son's  development.  His
son's grandfather had been killed during the rebel  war.  The  sponsor  said
that he wanted his son to come to the United Kingdom  as  he  wanted  to  be
there for him. His son also wanted to be with his half-siblings.

When cross-examined, the sponsor said that he last visited his son  in  late
2004/ early 2005. He had planned to go again in  2009  but  decided  instead
that his wife and daughter would go, to form a bond with him.  His  son  was
seven to eight months old when he left. The sponsor confirmed  that  he  had
had  about  �5,000  in  savings  in  his  bank  account  before  the   legal
proceedings but he had spent a lot on legal fees. He  had  intended  to  put
that money aside to bring his son here. Although the  letter  from  his  son
was dated 21 July 2013 he did not receive it  until  the  end  of  September
2013 because he had been looking for someone who was going to  Sierra  Leone
who could bring it to him but could not find anyone and so told his  son  to
put in the post. He did not know why the letter was not signed. He  did  not
have the envelope in which the letter was sent as he had thrown  it  in  the
bin after taking out the letter and the medical report from  Dr  Coker.  The
sponsor confirmed that  he  had  mentioned  about  his  son's  grandmother's
illness at the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal.  He  said  that  his
son's aunt had one child, aged about three or four, but he was not aware  if
she had a partner or husband. The other relatives who lived nearby were  his
cousins. They would care for  his  son  in  emergency  situations  when  his
grandmother had to go into hospital but were  generally  unwilling  to  look
after him. He had not considered offering them money to care  for  his  son.
The sponsor said that his son lived with his mother  and  grandmother  until
2009 and then from  2009  onwards  stayed  with  his  grandmother.  He  then
clarified that and said that his son went to stay with his mother  when  she
married in 2005 but then went back to his grandmother's in 2009  because  he
did not get on with his mother's husband and he was  beating  him.  When  Mr
Parkinson  referred  the  sponsor  to  the  contradictory  evidence  in  his
statement, he said that he had stayed with his mother until  2009  and  then
in 2009 went to his grandmother's house. His education had been affected  by
being left alone when his grandmother was ill. She had been ill for  six  to
seven years now.

When re-examined about his evidence as to where his  son  had  been  living,
the sponsor said that he had lived with his  mother  and  grandmother  until
2005, when his mother left to go and live with her husband,  at  which  time
he remained with his grandmother although he would visit his mother. He  did
not go to live with his mother in 2005, but  would  stay  there  for  a  few
weeks and then return to his grandmother. The sponsor said that he would  be
happy if his son's cousins would care for him in exchange for  payment,  but
he believed that they would just take the money and not care for him.

In response to my enquiry, the sponsor confirmed that his  son  had  written
the letter himself, first by  hand  and  then  typed  on  the  computer  and
printed out. His son's first language was Creole but  he  spoke  English  in
school. When asked whether his son's mother had moved back to live with  him
and his grandmother after her marriage, he said initially that she had  done
that one time, but then said that that had occurred several times.  Whenever
she moved back in with her husband, his son would move  back  in  with  them
once they had settled down. His mother  was  still  with  her  husband.  She
would let him wander about on the streets rather than  have  him  back.  The
sponsor confirmed that he had two children in  the  United  Kingdom,  a  boy
aged 18 months and a girl aged  eight  years,  both  of  whom  were  British
citizens.

The sponsor's wife then gave evidence before  me.  She  confirmed  that  her
statement was true and accurate and said that the appellant  would  be  very
vulnerable if left in Sierra Leone. He had extended  family  members  living
near him but that was no substitute for his own  parents.  She  had  visited
him in 2009 with her daughter who  was  five  years  old  at  the  time,  to
celebrate her daughter's birthday. Since then she had been in  contact  with
him by telephone and through  social  media  and  text.  Her  daughter  also
communicated with him. Her husband had  been  affected  emotionally  by  the
separation from his son and would  feel  down  after  talking  to  him.  The
appellant had told her that he could not wait to be living with  them.  When
cross-examined, she said that her husband had not seen his  son  since  2005
because it was difficult financially as it was very expensive to  go  there.
They had not  thought  about  bringing  him  here  for  a  visit.  They  had
sponsored him as they wanted him to be part of the family.

Mr Parkinson conceded that there was family life  between  the  sponsor  and
the appellant, on the basis that they were father  and  son,  but  submitted
that what was relevant was the  quality  of  that  family  life.  There  was
considerable confusion in  the  evidence  as  to  where  the  appellant  was
living. The sponsor left his son when he was only a few months old  and  had
chosen not return to Sierra Leone to visit him since early 2005. It was  not
clear how frequent was the contact between them or why he had not sought  to
visit him since then, given that  he  had  savings.  There  was  nothing  to
indicate that the letter submitted genuinely came  from  the  appellant  and
should be accorded no weight. The findings of the  First-tier  Tribunal,  as
to the lack of evidence to show  that  the  appellant  was  at  risk,  still
stood. The letter from Dr Coker had simply been produced to add weight to  a
situation not previously relied upon, namely the  appellant's  grandmother's
inability to care for  him.   There  was  little  evidence  of  family  life
between the appellant and sponsor and nothing  to  indicate  that  the  best
interests  of  the  appellant  or  his  step-siblings  would  be  materially
affected by the refusal of entry clearance. The  decision  to  refuse  entry
clearance was not disproportionate.

Mr  Gilbert  submitted  that  the  compelling  circumstances  test  in   the
immigration rules was not the appropriate test and there was no  requirement
for the appellant to show that he was uncared for in Sierra Leone. What  was
relevant was the family life, and the potential  family  life,  between  the
appellant and sponsor. Although the family life had been  conducted  through
contact, there was the potential for it to grow. Mr Gilbert  relied  on  the
case of Singh v Entry Clearance Officer New Delhi [2004] EWCA  Civ  1075  in
that respect. The refusal of entry clearance was a barrier to the  appellant
and sponsor being able to live together. With regard to the  sponsor's  lack
of visits to Sierra Leone, his family was not one of great means and  travel
was expensive. It was rational to spend his savings on bringing his  son  to
the United Kingdom rather than on holidays to Sierra Leone. The sponsor  had
made regular financial remittances to his son and there had  been  continued
contact by telephone and social media. There was  therefore  a  close  bond,
despite the distance. There was  a  lot  of  evidence  of  contact  and  the
documentary evidence should be taken in  the  round.  Mr  Gilbert  submitted
that weight should be given to  the  letter  from  Dr  Coker  and  from  the
sponsor's wife. It was clear that the motivation for bringing the  appellant
to the United Kingdom now was the crisis leading him to have to remain  with
his grandmother and her inability to care for  him.  The  refusal  of  entry
clearance was a disproportionate interference with the family lives  of  the
appellant, the sponsor and the sponsor's wife and children.

Consideration and findings

It is accepted that the appellant is unable to meet the requirements of  the
immigration rules and that  the  only  issue  is  Article  8  in  its  wider
context. It is also accepted that family life  exists  between  the  sponsor
and the appellant, given the relationship of father  and  son.  It  was  not
suggested by Mr Parkinson that the sponsor could be expected to relocate  to
Sierra Leone on a permanent basis in order to pursue his  family  life  with
the appellant and indeed that could not be the case, given  that  he  has  a
wife and British children in the United Kingdom.  The  question  before  me,
therefore, is whether the nature  and  quality  of  the  appellant's  family
life/ potential family life in the United Kingdom is  sufficient  to  render
the refusal of entry clearance disproportionate.

It was Mr Gilbert's submission that the respondent had  erred  by  focussing
on the appellant's  circumstances  in  Sierra  Leone  and  by  applying  the
compelling circumstances test  under  the  immigration  rules,  rather  than
focussing on the potential for family life in the United  Kingdom.  However,
whilst  there  is  merit  in  his   submission   as   to   the   appropriate
considerations, the appellant's inability to meet the immigration rules  is,
of  course,  a  relevant  factor  in  the  assessment  of   proportionality.
Furthermore, it has to be the case that  the  appellant's  circumstances  in
Sierra Leone must play an integral part in those considerations, given  that
they form a basis for concluding where his best interests lie as well  as  a
basis for considering the weight to be attached to the evidence as a whole.

Accordingly, establishing what the appellant's circumstances  are,  or  were
at the time of the entry clearance decision, has to be the  starting  point,
and  it  is  plain  that  the  evidence  in  that  regard  is  significantly
inconsistent and unreliable. Indeed, so inconsistent is  the  evidence  that
it fails even to establish where and with whom the appellant was living.  As
the entry clearance decision properly noted, the evidence produced with  the
application indicated that the appellant was living with his mother and  had
always  been  part  of  her  family  unit.  The  letter   accompanying   the
application, from Capitalvisas, states quite clearly that the appellant  was
living with his mother and cites the reason for his  proposed  move  to  the
United Kingdom as being her  inability,  as  a  result  of  her  own  family
commitments, to continue  to  provide  for  him  by  way  of  financial  and
emotional  support.  The  letter  accompanying  the  application  from   the
appellant's mother states the same, whilst also  mentioning  the  fact  that
her husband did not approve of her son  being  part  of  their  family,  and
bears the same address as that given by the  appellant  in  his  application
form as his  place  of  residence  for  the  past  five  years.  There  was,
accordingly, no indication at all in the  appellant's  application  that  he
was living anywhere other than with his mother.

It was only with the grounds of appeal  challenging  the  refusal  of  entry
clearance that the reference to the appellant living  with  his  grandmother
arose. In a statement of  "non-impediment"  the  appellant's  mother  stated
that, following her marriage in 2005 he was living with his grandmother  but
came to live with her and her  husband  in  2009,  but  that  owing  to  her
husband's violence, she and her son returned to  live  with  her  mother  on
several occasions  thereafter.  The  sponsor's  evidence  in  his  statement
before the First-tier Tribunal was that his son  remained  living  with  his
grandmother, following the marriage of his mother,  and  lived  there  until
2009, although visiting his mother on occasions during that period, with  an
indication that since 2009 he had been living with his  mother  and  violent
step-father in Freetown. A letter from the appellant's  school  in  Freetown
indicated that he had been attending there since September  2010.  His  oral
evidence before the Tribunal was  that  he  had  remained  living  with  his
grandmother.

The evidence continued to vary following the hearing before  the  First-tier
Tribunal. In his most recent statement the sponsor's evidence was  that  his
son remained with his grandmother after  his  mother's  marriage  and  until
January 2009 when he moved back to his mother's  house  and  remained  there
until April 2012, when he returned to his grandmother due to  the  stressful
situation at  his  mother's  house.  That  was  also  the  evidence  of  the
sponsor's  wife  in  her  statement.  The  details  about  his   whereabouts
contained in a letter from Dr Coker, his grandmother's doctor, are  somewhat
difficult to decipher, but appear to be broadly similar. The sponsor's  oral
evidence at the hearing before me varied. Initially he stated that  his  son
moved with his mother when she married in 2005 but because of problems  with
his step-father he returned  to  live  with  his  grandmother  in  2009  and
remained living there continuously from then. He repeated the  same  account
when asked to confirm it. However, when confronted  with  the  contradictory
evidence in his statement, he changed his evidence and  said  that  his  son
had remained with his grandmother until 2009 and  only  visited  his  mother
during that period.

The evidence of the  appellant's  place  of  residence  since  his  mother's
marriage in 2005 is plainly wholly inconsistent and unreliable.  I  have  no
doubt that the sponsor was not providing me  with  a  truthful  account,  as
clearly reflected in his change  of  mind  when  confronted  with  his  own,
contradictory  evidence.  Moreover,  his  evidence  about  extended   family
members reluctantly taking his son in when his grandmother was  admitted  to
hospital  is  inconsistent  with  the  account,  presented  in  the   letter
purporting to come from his son, that he was forced to remain alone at  such
times. The evidence at the time of the respondent's decision  was  that  the
appellant had always lived with his mother.  At  that  time,  there  was  no
suggestion that he had lived alone with his  grandmother.  The  evidence  of
remittances  of  funds  from  the  sponsor  shows  that  the  payments  have
continued to be made to his mother at her address in Freetown. There was  no
evidence, at the time of the entry  clearance  decision,  of  the  appellant
experiencing domestic violence. At the highest, the evidence suggested  that
his mother's new husband did not want  him  remaining  with  them,  a  claim
which I consider in any event to be of doubtful veracity.  I  consider  that
that claim, and  the  subsequent  accounts  of  domestic  violence,  of  the
appellant being sent back to his grandmother, of his  grandmother's  illness
and inability to care for him and of the lack of other family support,  have
all been fabricated in order to support the claim that it was  in  his  best
interests to join his father in the United Kingdom.

Such a conclusion is supported by the contradictory  and  unreliable  nature
of the  documentary  evidence.  The  reliability  of  the  letter  from  the
appellant's school  is  properly  addressed  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
findings at paragraph 20 of their determination. The  letter  from  Dr  Ryan
is, as stated above, contradicted by the oral evidence and also  contradicts
the sponsor's evidence of the duration of his son's  grandmother's  illness.
It plainly goes  beyond  the  remit  of  a  family  practitioner's  area  of
expertise and is  limited  in  its  explanation  of  the  patient's  alleged
medical condition. The letter purportedly from the  appellant  is  unsigned,
not unaccompanied by  any  evidence  of  postage,  inconsistent  with  other
evidence in its account of his place  of  residence  and  contains  language
suggestive of preparation by an adult rather than a child of 15 years.

Accordingly, I do not accept the account of  the  appellant's  insecure  and
precarious circumstances in Sierra Leone to be a truthful one and find  that
the situation is more likely than not the one considered by  the  respondent
when refusing entry clearance. Even if it were the case that  the  appellant
had, or has since, been living with his grandmother, there  is  no  credible
or reliable evidence that neither she nor other family members were able  to
look  after  him.  There  is  no  reliable  evidence  to  suggest  that  the
appellant's best interests  would  be  served  by  uprooting  him  from  his
settled life, leaving behind his mother, his grandmother  and  other  family
members, his school and no doubt also his friends, to  live  with  a  parent
who left him when he was seven months old and whom he had met only  once  in
fourteen years.  There  is  no  reliable  evidence  from  the  appellant  to
indicate as such.

The appellant's family life with his father is clearly a tenuous one.  There
is little evidence of contact between them. It has been  accepted  that  the
sponsor has been providing financial support for  his  son.  However,  other
than that, the evidence is limited to a few international  telephone  cards,
which do not in any event identify the frequency of calls or the parties  to
the calls, and the oral evidence of the sponsor and his wife. In  regard  to
the latter I do not consider the sponsor to be a reliable witness,  for  the
reasons already given, and  neither  do  I  place  weight  upon  his  wife's
evidence which is equally inconsistent in its  account  of  the  appellant's
place of residence in Sierra Leone. Neither of them  provided  a  reasonable
explanation as to why the sponsor had not visited his son  in  Sierra  Leone
other than on one occasion eight to nine years ago. There is no reliable  or
detailed evidence of the sponsor's wife's visit to the appellant in 2009.  I
do not accept, from the evidence before me,  that  their  circumstances  are
such that they were financially unable  to  meet  the  costs  of  occasional
travel to Sierra Leone to spend time with the appellant. It is  relevant  to
note that the sponsor's wife's evidence was that they had not  even  thought
of inviting him to visit them in  the  United  Kingdom.  I  find  that  such
actions do not support the claim of a strong family life  or  one  that  has
potential strength.

I return to the question of whether the nature and  quality  of  the  family
life between the appellant and the sponsor, or indeed between the  appellant
and his step-mother and step-siblings, is sufficient to render  the  refusal
of entry clearance disproportionate. The answer to that question,  based  on
the findings I have made above, has to be that it is not.  Accordingly,  the
decision to refuse entry clearance was, I find, not in breach of  Article  8
of the ECHR and I dismiss the appeal on that basis.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision has been set  aside  and  I  re-
make it by dismissing the appeal on all grounds.

    Anonymity


    The anonymity order made in the error of  law  decision  is  continued,
    pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.




                               Signed                                  Date


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
