
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: oa/13959/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 22 July 2014                                 |On 5 August 2014           |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE

                                   Between

                            miss layla abdi dahir
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
                             EXTEMPORE JUDGEMNT


 1. The Appellant in this appeal  was  the  Respondent  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and I refer to the parties as they were known  at  the  First-
    tier for convenience.

 2. The Respondent  appeals  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Crawford promulgated on 13 May 2014 in which he  allowed  the  Somalian
    Appellant's appeal against  the  refusal  of  entry  clearance  as  the
    dependant child relative of  a  refugee  on  Article  8  grounds.   The
    Respondent argues that the judge materially misdirected himself in  law
    in his approach to the Article 8 assessment as he  did  not  apply  the
    guidance in the case of Gulshan  (Article  8  -  new  rules  -  correct
    approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 and similar jurisprudence and in particular
    that  the  judge  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  as  to  why  the
    Appellant's circumstances were compelling or exceptional.  Mr  Saunders
    has renewed those grounds before me today.

 3. The Appellant, although previously represented, is unrepresented as  at
    today's hearing but her Sponsor, Mrs Nunra Abdalla Sherif-Ali  attended
    to support her case and invited me to find that there was no  error  in
    the judge's determination.

 4. This was an out of country application.  The Entry Clearance Officer in
    the terms of the decision recognises that the out of  country  Rule  at
    paragraph 319 of HC 395 are not a complete code in the context of  this
    application, and goes on to deal with  the  wider  Article  8  European
    Convention on Human Rights, and specifically the question of  the  best
    interests  of  the  children,  and  so  decides  the  application  with
    reference to both the Rules and Article 8 ECHR.   Similarly,  when  the
    case was put before the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  the  Home  Office
    representative took no issue with the need for the  judge  to  move  on
    beyond the rules position to a consideration of Article 8 ECHR.

 5. The judge makes it clear that the basis of the rules refusal  is  fully
    taken  into  account  as  the  starting  point   of   the   Article   8
    consideration.  The judge looks at the coverage of the Rules,  and  the
    reasons for the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's  refusal.  The  ground  of
    refusal which  the  judge  found  sustainable  on  the  facts  was  the
    financial requirements.

 6. The judge found that the Respondent's concerns about  the  relationship
    between the Appellant and  the  Sponsor  fell  away  in  light  of  the
    positive DNA evidence. The judge found the sponsor and her  husband  to
    be truthful and reliable witnesses, and on their evidence was satisfied
    that the Appellant had been brought up by the Sponsor from the age of 2
    and was part of the Sponsor's pre-flight family,  and  found  that  the
    minor appellant is now living  alone  and  is  vulnerable.   The  judge
    applies the findings of fact that he has made, set out at paragraph 11,
    to the rules and significantly finds that sub-paragraph 319X (ii): that
    there are serious and compelling family or other  considerations  which
    make exclusion of the child undesirable, is met.

 7. The findings were contrary to  the  findings  of  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer, but are sustainable on the  evidence  as  it  was  before  the
    judge. In the light of the finding in respect of serious and compelling
    circumstances the judge's decision to engage with  Article  8  ECHR  is
    unassailable.

 8. Mr Saunders  today  pressed  me  to  note  that  that  the  Appellant's
    relatives ie the husband of the Sponsor along with his children,  chose
    to leave the Appellant behind, and travel on their  visas  as  granted,
    and that is why the Appellant is alone and vulnerable rather than as  a
    result of the respondent's decision. I find that the  submission  takes
    the matter no further not only was it not raised in  the  grounds  upon
    which permission was granted it was  not  argued  by  the  Respondent's
    representative on the day.  The Appellant is a child,  not  responsible
    for the Sponsor's husband and children travelling to the United Kingdom
    to join the sponsoring wife and mother, but in any event as a result he
    was able to attend the Appellant's hearing and give evidence about  her
    history and current living conditions, and his evidence  was  found  to
    assist the court.

 9. The First-tier Tribunal Judge made sustainable  findings  of  fact  and
    clearly had regard to the failure to meet the financial requirements of
    the rule. The judge was entitled to conclude that  on  the  facts  that
    position was not determinative of balancing of the competing  interests
    in the Article 8 consideration.  The judge applied the jurisprudence in
    respect of Article 8, correctly self-directing in terms of the question
    of  the  interference  with  family  life  and  the  severity  of   the
    interference, as well as the best interests of the  child.  The  judged
    weighed the competing interests and whilst having regard to the  weight
    to be attached to the public interest in restricting entry to those who
    meet the strict requirements of the rules,  found  on  the  facts,  and
    including taking into account the finding that the Sponsor is a genuine
    refugee could  not  be  reasonably  expected  to  relocate,  reached  a
    conclusion which is not perverse on the evidence.  In short I find that
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge reveals no material error
    of law and it stands.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge


