
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                  Appeal Number:
OA/13710/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On 23 July 2013                          |On 23 July 2013           |
|                                         |                          |


                                   Before

                          Upper Tribunal Judge PITT

                                   Between


                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ABU DHABI

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               SHIMA KHOSRONIA
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Parkinson, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Not present


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The Appellant (the  Entry  Clearance  Officer)  appealed  against  the
determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Hubball  who  had  allowed  the
Respondent's appeal in determination promulgated on 31 January  2013.    The
Respondent had applied for entry clearance as a student visitor for a  short
course under paragraph 56K of HC 395 (the Immigration Rules).

The refusal letter dated 9 July 2012 stated that the  right  of  appeal  was
limited to race relations and human rights following section 84 (1) (b)  and
(c) of Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  This  was  so  from  9
July 2012 onwards following changes to the Immigration Rules. This limit  on
the grounds of appeal was noted when the appeal was lodged and found by  the
duty  judge  to  be  a  matter  that  should  be  considered  by  the  judge
determining the appeal. However, Judge Hubball did not  consider  the  limit
on the grounds of appeal but went on to make  findings  on  the  substantive
application, allowing the appeal.

It is  indisputable  that  Judge  Hubball  erred  in  finding  that  he  had
jurisdiction to consider an appeal on the ground that the decision  was  not
in accordance with the Immigration Rules and  allowing  the  appeal  on  the
basis that the substantive requirements of paragraph 56K were met. The  only
matters that fell to be considered were whether the  decision  discriminated
against the appellant on the grounds of race  or  whether  it  breached  her
human rights. Her grounds of  appeal  did  not  refer  to  either  of  these
matters overtly. I found it  difficult  to  infer  any  challenge  on  these
grounds, certainly one that could possibly have succeeded.

I therefore found that the First-tier  Tribunal  determination  disclosed  a
material error on a point of law such that it had to be set  aside  and  re-
made. I re-made the  appeal,  considering  only  the  grounds  contained  in
section 84 (1) (b) and (c) of Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,
namely race discrimination and  human  rights.  I  did  not  find  that  the
appellant had shown that either ground was made  out.  I  therefore  refused
the appeal.

Mr Parkinson  and  I  were  in  agreement,  however,  that  Judge  Hubball's
consideration of the substantive application was sound,  albeit  he  had  no
jurisdiction in that regard. It appeared to us  that  the  appellant  was  a
genuine student seeking limited leave and had  an  intention  to  return  to
Iran and wished only and understandably to improve her  spoken  English  and
that she could meet the costs of her course.  Those  are  matters  that  can
only relevant if she applies again, however.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal made an error on a point of law.  I set  aside  that
decision and re-make the appeal as refused.


      Signed                                  Dated: 23 July 2013


      Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

