
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/13966/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30th October 2014                       |On 6th November 2014            |
|                                           |                                |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

                            mISTRESS MAZEDA BEGUM
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Islam, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                             EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT


 1. The Appellant appeals with permission  a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, Judge Sweet, promulgated on  14th  May  2014  in  which  this
    Bangladeshi Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's refusal of  her
    application for Certificate of  Entitlement  along  with  that  of  her
    brother Mohammed Husain Miah was dismissed.  Permission  has  not  been
    granted in respect of Mr Mohammed Husain Miah and the only appeal  that
    I am considering is that of Miss Mazeda Begum.

 2. The grounds of the application upon which permission is granted  assert
    that the judge has failed to pay regard  to  the  statutory  provisions
    regarding the presumption  of  legitimacy  for  the  children  of  void
    marriages.  That was a matter that was particularly pertinent  in  this
    Appellant's  case,  for  reasons  that  I  shall   come   to   shortly.
    Permission was granted on that ground, but also on the basis  that  the
    judge failed to take account of a decision by First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Chana, promulgated on 12th February 2007,  concerning  the  Appellant's
    half-sister Mahmuda Begum, where the factual matrix  and  legal  issues
    were as they largely are in this appeal, and in which he  decided  that
    the marriage was a valid one and  that  in  the  alternative  that  the
    presumption applied.

 3. The matter came before me to decide and, there being no application  to
    admit additional evidence, the representatives proceeded on  the  basis
    of submissions only.  I indicated at the beginning of the hearing that,
    as per the grant  of  permission  it  was  apparent  from  the  judge's
    determination that the judge had not made a finding in respect  of  the
    domicile of the Appellant's father, and further, even if  it  had  been
    found that he was domiciled in the UK at the time of  this,  his  third
    marriage, there  had  been  no  consideration  of  the  impact  of  the
    statutory presumption with regard to legitimacy, as set out in  Section
    1  of  the  Legitimacy  Act  1976.   The  judge  had  stopped  at   his
    consideration that the divorce certificate, not put before  him,  would
    if valid operate to make the marriage valid.  Inter alia  in  light  of
    the failure to give consideration to the issues in the alternative  the
    judge's decision making process is vitiated by legal error to the point
    that the decision must be set aside and remade.

 4. Before deciding whether to remake the decision I took  the  opportunity
    of clarifying with Mr Kandola whether the Respondent had brought before
    the First -tier, or was even able to bring  forward  now,  evidence  to
    rebut the presumption of legitimacy at Section 1 (4) of the  Legitimacy
    Act 1976, which I set out below.  Mr Kandola indicated  that  albeit  a
    switch by the father, from his Bangladeshi domicile of origin to one of
    choice of the UK, might be inferred from his having  held  his  British
    passport since 1968, and so for some 30 years  before  the  Appellant's
    birth, the judge had not made a finding on the point, and he could  not
    say if there had been any argument on the issue. In the context of  the
    presumption of legitimacy he could take me to no evidence  of  rebuttal
    before the First tier, and he had none to adduce before me.

 5. I find therefore that even taking the Appellant's case  at  its  lowest
    i.e. assuming that her father had entered into a polygamous marriage to
    her mother, and that it remained so as at the time of  her  birth,  and
    that it was a marriage where one of  the  parties,  in  this  case  her
    father, was in fact domiciled  in  the  United  Kingdom,  so  that  the
    marriage is void in the context  of  Section  11D  of  the  Matrimonial
    Causes Act 1973,   absent evidence to rebut the  presumption  that  the
    mother believed it valid, the Appellant's case must succeed.

 6. Section 1 of the Legitimacy Act 1976 reads as follows:


    "1.  Legitimacy of children of certain void marriages

    (1)  The child of a void marriage, whenever  born,  shall,  subject  to
         subsection (2) below and Schedule 1 to this Act, be treated as  the
         legitimate child of his parents if at the time of the  insemination
         resulting in the birth or, where there was  no  such  insemination,
         the child's conception (or at the time of the  celebration  of  the
         marriage if  later)  both  or  either  of  the  parties  reasonably
         believed that the marriage was valid.

    (2)  This section only applies  where  the  father  of  the  child  was
         domiciled in England and Wales at the time of the birth or,  if  he
         died before the birth, was  so  domiciled  immediately  before  his
         death.

    (3)  It is hereby declared for the avoidance of doubt  that  subsection
         (1) above applies notwithstanding that the belief that the marriage
         was valid was due to a mistake as to law.

    (4)  In relation to a child born after the coming into force of section
         28 of the Family Law Reform Act 1987, it shall be presumed for  the
         purposes of subsection (1) above, unless  the  contrary  is  shown,
         that one of the parties to the void marriage reasonably believed at
         the time of the insemination resulting in the birth or, where there
         was no such insemination, the child's conception (or at the time of
         the celebration of the marriage if later)  that  the  marriage  was
         valid.


 7. As subparagraph (4) above reveals even taking the case at  its  lowest,
    so as to assume  the  father  had  at  the  relevant  times  a  British
    domicile, absent rebuttal evidence the issue of the mother's belief  is
    statutorily determined by the operation of  the  presumption.   I  note
    that when the matter was before Judge Chana in  respect  of  the  half-
    sister that the issue of the presumption was live,  and  that  in  that
    case,  Judge  Chana  noted  that  no  evidence  was  available  to  the
    Respondent to rebut that presumption. None was put  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal  in  this  case.  No  application  to  adduce  additional
    evidence is made to me.  I can see no reason not to remake the decision
    on the evidence.

 8.  The  only  reasonable  conclusion  available,  bearing  in  mind   the
    presumption, is that the Appellant's mother did reasonably  believe  at
    the material time that the marriage was valid. In  those  circumstances
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal should have been to  allow  the
    Appellant's appeal, and that is the way  that  I  remake  the  decision
    today.


Signed E DAVIDGE                             Date 04 November 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge

