
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/13476/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19th November 2014                         |On 19th January 2014          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                              mr Mazher Mahmood
                          (no ANONYMITY order MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Zahoor
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Petterson, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born  on  9th  June  1968.   The
    Appellant applied for entry clearance as a partner under Appendix FM of
    the Immigration Rules.  The Appellant's  application  was  refused  for
    reasons set out in a Notice  of  Refusal  dated  20th  May  2013.   The
    Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Chambers  sitting  at  Manchester  on  9th  May  2014.   In  a
    determination promulgated on 23rd May 2014 the Appellant's appeal under
    the Immigration Rules was refused.  However the Appellant's appeal  was
    allowed pursuant to Article 8  of  the  European  Convention  of  Human
    Rights.

 2. The Secretary of State lodged Grounds of Appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    on 5th June 2014.  Those grounds contended that the  Immigration  Judge
    had allowed the appeal on the basis of exceptional circumstances as the
    Appellant and his wife "cannot get the private medical assistance  they
    seek in Pakistan."  The Secretary of State noted that this referred  to
    IVF treatment.  The grounds contend the Sponsor had given oral evidence
    that she had sought treatment in Pakistan but was told  that  her  best
    prospects of success were in the UK and that there was no other medical
    or  objective  evidence  showing  that  treatment  was  unavailable  in
    Pakistan.  The grounds submitted that the Immigration Judge  had  erred
    in law coming to a conclusion that was not supported by evidence and in
    finding that the fact that the couple were  seeking  medical  treatment
    constituted exceptional circumstances.

 3. On 17th July 2014 Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Grant-Hutchison
    granted permission to appeal and that it was an arguable error  of  law
    that the judge had come to the conclusion that the fact that the couple
    were  seeking  medical  treatment  for  IVF  constituted   "exceptional
    circumstances" when the judge's conclusion was not supported by medical
    or  objective  evidence  showing  that  treatment  was  unavailable  in
    Pakistan.

 4. No Rule 24 response appears to  have  been  filed  by  the  Appellant's
    solicitors.  It is on that basis that the appeal  comes  before  me  to
    determine whether or not there is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   For  the  purpose  of
    continuity within the appeal proceedings  the  Secretary  of  State  is
    referred to herein as the Respondent and Mr Mahmood as  the  Appellant.
    The Appellant appears by  his  instructed  solicitor  Ms  Zahoor.   The
    Secretary of State appears by her Home Office  Presenting  Officer  Mrs
    Petterson.

Submission/Discussions

 5. Mrs Petterson submits that there is no issue taken by the Secretary  of
    State.  The Sponsor Naeem Kouser, who is a British national present and
    settled in the UK is the  Appellant's  spouse  and  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship.  Mrs Petterson submits that  the  issue  would
    have been dealt with far more quickly if the Appellant had  passed  the
    appropriate English language course.  She submits  that  it  is  always
    open to the Appellant to make a further application  under  the  Rules.
    She takes me to page 6  of  the  bundle  provided  in  support  of  the
    Appellant's application.  This is a letter from Dr Saleem at  New  Bank
    Health Centre, Longsight, Manchester.  The letter states

         "She tried to get IVF treatment in Pakistan but due to her age  and
         poor results she was advised in Pakistan to have IVF in UK.".

    Mrs Petterson submits that that  letter  does  not  provide  sufficient
    evidence treatment is not available.  She acknowledges that it  may  be
    difficult because of the Sponsor's age (I note she was  born  in  1968)
    but that the letter merely recites what  the  Sponsor  has  advised  Dr
    Saleem but provides no evidence to say that IVF is not available to the
    Sponsor in Pakistan.  She submits therefore that there  is  a  material
    error in law in the finding by the First-tier Tribunal Judge  that  the
    circumstances were exceptional.  She submits that it  is  open  to  the
    Appellant to make a fresh application under the Immigration Rules.  She
    asked  me  to  dismiss  the  appeal  as  there   are   no   exceptional
    circumstances.

 6. Ms Zahoor opposes the appeal.  She submits that it is well thought  out
    and balanced and that the First-tier Tribunal Judge has looked at  both
    sides of the argument and has come to a fair decision.   She  seeks  to
    admit in evidence correspondence from the Islamabad Hospital dated  8th
    November 2013 and an Article from Nadkarni's Assisted  Conception  Unit
    and Research Centre.  Mrs Petterson does not object to this  additional
    evidence.  Ms Zahoor submits that the Sponsor's evidence was  that  she
    was told by the medical providers that the Appellant would not be in  a
    position to get  the  medical  assistance  she  requires  in  Pakistan.
    Further Ms Zahoor reminds me that the  Appellant  meets  the  financial
    Rules.  She contends that there is no material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal and asked me to dismiss the appeal.



The Law

 7.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account   immaterial   consideration,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

 8. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.



Findings

 9. This case turns entirely on whether the judge was entitled to  conclude
    that this was an  appeal  that  should  be  allowed  on  the  basis  of
    exceptional circumstances.  The judge has given  due  consideration  to
    the authorities of Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach)
    [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC).  The law has of course  moved  on  substantially
    since then.  However the starting point has to be whether  or  not  the
    judge was entitled to conclude that the  inability  to  obtain  IVF  in
    Pakistan constituted exceptional circumstances.   It  is  important  to
    note that this is not just a question of disagreement by the  Secretary
    of State.  If that were the issue providing the  determination  is  not
    perverse and is properly set out  and  reasoned  then  just  because  a
    different Immigration Judge may have come  to  a  different  conclusion
    does not mean that there is a material error of law.  However  in  this
    instance it is not evidenced that it was not  possible  to  obtain  IVF
    treatment in Pakistan.  All that is available,  even  allowing  in  the
    additional letter, is a letter from the medical  officer  of  Islamabad
    Hospital stating that his hospital could not treat the Sponsor  and  in
    addition there is a letter from the Sponsor's GP  which  does  no  more
    than recite  what  the  Sponsor  told  him.   There  is  absolutely  no
    objective evidence before the Tribunal to state that the Sponsor cannot
    obtain IVF treatment in Pakistan.  In such  circumstances  there  is  a
    material error of law and the First-tier Tribunal Judge  erred  in  the
    lack  of  such  evidence  in  finding  that  there   were   exceptional
    circumstances by which the appeal should be allowed under Article 8.

10. The authorities now  show  that  it  is  inappropriate  to  consider  a
    threshold test as opposed to making it clear that there is  a  need  to
    look at the evidence to see if there was anything which had not already
    been adequately considered in the  context  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    which could lead to a successful Article 8  claim.   And  there  is  no
    utility in imposing a further intermediate test as a preliminary  to  a
    consideration of an Article 8 claim beyond the relevant criterion-based
    Rule.

11. In all the  circumstances  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    contained a material error of law and I set aside the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal and remake the decision allowing the  Secretary  of
    State's appeal.

12. I am advised the basis upon which the Appellant was unable  to  satisfy
    the Immigration Rules has now been met.  It  has  been  urged  upon  me
    throughout these proceedings by the representative of the Secretary  of
    State that the appeal should be allowed and that the  correct  approach
    thereafter is for the Appellant to submit a further  application  under
    the Immigration Rules.  I agree with that course of action.  It  is  of
    course for the Secretary of State to thereafter determine  whether  she
    is now satisfied that the Appellant meets the Immigration Rules.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of  law
and is set aside and the decision is  remade  allowing  the  appeal  of  the
Secretary of State.

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to  Rule  13  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)
Rules 2014.  No application is made to vary that order and none is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
