
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/13927/2013
     OA/13929/2013
     OA/13931/2013
     OA/13934/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 4th June 2014                                |On 11th July 2014          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT

                                   Between

                                                  ZJ                  First
                                  Appellant

                                                               W
                              Second Appellant

                                                              B
                               Third Appellant

                                                               R
                              Fourth Appellant

                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms S Mardner of Counsel instructed by Kothala & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Vidvadharan, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. The First-tier Tribunal made an  anonymity  order  in  respect  of  all
    appellants which I continue before the Upper Tribunal pursuant to  Rule
    14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

 2. Before the Upper Tribunal the Secretary of State becomes the appellant.
     However, for the sake of consistency and the avoidance of confusion, I
    shall continue to refer to the parties as they were before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 3. On 11th April 2014  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Ransley  gave
    permission to the appellants to appeal  against  the  determination  of
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Samimi who allowed the appeals against
    the decisions of the respondent to refuse entry clearance as  an  adult
    dependent relative in respect of the first appellant in accordance with
    the provisions of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules and  in  respect
    of  the  second,  third  and  fourth  appellants  as  her  children  in
    accordance with the provisions of paragraph 297 of the Rules.

 4. Judge Ransley granted permission because  it  was  considered  arguable
    that the judge failed to give adequate reasons for finding the  sponsor
    credible and accepting all his oral evidence in relation to  the  claim
    that the sponsor was the only family member who could provide  help  to
    the first appellant when there were other family  members  in  Pakistan
    providing care.  It was also considered that other findings relating to
    the sponsor's financial position were tainted by conclusions about  the
    latter issue.  Judge Ransley also noted that  the  respondent's  second
    ground of application alleged an error of law because of a  failure  to
    give reasons for accepting that the fourth named appellant died on  2nd
    February 2013.

 5. At the hearing before me Ms Vidvadharan confirmed that  the  respondent
    relied upon the grounds.  In addition, in relation to financial issues,
    she drew attention to paragraph 7 of the determination where the  judge
    evidently considered financial information covering a period after  the
    date of decision on 5th June 2013.

 6. Ms Mardner stated that the appellant agreed the errors of law  set  out
    in the grounds including  the  additional  matter  referred  to  by  Ms
    Vidvadharan in relation to financial issues.  She  also  expressed  the
    view that, as fresh findings of fact would  have  to  be  made  on  all
    issues, it would be appropriate for the matter to be fully re-heard  in
    the First-tier Tribunal at  Hatton  Cross.   Ms  Vidvadharan  expressed
    agreement with that proposal and also pointed out that  the  respondent
    had accepted (paragraph 5 of  the  grounds  of  application)  that  the
    fourth appellant (R), had sadly died although she argued  that  it  was
    still wrong for the judge  to  have  accepted  that  state  of  affairs
    without having any supporting evidence.

 7. After considering the matter for a few moments I announced that  I  was
    satisfied that the determination showed errors on points  of  law  such
    that it should be re-made. My own reasons for that conclusion follow.

 8. Paragraph E-ECDR.2.4 of Appendix FM requires that an applicant  in  the
    first appellant's category  must,  as  a  result  of  age,  illness  or
    disability require long-term personal care to perform  everyday  tasks.
    Further and alternatively, paragraph E-ECDR.2.5 requires  an  applicant
    to show they are unable, even with practical and  financial  help  from
    the sponsor, to obtain a required level of care in  the  country  where
    they are living because such care is not available or there is  no  one
    in that country who can reasonably provide it or it is not  affordable.
    Neither  of  these  requirements  has  been  fully  considered  in  the
    determination even though there is reference to ECDR.2.5 in the refusal
    notice for the first appellant.  At paragraph 8  of  the  determination
    the judge gives no reasons for  accepting  the  sponsor's  evidence  as
    credible nor is there consideration of any other support which might be
    available in Pakistan to the first appellant.  Further, in paragraph  7
    of the determination, the  judge  considers  evidence  about  financial
    matters which postdates the decision but gives no reasons for doing so.
    Nor is there any consideration of the type of information  which  ought
    to have been provided to comply with the provisions of  Appendix  FM-SE
    of the Immigration Rules.

 9. All of the above defects amount to material errors on  points  of  law.
    The appeal will have to  be  heard  on  all  issues  again  with  fresh
    findings of fact and so it is appropriate for remittal  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal  having  regard  to  paragraph  7.2  (b)  of  the  Senior
    President's Practice Statement of 25 September 2012.



DIRECTIONS



 1. The appeals are to be heard again on all issues although taking account
    of the respondent's acceptance that the fourth appellant has died.

 2. Representatives should indicate to the First  Tier  Tribunal  forthwith
    whether or not any application  will  be  made  having  regard  to  the
    provisions of Rule  17(2A)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
    (Procedure) Rules for the appeal  on  behalf  of  the  deceased  fourth
    appellant to be continued by a personal  representative.  The  Tribunal
    will otherwise treat that appeal as withdrawn.

 3. The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross where
    it is to be heard on 7th November 2014.  The appeal should not be heard
    before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Samimi.

 4. No interpreter will be required.  The time estimate is 2 hours.

 5. The appellants' representatives should provide a consolidated bundle of
    all documents to be produced at the re-hearing.  Such bundle should  be
    filed with the Tribunal and served on the respondent at least five days
    before the date of hearing.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt

