
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/13335/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 January 2016                   |On 10 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                         The Entry Clearance Officer
                                  Istanbul
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 BILGE ERTAS
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss E Daykin, Counsel, instructed by Stuart Karatas
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  appeals  with  permission  against  the
    decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  under  the  Immigration
    Rules the claimant's  appeal  against  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's
    decision to refuse her entry clearance to join her spouse in the United
    Kingdom.

 2. The basis of the refusal was that the Entry Clearance Officer  did  not
    accept that the marriage  was  genuine  and  subsisting,  or  that  the
    evidence of Class 2 National Insurance contributions had been  provided
    with the application.  All other specified documents were provided.

First-tier Tribunal decision

 3. The First-tier Tribunal decision records that by the beginning  of  the
    hearing the genuine and subsisting nature of the  relationship  between
    the parties was no longer in issue and that the  evidence  showed  that
    the  Class  2  national  insurance  contributions,   the   only   other
    outstanding matter in the refusal notice, had in fact been  paid.   The
    only dispute was whether those documents had been made available at the
    time of the application.

 4. At paragraph 8 of his decision the First-tier Tribunal Judge said this:

         "8.  I had sight of the original  Class  2  NIC  documents  at  the
             hearing, copies of the appellant's spouse's  registration  for
             self-assessed tax and NI contributions are contained at  pages
             56-58 of the appellant's bundle and copies of his Class 2 NICs
             are contained at pages 11-16 covering  the  period  6  October
             2112-28 March 2015.   In  other  words  the  evidence  of  the
             payment of Class 2 NICs covers the relevant  period,  that  of
             the ECO's decision.

         9.   As this was the only  issue  identified  the  by  the  ECO  in
             his/her decision that was left to me  to  decide  I  found  in
             favour of the appellant at the hearing."

Permission to appeal

 5. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that there was  only  one
    issue before the First-tier Tribunal Judge, the absence of evidence  of
    National  Insurance  contributions  having  been  submitted  with   the
    application and that therefore, it  was  not  open  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to allow the appeal.

Discussion

 6. Paragraph 85A of subsection 85(5) of the 2002 Act as it  stood  at  the
    date of decision reads as follows:

         "The Tribunal may consider only the circumstances  appertaining  at
         the time of the decision to refuse."

 7. The question of payment of the Class 2 National Insurance contributions
    is a circumstance appertaining at the time of the  decision  to  refuse
    and the Tribunal was therefore entitled to have regard to it.

 8. My primary finding is that there is no error of law in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision  but  even  if  there  were  I  find  that  it  was
    immaterial since the evidence  showed  plainly  that  at  the  date  of
    decision, the appellant met the requirement of the Rules.

 9.  Accordingly  I  uphold  the  First-tier  decision  and   dismiss   the
    respondent's appeal.

Conclusions

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a  point  of  law.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal shall stand.


Signed:  Judith A J C Gleeson   Date: 3 February 2016
     Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

