
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/13013/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 25th February 2016                  |On 29th March 2016                  |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER

                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - beijing
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                Mrs Cuiyun Su
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Jafar, Counsel instructed by The Chancery
                    Partnership, London


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Mrs Cuiyun Su is a citizen of the People's Republic of China.  Her date
    of birth is recorded as 10th October 1940.  Sometime in July  2014  she
    made application for entry clearance to the United Kingdom on the basis
    that as a result of her age, illness or disability she  required  long-
    term personal care to perform  everyday  tasks,  having  regard  to  E-
    ECDR.2.4.

 2. On 18th September 2014 a decision was made to refuse  that  application
    and Mrs Su appealed.  Her appeal was heard on 26th August 2015 by Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal  Nicholls  sitting  at  Taylor  House.   The
    issues before the judge narrowed so that  the  only  consideration  was
    whether, having regard to rule E-ECDR.2.5. of  the  Immigration  Rules,
    the Respondent was unable to obtain the required level of care in China
    because it was not available.  The issue  of  whether  or  not  it  was
    affordable was conceded in the First-tier Tribunal.  In fact the  Rule,
    read as a whole, requires the Appellant to show  that  she  is  unable,
    even with the practical and financial help of the  Sponsor,  to  obtain
    the required level of care in the country (China) either  because  that
    care is not available or because it is not affordable.  As I said,  the
    issues somewhat narrowed.

 3. Judge Nicholls clearly found the Sponsor, the Respondent's daughter, to
    be very impressive in the evidence that was given and indeed says so in
    terms at paragraph 17.  He had regard to the medical evidence  such  as
    it was but also to the evidence given by the Sponsor and  came  to  the
    view that there was a long-term need for Mrs Su to have emotional  care
    which could not be provided in China but could only be provided by  her
    daughter, the Sponsor, in the United Kingdom.

 4. Not content with that finding, by Notice dated 17th September 2015  the
    Entry Clearance Officer made application for permission  to  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal.  The grounds focused entirely on the interpretation
    by the judge of Rule E-ECDR.2.5. and it was submitted that:

         "The fact that the [Respondent] and Sponsor may  not  want  her  to
         access that care cannot lead to a finding that it is not available.
          The First-tier Tribunal Judge itself [sic] records  the  Sponsor's
         evidence at paragraph 17 that residential  care  is  available  and
         accessible to the [Respondent].

         It is submitted that a choice not to go into a care  home  that  is
         evidently available does not equate to a finding that personal care
         is not available in China.  The fact that  an  Appellant  does  not
         wish to be cared for by strangers cannot lead  to  a  finding  that
         care is unavailable.  The Respondent submits that a person  in  the
         United  Kingdom  requiring  hospital  or  residential   care   will
         inevitably be cared for by strangers."

 5. On 7th January 2016  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Hollingworth
    granted permission thus the matter comes before me.

 6. Mr Clarke for the Secretary of State made a valiant  attempt  to  widen
    the grounds to include the contention that  the  finding  made  by  the
    judge was not open to him given the requirements, that is  to  say  the
    evidential requirements, of Appendix FM-SE at paragraphs 33 to 35.   Mr
    Clarke, however, both fairly and properly accepted that it  really  was
    not appropriate, or open to him, on the morning of the hearing, to seek
    to widen the grounds and so the issue for me to resolve in this  appeal
    is whether it was open to the judge to make the finding made within the
    context of paragraph E-ECDR.2.5.

 7. I return to the grounds in which it is submitted that a choice  not  to
    go into a care home that is evidently available does not  equate  to  a
    finding that personal care is not available in China.   The  judge  did
    not find, in my judgment, that the fact that  the  Respondent  did  not
    want to be cared for by strangers  led  to  a  finding  that  care  was
    unavailable. There was rather more to it than that.  It was the  nature
    of the care which the judge found was not  available.   It  is  not  in
    issue that Mrs Su has a number of medical issues but those  were  dealt
    with in the medical evidence which is referred to in the decision.  She
    has diabetes, hypertension, arthritis and  heart  disease  as  well  as
    difficulty with day-to-day tasks.

 8. Evidence was led that Mrs Su was very unhappy  about  the  prospect  of
    being cared for by somebody she did not know  or  trust.   That  formed
    part of the concerns of the Respondent, and  indeed  the  Sponsor,  but
    what informed the decision which the judge made was that the Respondent
    was lonely and isolated albeit that in using the  term  "depressed"  or
    "depression" it was not being used in the clinical sense but  rather  a
    lay sense.

 9. At paragraph 18 the Sponsor is  recorded  as  having  argued  that  her
    mother's requirements including tackling her feelings of depression and
    isolation were such that no amount of care  coming  into  the  home  or
    residential care would be met and that she, that is to say the Sponsor,
    was the only person who could provide for  the  Respondent's  needs  of
    intimate and personal care.

10. I have to ask myself whether the finding was one that was open  to  the
    judge and whether the finding  was  perverse,  irrational  or  made  in
    circumstances in which there was no  sufficient  evidence  (bearing  in
    mind that the requirements of FM-SE do not fall to be considered in the
    context of the appeal before me).

11. I come to the view that whilst it may have been a generous decision, it
    was one that was open to the judge.  The judge made plain at  paragraph
    19 that there was nobody in China, in his view, who could  provide  the
    filial care for the Respondent  which  the  Sponsor  can  provide.   Mr
    Clarke submitted that filial care was not sufficient within the context
    of the Rule under consideration but of course the Decision and  Reasons
    have to be read as a whole, as one piece, and when one does  that,  one
    sees that it is the mental state reasonably inferred from the  physical
    conditions taken together with the specific  evidence  of  the  Sponsor
    that entitled the judge, in my view, to come to the conclusion that  he
    did.

12. In those circumstances the appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is  dismissed
    and for the avoidance of doubt the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    is affirmed.

13. The grounds  of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  do  not  suggest  that
    consideration should have  been  given  to  the  wider  application  of
    Article 8.  There is no cross-appeal.  In those circumstances I do  not
    deal with that possibility.

Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed. The Decision  of  the  First-
tier Tribunal is affirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker

