

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/13921/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 18 July 2014                               |On 24th July 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey

                                   Between

                ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ISLAMABAD, PAKISTAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                ABIDA PARVEEN
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

Appellant:        Ms Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
Respondent:   Mrs U Sood (of Counsel), instructed by Matrix Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal has its origins  in  a  decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer (the "ECO") for Islamabad, Pakistan dated 29 May  2013  whereby
    the Respondent's application for admission to the United Kingdom in the
    capacity of family member of a EEA National exercising  Treaty  Rights,
    under the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006,  was
    refused.  The Respondent's ensuing appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (the  "FtT")  was  allowed.   The  Secretary  of  State  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. It is appropriate to  highlight  the  terms  in  which  the  underlying
    application was refused by the ECO:

         "The definition of 'spouse'  in  the  [EEA  Regulations]  does  not
         include a party to a marriage of convenience .....


         I  am  not  satisfied  that  this  matter  is  not  a  marriage  of
         convenience.  This is due to your own account of your  relationship
         ....


         I am not satisfied  that  there  is  a  continuing  and  meaningful
         relationship with your sponsor in marriage. I am satisfied that you
         do not intend to live with your sponsor as a marriage person.  I am
         also satisfied that you are party to a marriage of convenience  and
         are  therefore  not  the  family  member  of  an  EEA  National  in
         accordance with Regulation 7 of the [EEA Regulations]."

    The refusal decision specified  a  further  reason  for  rejecting  the
    application, namely the absence of any evidence that the  EEA  national
    family member concerned, the sponsor,  was  exercising  Treaty  rights,
    with the result that he was not a qualified person under Regulation  6.
    This second reason was reversed on internal review  and,  further,  was
    overturned by the FtT, in [23] of its determination.

 3. The central issue which developed before the FtT was  that  of  whether
    the sponsor had capacity to marry the Respondent.  The FtT's  treatment
    of this issue, its consideration of the evidence  bearing  thereon  and
    its findings in respect thereof feature in the grant of  permission  to
    appeal to this Tribunal.  No other issue is identified.   Specifically,
    the grant of permission to appeal concerns the FtT's preference for the
    assessment  and  opinion  contained  in  the  "FACE   Mental   Capacity
    Assessment" report rather than the competing  opinion  expressed  in  a
    second  report,  that  of  Dr  Morgan,  a  Highly  Specialist  Clinical
    Psychologist of Derbyshire Health Care NHS Trust.   In  brief  compass,
    the question for this Tribunal is whether  the  FtT  erred  in  law  in
    according greater weight to the former report and, in doing so, whether
    it gave sufficient reasons for its preference.

 4. At the conclusion of the hearing, I delivered an  ex  tempore  judgment
    dismissing the appeal for the following reasons, in summary:

    (a)  Subject to the legal requirements of rationality and  adequacy  of
         reasoning, the exercise of according weight  to  evidence  and,  in
         particular, determining to accept one expert opinion in  preference
         to another lay exclusively within the domain of the  FtT.   Whether
         this Tribunal would have done likewise is legally irrelevant.

    (b)  It is of some significance that both reports  were  compiled  some
         time after the marriage and, therefore, in considering the issue of
         the sponsor's capacity to marry both were backwards looking.

     c) It is also of some significance that whereas the order of the  High
        Court  (Family  Division)  dated  05  February  2014  required  the
        specified Respondents to take all reasonable steps to  prevent  the
        sponsor "from undergoing or participating in any  further  marriage
        ceremony ....", the application in question was adjourned generally
        and, in the event, stood dismissed (per paragraph 3 of  the  order)
        following the compilation of the FACE report.


     d) The determination of the FtT satisfies the standard of adequate and
        intelligible reasoning. In [27], the  Judge  determined  to  accord
        "considerable weight" to the FACE report.  The reasons for this are
        abundantly clear from [26] and [28].  The  Judge  clearly  accepted
        the assessment that the previous capacity evaluation of the sponsor
        was unreliable, for the reasons specified: non-compliance with  the
        Mental Capacity Act 2005 Guidance, the absence of  an  interpreter,
        the sponsor's linguistic ability and level of comprehension and the
        sponsor's claim that he did not fully understand the questions  put
        to him and could not hear them properly, given his hearing  defect.
        In [28], the Judge found the sponsor to be a credible  witness  and
        made a series of further findings of significance relating  to  the
        relationship under scrutiny.  I consider that no complaint  can  be
        levelled against the Judge's  treatment  of  the  competing  expert
        opinions and the adequacy of the reasons provided.

    This disposes of the first and third grounds of appeal.  As regards the
    second ground, there is no merit whatsoever in the complaint  that  the
    Judge erred in considering whether the marriage was one of convenience,
    given that this formed the centrepiece of the ECO's  refusal  and  was,
    following the internal review, the only surviving reason.


DECISION

 5. For the reasons elaborated above, the appeal is dismissed.



                                                                       [pic]


                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                        Dated:  19 July 2014



