

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/13526/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16.9.2014                                  |On 25.09.2014                |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT
                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL GA BLACK

                                   Between

                        MISS ALHANA BEGUM SAHABUDEEN
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - CHENNAI

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Martin (Counsel instructed by S Satha & Co)
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1.   This matter comes before us for consideration as to whether  or  not
      there is a material error of law in the determination  promulgated  by
      the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Ghani) on 2nd April 2014 in  which  the
      Tribunal dismissed the appeal against a refusal dated 15th May 2013 by
      an Entry Clearance Officer of an application  as  an  adult  dependent
      relative under Appendix FM of the Immigration rules.


   2.   The appellant is a citizen  of  India  and  her  date  of  birth  is
      29.5.1991.


   Background


   3.   The respondent   was  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  met  the
      requirements of the    rules because she did not meet the criteria for
      long term care as a result of age, illness, or disability.


   4.   The respondent was not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  established
      family life under   Article 8 given that  she  studied  in  India  and
      spent only vacations with her family in the UK.


   5.   There was no dispute that the  appellant  was  unable  to  meet  the
      Immigration  Rules  [13].  The  Tribunal  considered  Article  8  with
      reference to Gulshan (Article 8 - new  rules/correct  approach)  [2013
      UKUT 00640,  Nagre (2013) EWCA  720  (Admin)  and  Sabir  [2014]  UKUT
      00063IAC [14]. It found no  compelling  or  exceptional  circumstances
      rendering the decision unjustifiably harsh requiring it to  go  on  to
      consider a second stage Article 8 assessment.


   Grounds of appeal


   6.   The grounds maintain that the Tribunal erred by failing to  continue
      to a second  stage Article 8 assessment.  The Tribunal ought  to  have
      considered the evidence of family life between adults.   Reliance  was
      placed on SSHD v  HK  Turkey  [2010]  EWCA  Civ  583  and  RP  and  RP
      (Zimbabwe) [2008] EWCA Civ 825.


   7.   The grounds also maintained that the Tribunal  made  errors  in  the
      determination as to date of commencement of the appellant's course  of
      studies which was 2008 rather  than  2012  and  that  the  failure  to
      consider the correct dates was material.

   Permission to appeal


   8.   Permission was granted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  King  following  a
      renewed application. It was stated to be arguable that   adult  family
      life ought to have been considered more carefully but that evidence of
      compelling and compassionate circumstances would be  expected  if  the
      point was to be material.


     The hearing

   9.   Mr Martin relied on the grounds of appeal. The appellant established
      family life; as a student she had never led an existence independently
      of her parents.   Appendix FM was too restrictive. The Tribunal  ought
      to have conducted a full  second  stage  Article  8  assessment.   The
      appellant would have been granted indefinite leave to remain  in  line
      with the rest of the family in 2012 had she remained in the UK  rather
      than returning to India to resume her  studies  after  the  respondent
      declined to accept the premium services applications  initially  made.
      The  proportionality  assessment  could  have  been  decided  in   the
      appellant's favour given the particular factors in her case.


  10. Mr Avery relied on the Rule 24 response that  the  Tribunal  correctly
      considered the Gulshan approach and gave reasons why there was no need
      for a second stage Article 8 assessment. The error in the date  as  to
      when the appellant decided to return to India to  study  medicine  was
      not material and the fact that the decision  was  taken  in  2008,  in
      fact, weakened the argument as she had  been  living  apart  from  her
      immediate family for even longer. It was her  decision  to  remain  in
      India to pursue her studies.  There were no exceptional circumstances.

  11. Mr Martin emphasised that the issue was  the  fact  of  the  appellant
      being a student and dependent on her family that was important in  the
      assessment of family life not the location of her studies.

  12. At the end of the hearing we reserved our decision which we  now  give
      with our reasons.

 Discussion and decision

  13. The Tribunal's starting point was to consider  the  appeal  under  the
      Immigration Rules, which were not met [13]. The Tribunal then followed
      the approach in Gulshan. However, this has to  be  looked  at  now  in
      light of MM, AM & SJ [2014] EWCA Civ 985 in particular paras  128-132,
      in which it was decided that the Gulshan "arguably good grounds"  test
      was not appropriate. The Tribunal here should have gone on  to  assess
      whether there was a  family  life  for  the  purposes  of  Article  8,
      notwithstanding the definition of family life for the purposes of  the
      Immigration Rules and, if there was, proceed to the remainder  of  the
      Razgar questions.


  14. It was not our view that the failure to assess family  life  could  be
      found to be material, however, as the evidence before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal could not show  that  it  existed.  The  appellant  has  been
      studying to be a doctor in India, living apart from her family and  on
      her own since 2008.  The fact that her parents  were  paying  for  her
      studies and that she came to  the  UK  during  a  great  deal  of  her
      vacation time was not sufficient, given her age and the length of time
      she has lived apart from her family, to show a  relationship  of  such
      dependency or emotional ties over and above the  norm  for  it  to  be
      arguable that she had a family life for the purpose of Article 8.


  15. Even if family life as between adults were established on the  grounds
      that the appellant was a dependent student, we are satisfied that  the
      appellant  was  not  able  to  establish   that   the   decision   was
      disproportionate. The failure to  meet  the  Immigration  Rules  is  a
      starting and significant factor weighing against  her;  Haleemudeen  v
      SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 558 applied. The appellant took the  decision  to
      remain in India to continue her studies  in  2008  and  to  return  to
      continue those studies in 2012 rather than  remaining  in  the  UK  to
      reapply for indefinite leave to remain with her family.  She  has  not
      lived for any length of time in the UK with her  family;  only  visits
      during the holidays were made.

Decision
    17.  The determination discloses no material  error  of  law  and  shall
stand.




 Signed                                 Date 24.9.2014


 GA Black
 Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal







NO ANONYMITY ORDER
NO FEE AWARD



Signed                                  Date 24.9.2014

GA Black
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


