
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/13100/2014
                                                               OA/13101/2014
                                                               OA/13102/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Belfast                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 8 November 2016                         |On 15 December 2016              |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL
Between

                                Amrita Niure
                                   [A N1]
                                   [A N2]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Miss B Hassan, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants appeal with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Ian Howard, promulgated on 29 June 2015, dismissing
    their appeals against the  decisions  of  the  respondent  made  on  25
    September 2014 to refuse to grant them entry clearance as the dependent
    relatives (wife and children) of a person with leave to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom as a Tier 2 (General) migrant

 2. The appellants maintain that they  meet  all  the  requirements  to  be
    granted leave to enter as Tier 2 (General) Migrant dependent  relative.
    The respondent refused the applications on the basis that  he  was  not
    satisfied  that  the  appellants  were  respectively  the  husband  and
    daughter of Ram Prasad Niure ("the sponsor") given  that  the  marriage
    certificate was issued more than ten years after the marriage date  (18
    April 2003) and the birth certificates for the children were some  five
    and three years after their birth.

 3.  The  respondent  noted  that  certificates  of  marriage,  birth   and
    relationships could be easily and unofficially obtained in Nepal,  that
    the appellants had not provided any family photographs  to  corroborate
    the relationship and no explanation has been provided as to  why  there
    had been no entry clearance application although the sponsor  had  been
    working in the United Kingdom since 2010.  It was noted also that there
    was no evidence of communication or interaction between  the  appellant
    and the sponsor.  The application was  therefore  refused  pursuant  to
    paragraph 319H(b)(i), 319H(d) and 319H(e) of the Immigration Rules.

 4. The appellants appealed against that decision but did  not  request  an
    oral hearing.  On 12 February 2015 the First-tier Tribunal notified the
    parties that it was aware that they wished the appeal to be dealt  with
    on the papers and that any further  written  evidence  and  submissions
    were to be submitted to the Tribunal and the  respondent  by  10  April
    2015.

 5. The  appellants  provided  a  bundle  of  documents  including  witness
    statements from the principal appellant and sponsor; documentation from
    Tara Village Development Committee and other  supporting  documents  as
    well as family photographs.

 6. In his decision the judge found:-

      i) that it was not possible to be satisfied that  the  photographs  of
         the sponsor and appellants on the applications  were  the  same  as
         those appeared in the family photographs;

     ii) that although a number of additional documents had been  submitted,
         including those purporting to be from the Office of  Model  Village
         Development and the local registrar, "the  same  criticism  can  be
         levelled at these documents as they are  not  contemporaneous  with
         the events of which they speak";

    iii) that he was not satisfied that he could  accept  the  "relationship
         certificate", created on 22 April 2014 as its purpose  was  unclear
         [13] and that he must accept about the prevalence of the  forgeries
         in Nepal, he could not  be  satisfied  that  he  could  accept  the
         document at face value.

 7. The appellants sought permission to appeal  which  was  granted  on  15
    December 2015 by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Chambers  who  stated  as
    follows:-

         "2.  The grounds seeking submit that  a  witness  statement  and  a
             number of documents were submitted but  not  considered.   The
             grounds challenge the finding that the documents  were  forged
             and put forward reasons why they are genuine.

         3.   The judge  refers  (paragraph  10)  to  a  bundle  of  further
             material submitted by the appellants which leafing through it,
             includes photographs and documents some of which purported  to
             come from official quarters.  It does not appear from  a  fair
             reading of the decision that the judge  engaged  with  the  19
             items of evidence or a written statement dealing with it.

         4.   The failure to give reasons constituted an error of law."

The Hearing on 8 November 2016

 8. Miss Hassan accepted  that  the  grounds,  drafted  by  the  appellants
    without the proper legal assistance, needed to be refined and that  she
    would be focusing on two errors:-

      i) the failure on the part of the judge to engage with the documentary
         evidence in particular the witness statements; and

     ii) placing undue weight on the assertion in the  refusal  letter  that
         fraudulent documents were easily available in Nepal, this not being
         supported by objective evidence.

 9. Miss Hassan accepted that some of the documents included in the  bundle
    had not been served on the respondent either  before  the  decision  or
    subsequently.  She accepted also that the appellants  had  requested  a
    paper hearing, instructing solicitors only after permission  to  appeal
    had been granted.  She noted that they had  not  fully  understood  the
    implications of not requesting an  oral  hearing  but  nonetheless  the
    judge had erred in failing properly to take into account  the  evidence
    before him.  Miss Hassan submitted that the judge had erred in  stating
    [13] "what I must accept about the prevalence of forgeries  in  Nepal".
    This, Miss Hassan submitted, was indicative  of  an  improper  approach
    given that the respondent  had  adduced  no  evidence  to  support  the
    assertion of forgeries being widespread.

10. Mr Whitwell relied on the Rule 24 response submitting  that  the  judge
    had properly taken into account the documents and had been entitled  to
    reach the conclusions he did, the submission in ground 1 being  just  a
    disagreement.  Mr Whitwell submitted that there had in this  case  been
    no allegation of forgery and that it had been  open  to  the  judge  to
    decide what weight to attach to the material put before him.

11. As Miss Hassan accepted, I do  not  consider  that  the  judge  can  be
    faulted for failing to attach weight to photographs given that  it  was
    not possible, given the poor quality of the photocopy black  and  white
    photographs of the appellants attached to  the  application  forms,  to
    compare them properly with the photographs produced.

12. That said, the judge does not appear to have engaged with  the  witness
    statement from the principal appellant which [14]  refers  to  identity
    cards in respect of the two minor appellants (the children of the first
    appellant  and  sponsor),  notarised  copies  of  which  are  attached.
    Importantly, these documents name both parents and appear to have  been
    issued on 1 April 2014 thus predating the date of decision  by  several
    months.  Whilst the issue of contemporaneity with respect to  documents
    around date of birth may be relevant, the same cannot be said about the
    issue of identity cards.  Further, as Miss Hassan rightly pointed  out,
    there was no  evidence  other  than  a  bare  assertion  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer that documents  of  the  class  impugned  are  easily
    available.  Further, and in any event, had such evidence been  produced
    it would have been for the judge to evaluate;  there  is  no  basis  on
    which he could properly have concluded that he "must accept"  what  was
    asserted by the respondent as he fails to explain properly why  he  was
    compelled so to do.

13. Whilst I accept that some of the material  was  not  available  to  the
    Entry Clearance Officer, and does not appear to have been served on the
    respondent, nonetheless those were not reasons given by the  judge  for
    failing to engage with the material which was relevant.

14. In the circumstances therefore I am satisfied that the judge did err in
    his assessment of the evidence in  failing  properly  to  consider  the
    material before him and also erred in his assessment  of  the  evidence
    that documents can easily be obtained in Nepal without evidence to that
    effect adduced by the respondent.  I consider  that  these  errors  are
    material in that this led him to the conclusion that the appellants and
    sponsor were not related as claimed.

15. In the circumstances and given that  the  judge  understandably  having
    reached  that  conclusion  did  not  go  on  to  consider  whether  the
    relationship was subsisting and  the  other  matters  with  respect  to
    paragraph 319H, I consider that the matter should be  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a full fact-finding exercise  on  all  relevant
    issues.  It is of course evident that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  would
    greatly be assisted by DNA tests carried out by a  properly  accredited
    testing body obtained as a matter of  urgency  and  before  the  matter
    comes back to the First-tier Tribunal.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS


 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law, and I set it aside.

 2. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for it to  be  remade  on
    all issues. For the avoidance of doubt, none of the findings  of  Judge
    Howard are preserved


Signed                                  Date:  13 December 2016
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
