
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/13484/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28th July 2016                      |On 15th August 2016                  |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                         Mr nadir galaleldin mahmoud
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - RIYADH
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hart of Terence Ray Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwncyz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Lucas made
    following a hearing at Taylor House on 8th October 2015.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sudan born  on  14th  January  1959.   He
    applied to come to the UK as the partner of a refugee  under  paragraph
    EC-P.1.1 of Appendix FM but was refused by the Entry Clearance  Officer
    Riyadh on 29th September 2014 on the grounds that he was not  satisfied
    that the  appellant's  relationship  with  his  wife  was  genuine  and
    subsisting or that they intended to live permanently  together  in  the
    UK.

 3. The  judge  dismissed  the  appeal.   He  said  that  the  sponsor  had
    successfully applied for asylum as a refugee  here  and  a  fundamental
    part of that claim rested on the basis that  she  had  to  leave  Saudi
    Arabia because her marriage to the appellant had faltered  due  to  his
    attitude towards her religious conversion.  The  judge  said  that  the
    couple could not reasonably or credibly be said to be in  a  subsisting
    marriage in one application and then to be separated  in  another.   He
    concluded that the marriage was not subsisting.

 4. He then wrote as follows:

         "There is evidence of some remittances  from  the  sponsor  to  the
         appellant and his family in the UK and, there appears to have  been
         four visits.  However the facts do not show a subsisting  marriage.
         They are equally to be explained by his wish - inherent or  implied
         - to see and support his two children and he appears to  have  been
         doing that from where he is  currently  based.   They  do  not,  in
         themselves, show that there is a genuine and subsisting marriage to
         the sponsor.  She is after all in the UK  partly  or  mainly  as  a
         result of his rejection of her in Saudi Arabia."

 5. So far as Article 8 was concerne, the appellant had  no  status  to  be
    within the UK and he could maintain his family life with his two  minor
    children through visits and through other means of communication.

The Grounds of Application

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had misapplied the burden of proof by, in effect, stating that  it  was
    not possible  for  there  to  be  a  genuine  and  subsisting  marriage
    following the sponsor's declaration in her asylum  interview  that  the
    marriage had broken down.  Moreover it was clear from the determination
    that he had reached that conclusion before  dealing  with  any  of  the
    evidence which might support  the  contention  that  the  marriage  was
    genuine and subsisting.

 7. Second the judge had failed to mention the minor children  or  to  have
    regard for their best interests.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Osborne on 9th May 2016.

 9.  On  20th  May  2016  the  respondent  served  a  reply  defending  the
    determination and submitting that any failure to make any reference  to
    Section 55 and the best interests of the children was immaterial.

Submissions

10. Mr Hart relied on his grounds.  He submitted that the Immigration Judge
    was wrong to characterise the sponsor's  asylum  application  as  being
    based upon separation from her husband.  He drew my  attention  to  the
    Entry Clearance Manager's review which said that there was no  evidence
    at that stage from the sponsor to  corroborate  the  appellant's  claim
    that the couple had reconciled. When that evidence had been supplied to
    the Immigration Judge it was disregarded.

11. Mr Diwncyz acknowledged the weaknesses in this determination.

Consideration of Whether There is a Material Error of Law

12. The judge erred in law in failing to  take  into  account  all  of  the
    evidence when making his decision.  Clearly the fact that the  sponsor,
    when she claimed asylum, said that the marriage had broken down, was  a
    very important factor.  However it was  not  determinative.  The  judge
    also had before him a 78 page bundle  of  documents  including  witness
    statements from the sponsor and her children, evidence of his visits to
    the UK, proof of correspondence  and  telephone  calls  and  copies  of
    receipts used by the appellant to send goods to  the  sponsor  and  the
    children, to which he barely referred.  The judge appeared to  consider
    that the sponsor's evidence in 2013 was  conclusive  of  the  state  of
    affairs in 2016 without taking  account  of  the  substantial  body  of
    evidence that which could  potentially  show  that  the  situation  had
    changed.

Findings and Conclusions

13. The sponsor did not have adequate English to give oral evidence but her
    two children are fluent  and  were  cross-examined  by  Mr  Diwncyz  in
    relation to their father's visits to  the  UK.   Both  gave  consistent
    evidence that he had visited them four times since their  last  arrival
    here in 2012 and that they were in very frequent contact.

14. Mr Diwncyz made no submissions on the credibility of that evidence,  or
    that the appeal should be dismissed.

15. There was clear evidence in 2013 that the marriage had broken down.  In
    her statement for her asylum claim the sponsor gave evidence  that  she
    had changed her religion from Islam to Bahai and  that  her  conversion
    caused real problems between her and her husband.  She said that he had
    told her that she had committed apostasy and she was no longer his wife
    and he assaulted her.

16. However since that time there is strong evidence that the situation has
    changed.  In the sponsor's unchallenged witness statement she said that
    her husband has visited her on four occasions, staying with  her  in  a
    matrimonial relationship, and she wants to be reunited with  him.   She
    reiterated that they had never divorced althought they had disagreed on
    certain issues.  Her sons  both  gave  consistent  evidence  about  his
    visits and their wish to have their father living with them.They  state
    that the appellant had always remained responsible for the whole family
    and continues to provide material and moral support from Saudi Arabia.

17. Whilst it is entirely understandable that entry clearance was  refused,
    I am satisfied that the present evidence sheds a different  light  upon
    the circumstances which appertained as at the date of that decision and
    that the couple were and are in a subsisting relationship and intend to
    live together.

Notice of Decision

18. The original judge erred in law.  His decision is  set  aside.   It  is
    remade as follows.  The appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed                              Date 12 August 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
