
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/13793/2014
                                                               OA/13791/2014
                                                               OA/13792/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 18 August 2015                    |On 10 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

                         HOUDA ALFARROH   First Appellant
                      EBRAHEEM AL FARROUH    Second Appellant
                         DOHA AL FARROH   Third Appellant
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Moran of Alex Moran Immigration and Asylum
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1     The Appellants appeal against the  decision  of  First  tier  Tribunal
    Judge Heynes dated 22 April 2015 dismissing their appeals  against  the
    separate decisions of the Respondent, each made on  19.10.14,  refusing
    them entry clearance to the UK.

2     The Appellants are nationals of Syria. They  are  originally  from  Al
    Harra in the Daraa region of southern  Syria,  but  moved  to  Damascus
    because of the civil war. The First Appellant is married to Walad Salah
    Al Farrouh ('the Sponsor'), a Syrian national with discretionary  leave
    to remain in the UK valid from 8 December 2011 to 7 December 2014.  The
    Second Appellant is their minor son, aged 14 at date of  decision,  and
    the Third Appellant is  their  adult  daughter,  aged  22  at  date  of
    decision.

3     Applications for entry clearance were  made  in  August  2014  by  the
    three Appellants notwithstanding that it was accepted that it was known
    that, as the Sponsor was not settled in the  UK,  that  the  First  and
    Second Appellants could not succeed under Appendix  FM,  and  that  the
    Third Appellant could not be treated as  a  dependent  of  the  Sponsor
    under the Rules, being an adult. However, the application was  made  on
    the  basis  that  refusal  of  entry  clearance  would  amount   to   a
    disproportionate and therefore unlawful interference  with  the  family
    life enjoyed between  the  family  members.  The  Sponsor  made,  on  4
    December 2014, an application for further discretionary leave, and on 9
    March 2015, varied that application (which had not yet been decided) to
    an application for indefinite leave to remain.

4     The Respondent refused the applications on the grounds that the  rules
    were not met and that in the view of  the  Respondent,  there  were  no
    sufficiently compelling considerations for a grant of  leave  to  enter
    outside the Rules.

5     On appeal to the Fist tier Tribunal, the Judge held:

    (a)    there had been a  considerable  number  of  visits  between  the
         Appellants and the Sponsor,  notwithstanding  the  difficulties  in
         arranging them, and held that such visits  still  taking  place  so
         long after the sponsor came to the UK  was  an  indication  of  the
         strength of family  ties   [17]  (the  evidence  having  been  that
         between 2004 and 2011 the First Appellant had visited  the  Sponsor
         in the UK 11 times, the  Second  Appellant  twice,  and  the  Third
         Appellant once, and that the had Sponsor had visited the Appellants
         in Lebanon on three occasions since 2011 when  they  had  travelled
         there to meet him);

    (b)    at [20], that  weight  needed  to  be  given  to  the  following
         factors, as set out by  the  Appellant's  representatives,  and  as
         summarised by the Judge at [15]:

         (i)      the civil war in Syria;

         (ii)     only the immigration status of the sponsor  stood  in  the
             way of a successful application for entry  clearance  for  the
             First and Second Appellants (the Respondent having accepted in
             the refusal letter of the First Appellant that there  were  no
             issues with suitability, financial  requirements,  or  English
             language requirements for the First Appellant);

         (iii)    ... (the Judge did not  accept  that  it  was  necessarily
             established that the Sponsor could not return to Syria because
             of his claimed problems with the security services there);

         (iv)     the Appellants have no right of residence elsewhere and it
             was becoming more difficult for them to meet in Lebanon;

         (v)      the Third Appellant could not be left in  Syria  alone  in
             the current situation;

         (vi)     it was not in the best interests of the Third Appellant to
             remain in Syria;

         (vii)    the Sponsor was in a financially sound  position  to  care
             for the family;

    (c)     that  the  question  for  him  to  determine  was  whether  the
         circumstances of the family were such that awaiting the outcome  of
         an application that the Sponsor  had  made  for  ILR/requiring  the
         Appellants to remake their applications if and when the sponsor  is
         granted ILR, would be disproportionate [19], [21],  [24]  (which  I
         find to be the same question);

    (d)    the Respondent has a duty to  enforce  immigration  control;  to
         that end, it was legitimate to require that  applications  are  not
         made until the relevant requirements are fulfilled [25];

    (e)    Damascus was under the control of Government  forces;  the  fact
         that the Third Appellant was,  at  the  time  of  her  application,
         studying pharmacy, was suggestive  of  some  degree  of  normality,
         notwithstanding the strife in other parts of the country; there was
         no evidence that the situation in Syria  had  put  an  end  to  her
         study; the Appellants had chosen to remain in Damascus [26];

    (f)    it was not disproportionate to require the  applications  to  be
         made if an when the sponsor is granted ILR  [27].  The  appeal  was
         dismissed.

6     The Appellants sought permission to appeal on  the  grounds  that  the
    Judge had erred in law (in summary):

    (i)    in misdirecting himself  in  law  in  identifying  the  relevant
         question for determination  as being whether the  circumstances  of
         the family were such that awaiting the outcome  of  an  application
         that the Sponsor had  made  for  ILR/requiring  the  Appellants  to
         remake their applications if and when the sponsor is  granted  ILR,
         would be disproportionate ([21], [24], [27]); rather, the  relevant
         question  was:  "do  the  decision  under   appeal   constitute   a
         disproportionate  interference  with  the  family   life   of   the
         Appellants and their sponsor?";

    (ii)   in finding that there was  some  degree  of  normality  for  the
         Appellants in Damascus, had made a finding which was not  supported
         by the evidence presented, which was undisputed,  and  the  finding
         was  therefore  irrational;  alternatively,  if  the  evidence  was
         disputed, no reasons had been  given  for  the  rejection  of  such
         evidence;

    (iii)  failing in practice (notwithstanding his indirect  reference  to
         them at [20]), to attach weight to the factors set out  at  [15(i)-
         (ii) and (iv)-(vii)], in particular, to the best interests  of  the
         Second Appellant, a minor child; whether the Third Appellant  could
         safely remain in Syria as a young single woman; and the  fact  that
         the Sponsor's income was said to be considerably in excess  of  the
         maintenance requirements, such that the Appellants' presence in the
         UK would not adversely affect the economic well-being of the UK;

    (iv)   failing to make adequate findings as to why in the present  case
         the maintenance of immigration control outweighed  the  Appellants'
         right to family life.

7     Permission to appeal was granted on these  grounds  by  Judge  of  the
    First tier Tribunal Page on 16 July 2015.

8     In a rule 24 Response dated 29 July 2015 the Respondent  defended  the
    Judge's decision on the basis that the  decision  that  the  Appellants
    should await the outcome of the Sponsor's application for ILR  was  one
    which was open to him.

9     Before the hearing commenced before  me  on  the  day  of  hearing,  I
    received a message that Mr Avery for the Respondent was without a  Home
    Office file.  I arranged for him to be  provided  with  a  spare  'core
    bundle' from the Upper Tribunal file; such bundle contains the  Judge's
    decision, grounds of appeal, grant of permission, rule 24 notice, and a
    copy of the Respondent's bundle.

10    Upon the hearing commencing in the morning list,  Mr  Avery  confirmed
    that he was in a position to proceed with the error of law hearing.

11    Upon my enquiring to Mr. Moran whether there had been any decision  on
    the Sponsor's application for indefinite leave to remain, he  confirmed
    that this had been granted in June 2015, although a residence card  had
    not as yet been issued. That is a development which I cannot take  into
    account either for the purposes of considering  whether  there  was  an
    error law in the Judge's decision, or in remaking the decision, if that
    were  necessary;  in  an  entry  clearance  appeal,  the  Tribunal   is
    constrained to consider  circumstances  appertaining  at  the  date  of
    decision, even for Article 8 purposes; s.85A NIAA 2002 and AS (Somalia)
    v ECO [2009] UKHL 32.

12    Mr Moran,  for  the  Appellant  adopted  his  grounds  of  appeal.  In
    relation in particular to the second ground  (irrational  finding  that
    the Third Appellant's  studying  of  pharmacy  indicated  a  degree  of
    normality in Damascus, he referred to page 83 of the Appellants' bundle
    where the Third Appellant mentions the studies that she was engaged  in
    at that time (application dated 7 August 2014) but  argued  that  there
    had been no questions put to the Sponsor, who gave evidence before  the
    Judge, about that issue or how the Third Appellant  carried  out  those
    studies.

13    He referred to evidence that had  been  before  the  Judge  about  the
    situation in and around Damascus, including a report of  4  April  2015
    that ISIS had take over 90% of a  refugee  camp  in  the  outskirts  of
    Damascus, a few kilometres away from President al-Assad's seat of power
    [436-437]. I queried whether this was evidence which  was  relevant  to
    the Judge's decision, post dating the date of decision by some  months.
    However,  Mr Moran  referred  to  country  information  at  [381]-[394]
    around the time of the decision which showed  that  fighting  was  tale
    place on the 'doorstep' of Damascus, and the UNHCR  report  of  October
    2014 referred to fighting taking place in rural Damascus.

14    Mr Avery argued  that  the  Judge  had  taken  into  account  all  the
    relevant considerations set out at [15]  of  his  decision  which  were
    required to be taken into account, and  had  arrived  at  a  conclusion
    about the 'normality'  of  the  situation  in  Damascus  based  on  the
    evidence that was before him, including the  evidence  that  the  Third
    Appellant had continued to study. The Judge had asked himself the right
    question, and his reference to waiting until the Sponsor  had  obtained
    ILR was merely a response to  the  way  in  which  the  case  had  been
    presented to him.

15    Mr Moran addressed me briefly by way of reply.

      Discussion

16    I find that there are material errors of law in the Judge's  decision.



17    The grounds of appeal raise issues  which  interlink.  In  considering
    the Appellants' grounds (i) and (iv) together, I agree that  the  Judge
    asked himself the wrong question. The approach of the Judge, by  asking
    whether:

    (i)    the circumstances of the family  were  such  that  awaiting  the
         outcome of an application that the Sponsor had made for ILR; and/or



    (ii)   requiring the Appellants to remake  their  applications  if  and
         when the sponsor is granted ILR,

    would be disproportionate, the Judge gives  the  impression  of  simply
    delaying a full and adequate assessment of the proportionality  of  the
    decisions refusing them entry clearance.

18    Further, I must respectfully disagree with the Judge when he  suggests
    at [25] that "The Respondent has a duty to enforce immigration control.
    To that end, it is legitimate to require that applications are not made
    until  the  relevant  requirements  are  fulfilled".   The  Appellants'
    grounds of appeal raise no objection to those words  per  se  (Grounds,
    paragraph 25) but query whether the Judge has given adequate reason why
    in the present case the  public  interest  outweighed  the  Appellants'
    right to family life.

19     However,  I  find  that  the  Judge's  words  at  [25]  represent   a
    misdirection in law. The Judge may  be  entitled  to  say  that  it  is
    legitimate to normally 'expect' that applications are  not  made  until
    the relevant requirements are fulfilled, but not that it is  legitimate
    to 'require' such a delay. The use of language at paras [21], and  [24]
    in terms of the question that the Judge  poses  for  himself,  and  the
    expression at [25], appearing to require an application to  be  delayed
    until the relevant requirements of the rules are fulfilled,  gives  the
    impression that the Judge is refusing the  appeal  against  refusal  of
    entry clearance principally on the basis that it is made outside of the
    rules, and that he requires an application to be made at  a  time  when
    the application will come within the rules.

20    That rather mises the point of the whole application, which  was  made
    outside the rules, and the application  consciously  requested  a  full
    consideration of the proportionality of the continued exclusion of  the
    Appellants from  the  UK  at  the  present  time,  notwithstanding  the
    acknowledged fact that the Sponsor was not settled in  the  UK  at  the
    time of application.

21    I find that ground (iii), ie that the Judge errs in law in failing  to
    have adequate regard to, or attach relevant weight to  the  issues  set
    out at para 5(b)(i)-(ii) and (iv)-(vii) above, is made out. Although Mr
    Avery for the Respondent has sought to persuade me that  by  indicating
    at the beginning of [20] that he accepted that weight needs to be given
    to all of those matters, the Judge had indeed given them weight, but it
    is not apparent in the passages that follow thereafter that he has done
    so. The only specific issue that he refers to thereafter is that  there
    was a degree of normality in Damascus.

22    I find that the Judge errs in law in failing to have regard  to  those
    relevant considerations. This compounds the error I have identified  in
    [18-20] above, that the Judge gives the impression  of  dismissing  the
    appeal largely on the basis that he requires the Appellants to wait  to
    make their application until the Sponsor has ILR.

23    Ground (ii) stands more  on  its  own;  being  a  challenge  that  the
    Judge's finding of a degree of normality in  Damascus,  notwithstanding
    the strife in 'other parts of the country', is perverse. I  agree  with
    the ground, on the basis of its alternative formulation; not  that  the
    decision is perverse, but that if the Judge has had regard to  relevant
    country information about the situation in and around Damascus, he  has
    not given reasons which are adequate in law for dismissing it.

24    Noting Mr Moran's submissions on this point  (see  [12-13]  above),  I
    also note that the skeleton argument before the  First  tier,  dated  8
    April 2015,  specifically  referred  at  [7]  to  a  request  that  the
    Appellants had made on 17 December 2014 for the First tier  hearing  to
    be expedited, and also refers to the evidence  at  [377]-[394]  of  the
    Appellant's bundle. This includes, on inspection, a  witness  statement
    of the Sponsor dated 17 December  2014  [379]-[380],  and  accompanying
    country evidence from:

    (i)    August 2014 [389], referring to  fighting  intensifying  in  the
         suburbs east of Damascus, daily air strikes in the suburbs  outside
         Damascus, and a daily barrage of rebel rockets  and  mortar  shells
         being fired at  the  capital,  Damascus,  since  the  beginning  of
         August, killing 45 people injuring 150, almost all civilians;

    (ii)   September 2015 [387], describing rebels  being  'closer  to  the
         doorstep of Damascus';

    (iii)  October 2014 [385] regarding heavy  fighting  in  the  al-Ghouta
         region 'near Damascus'; and

    (iv)   November 2014 [383] and [393] which describes heavy fighting  in
         a Damascus suburb, Jobar, being the scene of some of  the  heaviest
         fighting the rebels holding the area have seen in the past year.

25    Further, at [39] of  the  Appellants'  skeleton  argument  before  the
    Judge, the Appellants refer to further elements of county  information,
    eg [145]-[153], which includes:

    (i)    a Human Rights Watch report dated January 2014  referring  to  a
         chemical   weapons   attack   by   government   on   the   Damascus
         countryside/'areas near Damascus' in August 2013 which resulted  in
         the deaths of hundreds of civilians;

    (ii)   a BBC news report dated 17 June 2014  describing  rebels  having
         held in 2012 sections of Ghouta, the belt of suburbs and  satellite
         towns on the perimeter of Damascus; although the rebels  had  since
         been driven back in some areas; they retain control of the area  of
         Qaboun, a suburb of Damascus, 20  minutes  from  central  Damascus,
         where fighting continues, and where  shelling  has  damaged  almost
         every building.

26    Although Mr Moran has not drawn my  attention  to  objective  evidence
    supporting the Sponsor's witness evidence that the Appellants'  current
    accommodation in Dahadil neighbourhood was only around 1 km  away  from
    the front line with the opposition, and that neighbourhoods around them
    - Yarmouk, Qadam, Nahr Aisha, Darayya, and Al Hajar Al Aswad,  are  all
    the scenes of fierce urban battles  (Sponsor's  statement  of  7  April
    2014, at [18] of the Appellants' bundle), the evidence  that  Mr  Moran
    has brought to my attention tends to support the  Sponsor's  assertions
    about the situation in Damascus, and the Judge described at  [10]  that
    there was little or no dispute as to fact.

27    In the light of such  evidence  about  the  situation  in  and  around
    Damascus, something more, evidentially, would be  required  to  support
    the apparent finding that the situation in Damascus was suggestive of a
    degree of normality, aside from  the  fact  that  the  Third  Appellant
    described that she had continued to study. By contrasting the situation
    in Damascus with strife in 'other parts of the country' the Judge draws
    a distinction which I find not to be real; the  parts  of  the  country
    where this strife is ongoing is, at best, a 20 minute journey from  the
    centre of Damascus, and rocket and mortar  attacks  on  the  centre  of
    Damascus were taking place around the time of the decision.  The  Judge
    erred in failing to have adequate regard  to  that  relevant  evidence,
    which  was  specifically  referred  to  in  the  Appellant's   skeleton
    argument.

28    On that basis, I find that the decision of  the  First  tier  Tribunal
    involved the making of material errors of law, and I set it aside.

29    I announced that conclusion at the hearing, and I invited the  parties
    to address me as to how  the  matter  should  then  proceed.  Mr  Moran
    pressed me to re-hear evidence from the Sponsor,  to  hear  submissions
    and to re-make the decision.

30    For his part, Mr Avery asserted that without his file  of  papers,  he
    was not in a position to proceed to  a  re-hearing  of  the  appeal.  I
    pointed out that he had had an opportunity to peruse the 'core  bundle'
    in the morning, and had been in a position to proceed with the error of
    law hearing. Further, Mr Moran also offered for Mr Avery to have access
    to his copy of the Appellant's bundle over  the  luncheon  adjournment.
    There was no reason known as to why Mr Avery had not been provided with
    his file. I indicated to the parties that I considered  it  appropriate
    to proceed to re-hear the appeal after the luncheon adjournment.

31    When the matter was called on again  in  the  afternoon,  I  indicated
    that the findings at [17] of the Judge's decision  would  be  retained,
    not being vitiated by any error of law. Mr Moran called  oral  evidence
    from the Sponsor. He was asked  (given  that  the  issue  had  been  of
    concern  to  the  First  tier  Judge)  about  the   Third   Appellant's
    circumstances and how she was able to continue studying in Damascus.

32    The Sponsor adopted his witness statement of 7 April 2014 (which  also
    reiterated the  contents  of  his  earlier  statements).  He  explained
    through the interpreter that  at  the  time  of  the  application,  his
    daughter was studying, but not continuously; she was studying at  home,
    and going in for tests. She was unable to  study  continuously  because
    there was no security - it was  not  peaceful;  there  were  a  lot  of
    barriers on the way (by which I understood roadblocks). His family  had
    moved from the home area of Al Harra two years beforehand when Al Harra
    was bombarded. This was 65 km away from Damascus. His daughter had  not
    been able to attend university in Damascus regularly  since  the  early
    months of 2014.

33    In cross examination, the Sponsor confirmed that his daughter's  place
    of  study  in  Damascus  was  about  10  km  away  from  their  current
    accommodation.  The  institution  where  she  studied  was  called  the
    European  University.  It  was  correct  that  she  only  attended  for
    examinations. Some, 5-6, of her colleagues/friends attend  and  collect
    materials for her and come  and  provide  these  to  her.  He  answered
    questions about his asylum claim in 2004; this was refused in 2005.  He
    did not re-apply, but he  kept  signing/reporting.  He  confirmed  that
    before the Appellants' applications in 2014, he had been  meeting  them
    in Lebanon. They had not tried to leave Syria before  then  because  he
    was trying to make the application. The family  had  left  Al-Harra  in
    2013, not 2012.  At that time, Damascus was a  little  bit  safer  than
    other parts of Syria. Later on it began  to  deteriorate.  Places  like
    Darra fell to terrorists - a lot of places around Damascus.  There  had
    been no fighting in the neighbourhood where  they  lived,  but  it  was
    surrounded by a lot of fighting. He  confirmed  his  witness  statement
    evidence that there was fighting 1 km away.

34    There was no witness evidence from the Appellants directly because  he
    was taking actions on their behalf  according  to  what  he  knows.  He
    confirmed that the Security Service had been  to  the  house  twice  in
    2015, the first time asking about whether his wife held  the  deeds  to
    the property, and the second time they took some money.

35    In re-examination, the Sponsor confirmed that his normal contact  with
    his family was by phone. He explained that some  university  colleagues
    attended college more than his daughter did - her female colleagues are
    targeted on the journey to university - it is the male  colleagues  who
    attend. He  had  not  arranged  for  any  witness  statement  from  the
    Appellants because his representative had not suggested it.

36    In submissions Mr Avery relied on the refusal  letter  and  the  Entry
    Clearance manager's review of that decision. There was very  little  by
    way of direct evidence from the Appellants. The Sponsor was vague about
    why the Appellants had not tried to leave Syria before now. There was a
    degree of exaggeration about the situation in Damascus. The information
    indicated that the situation varied considerably from place to place. I
    needed to look carefully at the situation in Damascus.

37    On the Appellants' application for entry  clearance  under  Article  8
    ECHR, it was to be noted that the Appellants did not meet the  relevant
    rules. The rules indicated Parliament's view as  to  where  the  public
    interest lies. The issue was not simply one about whether  the  sponsor
    could afford to maintain the Appellants. It was necessary  to  maintain
    public order and a fair effective immigration control. At the  time  of
    the application, the sponsor had limited leave to remain and his status
    was precarious. The Respondent's obligation to protect Article 8 rights
    in an entry clearance case was not  as  strong  as  its  obligation  to
    protect such rights in a removal case. This was the first real  attempt
    to reunite the  family  since  2002,  and  this  was  relevant  in  the
    proportionality balancing exercise.

38    Mr Moran relied on his skeleton argument before the First tier  (pages
    [1]-[12]), paragraph 4 in particular (this representing the  series  of
    relevant factors set out at [15] of the Judge's  decision).  He  denied
    any exaggeration by the Sponsor as  to  the  situation  in  and  around
    Damascus; he could have falsely asserted that bullets had  been  coming
    through the Appellants' windows, but he did not.  He  referred  to  the
    evidence previously referred to in his error of  law  submissions.  The
    reasons why no application for entry clearance  had  been  made  at  an
    earlier time were that the Sponsor either did not have leave to  remain
    at all, or his  financial  position  was  not  sufficiently  strong  to
    support the Appellants in the UK until recently.  Regarding  the  Third
    Appellant' position, although she was over 18 , she was  unmarried  and
    had always lived with her mother; the situation for an unmarried  young
    woman in Syria now would be very dangerous.

39    I reserved my decision on  the  remaking  of  the  decision  in  these
    appeals.

    Relevant law

40    The Appellants do not  come  within  the  Immigration  Rules  and  the
    decisions refusing them entry clearance are impugned on the basis  that
    they represent disproportionate interference with their right to family
    life under Article 8 ECHR.

41    A five-stage  approach  should  be  taken  when  assessing  Article  8
    claims, as set out in R v SSHD (ex p Razgar) [2004] UKHL 27:

    1.     Will the proposed  [action]  be  an  interference  by  a  public
         authority with the exercise of the applicant's right to respect for
         his private or (as the case may be) family life?

    2.     If so, will such interference have consequences of such  gravity
         as potentially to engage the operation of article 8?

    3.     If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

    4.     If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic society in
         the interests of national security, public safety or  the  economic
         well-being of the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime,
         for the protection of health or morals, or for  the  protection  of
         the rights and freedoms of others?

    5.     If so, is such  interference  proportionate  to  the  legitimate
         public end sought to be achieved?

42    Referring to the authorities  set  out  at  paragraphs  20-24  of  the
    Appellant's skeleton argument (and which I find the Respondent has  had
    notice of):  It has been  recognised  that  family  life  may  continue
    between parent  and  child  even  after  the  child  has  attained  his
    majority:  see  Etti-Adegbola  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the   Home
    Department [2009] EWCA Civ 1319, per Pill LJ at [23]; per Arden  LJ  at
    [35].

43    In RP (Zimbabwe) & Anor v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    [2008] EWCA Civ 825, a finding that a 23-year-old who had lived  pretty
    well continuously with her parents and siblings all her  life  did  not
    have family life with them "would have been quite unreal".

44    The ECtHR in AA v United Kingdom - 8000/08 [2011] ECHR 1345 refers  at
    para 48 to paragraph 49 of the judgement in  Bousarra  v.  France,  no.
    25672/07: [2010] ECHR 1999:   a significant factor will be  whether  or
    not the adult child has founded a family of his own: "An examination of
    the Court's case-law would tend to suggest that the applicant, a  young
    adult of 24 years old, who resides with his  mother  and  has  not  yet
    founded a family of his own can be regarded as having family life."

45    It was established in Beoku-Betts v  SSHD  [2008]  UKHL  39  that  the
    effect on the entire family should be  assessed  when  considering  the
    proportionality of an action that interferes  with  family  life  under
    Article 8, not merely the effect on the applicant.

46    It was stated in Huang v SSHD [2007] UKHL 11  (at  para  18)  that  in
    assessing whether Article 8 is  engaged,  "Matters  such  as  the  age,
    health and vulnerability of the applicant, the closeness  and  previous
    history of the family, the applicant's dependence on the financial  and
    emotional support of the family, the prevailing cultural tradition  and
    conditions in the country of origin and many other factors may  all  be
    relevant."

47    Relevant to the two issues (i) the degree to which a failure  to  meet
    the  immigration  rules  is  relevant  to   the   assessment   of   the
    proportionately of an immigration decision, and  (ii)  the  appropriate
    starting point in that assessment) is the case of  SS  (Congo)  v  SSHD
    [2015] EWCA Civ 387 (23 April 2015). I understand the following  points
    to have been made within the Court's single judgment:

    (i)    If there was a wide gap between the  way  in  which  immigration
         rules were framed, and the protection that was rightfully  afforded
         under Article 8 ECHR, then the practical guidance from the rules as
         to public policy  considerations  in  a  proportionality  balancing
         exercised was reduced [17].

    (ii)   On the other hand, if the rules were fashioned so as  to  strike
         an appropriate balance under Article 8, and  any  gap  between  the
         rules and what Article 8 required was narrow, the court  will  give
         weight to the Secretary of State's formulation of the Rules  as  an
         assessment of what public interest required [17].

    (iii)  Following MM v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 985, there will generally be
         no or only a relatively small gap between  the  new  LTE  Rules  as
         promulgated by the Secretary  of  State  and  the  requirements  of
         Article 8 in individual cases, including those  involving  Sponsors
         who are British citizens or refugees located in the United  Kingdom
         [24]. Further, outside of the context of precarious family life  or
         deportation: '...if the Secretary of State has sought to  formulate
         Immigration Rules to reflect a  fair  balance  of  interests  under
         Article 8 in the general run of cases falling within  their  scope,
         then,  as  explained  above,  the  Rules  themselves  will  provide
         significant   evidence   about   the   relevant   public   interest
         considerations which should be brought into account when a court or
         tribunal seeks to strike the  proper  balance  of  interests  under
         Article 8 in making its own decision.' [32].

    (iv)   Where the immigration rules were not satisfied, different  types
         of cases required the presence of different factors to outweigh the
         public interest in the maintenance of immigration control:

         *  precarious in-country cases not involving children:  exceptional
             factors [29];

         *  deportation: very compelling reasons [30];

         *  refusal of leave to remain or leave to enter  cases:  compelling
             circumstances [33], [40].

    (v)    The state has a wider margin of appreciation in determining  the
         conditions to be satisfied before LTE is granted, by contrast  with
         the position in relation to decisions  regarding  LTR  for  persons
         with a (non-precarious) family  life  already  established  in  the
         United Kingdom.  The Secretary of State  has  already,  in  effect,
         made some use of this wider margin  of  appreciation  by  excluding
         section EX.1 as a basis for grant of LTE, although it is  available
         as a basis for grant of LTR.  [40].

    (vi)    'The  LTE  Rules  therefore  maintain,  in  general  terms,   a
         reasonable relationship with the requirements of Article 8  in  the
         ordinary run of cases' [40].

    (vii)  'However,  it  remains  possible  to  imagine  cases  where  the
         individual interests at stake are of a particularly pressing nature
         so that a good claim for LTE can be established outside the  Rules.
         In our view, the appropriate general formulation for this  category
         is that such cases will arise where an applicant for LTE  can  show
         that compelling circumstances exist  (which  are  not  sufficiently
         recognised under the new Rules) to require the grant of such leave'
         [40].

    (viii) The approach to Article 8 in the light of the Rules in  Appendix
         FM-SE should be the same as in respect of the substantive  LTE  and
         LTR Rules in  Appendix  FM.   In  other  words,  the  same  general
         position applies, that compelling circumstances would have to apply
         to justify a grant of LTE or LTR where the evidence Rules  are  not
         complied with [51].

48    Also, s.117A NIAA 2002 now provides that in  determining  "the  public
    interest question", ie the question of whether an interference  with  a
    person's right to respect for private  and  family  life  is  justified
    under Article 8(2), Tribunals  and  Courts  must  have  regard  to  the
    following considerations (in a non-deport case) set out in s.117B:

         "(1)     The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in
         the public interest.

         (2)      It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

             (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)      It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
         financially independent, because such persons-

             (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)      Little weight should be given to-

             (a) a private life, or

             (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)       Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a   private   life
         established by a person at a time  when  the  person's  immigration
         status is precarious.

         (6)      In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
         the public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom."

49    It is not necessary  to  set  out  those  provisions  in  terms  in  a
    decision, so long as it is apparent that the  relevant  test  has  been
    applied  (Dube (ss.117A-117D) [2015] UKUT 90 (IAC)).







    Discussion - remaking

50    Considering the five steps in Razgar, I find on  the  evidence  before
    me that there is a family life as between  the  three  Appellants,  and
    between the three Appellants and the Sponsor. Given  the  efforts  that
    the family have gone to visit one another in  difficult  circumstances,
    this is a finding which is proper to make. I also find that  the  Third
    Appellant retains a family life with the other Appellants, and with the
    Sponsor, notwithstanding her age, given that the family remains in very
    regular telephone contact with each other,  the  Sponsor  continues  to
    financially support the family, and the Third  Appellant  is  unmarried
    and continues to  live  with  her  family  members,  and  applying  the
    relevant authorities as set out at [42]-[45] above.

51    I find that the decision interferes  with  the  Appellants'  right  to
    family life, as it has become very  difficult  for  them  to  meet  the
    Sponsor in another country. Insofar  as  the  Respondent  asserts  that
    family life may reasonably be expected to take place by  the  Sponsor's
    return to live in  Syria,  I  find  that  this  is  not  a  sustainable
    argument. Even though, for the purposes of  my  consideration  of  this
    appeal, the Sponsor possessed only limited leave to remain, he expected
    to be able to apply for further leave, and an application for ILR would
    have  faced  no  obvious  impediment,  (to  borrow  from  the   Judge's
    expression [23]). Given the situation in  Syria  as  a  whole,  in  the
    family's original home town of Al-Harra, and the situation in Damascus,
    as set out in the objective evidence set out at [24]-[25] above, I find
    that the Sponsor cannot reasonably be required to give up his residence
    and successful self employment in the United Kingdom, in order to  live
    in circumstances in Damascus  which  at  best  could  be  described  as
    perilous.

52    Assuming that the decisions were in accordance with the law, and  were
    necessary  in  a  democratic  society  (with  a  view  to   maintaining
    immigration  control);  I  consider  the   'public  interest  question'
    (s.117A(3) NIAA 2002) ie the question of whether the  interference with
    the Appellants' right  to  respect  for  private  and  family  life  is
    justified under Article 8(2).

53    I find that the maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in
    the public interest, and I give due weight to it (s.117B(1) NIAA 2002).



54    Further, although s.117B(2)  NIAA  provides  that  it  is  the  public
    interest that persons seeking to enter or remain in the United  Kingdom
    are able to speak English, the Respondent has held that the  Appellants
    are exempt from the requirement to speak  English,  presumably  on  the
    basis that there is no test centre in Syria to undertake  the  relevant
    English language test. In any even one of the two  stated  reasons  why
    speaking English is said to be important; because a person  who  speaks
    English is less of a burden on tax payers, is of less relevance because
    I find, considering s.117B(3), that the  family  would  be  financially
    independent; the Respondent accepts that the Appellants  would  satisfy
    the financial eligibility criteria in Appendix FM.

55    I take into account the provisions of s.117B(4) and (5). I  find  that
    although the Sponsor has been present in the UK unlawfully for a period
    of time, and later, with only limited leave to remain, weight is to  be
    attached to his family life, which was not formed at a time when he had
    such status in the UK, but rather, long before; the couple  have  seven
    children. I find that s.117B(6) has no application.

56    I consider the guidance in SS (Congo) v SSHD,  and  I  find  that  the
    outcome of the appeal is arrived at  by  considering  the  propositions
    contained within that judgment.

57    I find that there will be unusual cases where the  family  life  of  a
    person with only limited leave to remain in  the  UK,  and  his  family
    members outside the UK, falls to be considered and respected. The rules
    do  not  make  any  accommodation  for  a  person  in  the  Sponsor  or
    Appellants' position. I find that there is a gap between what the rules
    provide, and the  protection  that  should  rightfully  afforded  under
    Article 8 ECHR. Thus, the practical  guidance  from  the  rules  as  to
    public policy considerations in a proportionality  balancing  exercised
    is reduced (SS (Congo) [17]).  That gap may be narrow, however, because
    the Secretary of State's formulation of the Rules as an  assessment  of
    what public interest required it is likely to be intentional.

56    The present appeal is not amongst the 'ordinary run  of  cases'  [40].
    The Court of Appeal accepted that it remained possible to imagine cases
    where the individual interests at stake are of a particularly  pressing
    nature so that a good claim for LTE  can  be  established  outside  the
    Rules. Where the  immigration  rules  were  not  satisfied,  compelling
    circumstances need to be demonstrated to warrant entry clearance  [40],
    [51].

59    I find that the circumstances of the Appellants are compelling.  Their
    ability to enjoy family life with the Sponsor has been impeded by civil
    war. Neither they nor their Sponsor can live in  their  original  home;
    that area was subject to a bombardment in the earlier stages of the war
    and is said to be held by terrorists. I  have  found  that  it  is  not
    reasonable for the Sponsor to be expected to return to Syria to attempt
    to live with the Appellants in Damascus. Although the  Third  Appellant
    has managed to continue her studies, the further oral evidence  of  the
    Sponsor, which I accept, having no good grounds to disbelieve  him,  is
    that his daughter's studies have been impeded by the war. I accept that
    safety of women in Syria is compromised and that there  are  legitimate
    concerns for the Third Appellant's safety in travelling around Damascus
    to study, or attempting to live alone in that city.

60    The family are no longer able to reunite in any third  country.  Their
    bonds are strong, but they are currently  unable  to  see  each  other.
    Although s.55 Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009  does  not
    apply to children outside the United Kingdom, I take the welfare of the
    Second Appellant into account in my decision as being one of  a  number
    of relevant considerations, and  find  that  it  is  not  in  the  best
    interests of the  Second  Appellant  to  remain  in  the  situation  he
    currently faces, which is one of continued separation from  is  father,
    and being in a position of some danger in a neighbourhood  of  Damascus
    where fighting is said to take place nearby.

61    Overall, I find that the continued refusal of entry clearance for  the
    Appellants  amounts  to  a  disproportionate  and  therefore   unlawful
    interference with their right to family life. Run  of  the  mill,  this
    case is not.

    Decision

62    (i)   The making of the decision of the First tier  Tribunal  involved
         the making of a material error of law.

    (ii)   I set aside the decision of the first Tier Tribunal.

    (iii)  I remake the decision, allowing the appeals of the Appellants.

63    The Tribunal regrets the delay in making this decision.


Signed:     Date: 5.2.16

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan

