

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/13473/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 7th November 2013                          |on 11th November 2013        |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NAIROBI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          KAMWANYA BENDICTE ILUNGA
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Mc Veety - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

For the Respondent: Mr M Syed - Legal Representative.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a determination
        of First-tier Tribunal Judge Mensah promulgated on 4th June 2013 in
        which she allowed the  appeal  against  the  refusal  of  an  Entry
        Clearance Officer (ECO) dated 6th June 2012.


     2. The Appellant, a national of the DRC born on 15th August 1994, made
        a settlement application. The ECO was not  satisfied  she  met  the
        requirements of paragraph 297 of the Rules  and  so  dismissed  the
        appeal.


     3. Before Judge Mensah  it  was  accepted  that  the  requirements  of
        paragraph 297 could not be met. One of the sponsor's is  a  British
        citizen although  the  Appellants  mother  has  only  been  granted
        discretionary leave and therefore could not fill the settled status
        category required under this rule. It  was  agreed  that  the  rule
        which should have been considered  was  paragraph  301.  The  Judge
        therefore proceeded to determine the appeal by  reference  to  this
        rule.


     4. The Judge, from paragraph 26 onwards of  her  determination,  makes
        specific findings relating to the criteria to be found in paragraph
        301.  In paragraph 26 the Judge finds:


     26.  Whilst it is clear documents from the DRC can be unreliable  I  do
   not feel it             is appropriate to  go  so  far  as  to  find  all
   documents are unreliable and taken            together with the  rest  of
   the evidence I have before me I accept the                  appellant  is
   the daughter as  claimed  and  her  date  of  birth  is  as  claimed.   I
   accept therefore the appellant has demonstrated on  balance  she  is  the
   child          of a person settled and a person  with  limited  leave  to
   remain in the UK.


     5. This paragraph encapsulates  the  Judge's  findings  regarding  the
        ability of the appellant to satisfy the requirements of 301 (i) (a)
        and (ii).


     6. There is no challenge to the finding under  subparagraph  (ii)  but
        the finding under (i) is disputed.



Discussion



     7. The grounds of appeal refer to the  need  for  the  Judge  to  have
        considered the issue of sole responsibility  but  they  are  poorly
        drafted and before the Tribunal Mr McVeety set out the true  nature
        of the ECO's challenge. Paragraph 301 sets out the requirements for
        limited leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom with a  view
        to settlement as the child of the parent or parents  given  limited
        leave to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  with  a  view  to
        settlement.  Paragraph 301 (i) provides:


              301 The requirements to be met by  a  person  seeking  limited
   leave to enter or                remain in the United Kingdom with a view
   to settlement as the child  of  the                   parent  or  parents
   given  limited   leave   to   enter   or   remain   in   United   Kingdom
   with a view to settlement are that he:


                  (i)  is seeking leave to enter or  accompany  or  join  or
   remain with the                       parent or parents  in  one  of  the
   following circumstances:


                  (a)  one parent is  present  and  settled  in  the  United
   Kingdom or being                      admitted on the  same  occasion  to
   settlement and the other parent is                     being or has  been
   given   limited   leave   to   enter   or   remain    in    the    United
   Kingdom with a view to settlement; or


                  (b)  one parent is being or has been given  limited  leave
   to enter or remain                    in the United Kingdom with  a  view
   to settlement and has had sole                     responsibility for the
   child's upbringing; or


                  (c)  one parent is being or has been given  limited  leave
   to enter or remain                    in the United Kingdom with  a  view
   to settlement and there are                        serious and compelling
   family or other considerations which make                       exclusion
   of   the   child   undesirable    and    suitable    arrangements    have
   been made for the child's care; and


                  (ii) ..............




     8. Paragraph 301 provides for a number of scenarios depending upon the
        status of the parents. In this appeal the child's father is in  the
        United Kingdom and is a British citizen. The child's mother is also
        in the United Kingdom as she entered in  2007  and  claimed  asylum
        which was refused, although she  was  granted  discretionary  leave
        outside the Rules on 11th May 2011.   The  Judge  appears  to  have
        allowed the appeal, as she was satisfied the  requirements  of  301
        (i) (a) had been proved to be met, on the basis the Appellant is  a
        child of a person present and settled and  a  person  with  limited
        leave to remain in the UK [26].  The difficulty with  this  finding
        is that the Rule contains a further requirement that the  grant  of
        limited leave to enter or remain must have  been  with  a  view  to
        settlement.  The Judge fails to address this  specific  requirement
        and in doing so has fallen into legal error.


     9. Mr Syed argued that  the  fact  the  Appellant's  mother  has  been
        granted leave outside the Rules, which  would  inevitably  lead  to
        settlement, meant the requirement was satisfied.  I do  not  accept
        this argument.  The points-based system is  a  highly  prescriptive
        system setting out in detail individual requirements that  must  be
        satisfied before an individual is able to  be  awarded  the  points
        they seek.  The phrase 'with a  view  to  settlement'  has  a  very
        specific meaning within the Rules.


    10. When I asked the advocates  to  indicate  whether  there  were  any
        provisions of the Rules that would allow an individual  to  satisfy
        this requirement my attention was  drawn  to  paragraph  281  which
        contains the requirements for leave to  enter  the  United  Kingdom
        with a view to settlement as the spouse [or  civil  partner]  of  a
        person present and settled in the United Kingdom or being  admitted
        on the same occasion for settlement.  Although it may  be  possible
        to secure settlement based upon passage of time following grants of
        discretionary leave, I do not find this is  sufficient  to  satisfy
        the requirements of paragraph 301 as it is not  specifically  leave
        granted 'with a view to settlement'.


    11.  The  difficulty  recognised  by  Mr  McVeety  is   that   in   the
        circumstances of the parents of this appellant, and any  other,  in
        which one parent is settled and the other  has  only  been  granted
        discretionary leave outside the Rules  it  is  impossible  for  the
        Appellant to succeed as the Rules make no provision for  relief  on
        these facts.


    12. That the provisions of 301 (i) could not be met  on  the  facts  is
        correct and as such the Judge made a legal error  in  allowing  the
        appeal on this basis.


    13. It was also submitted the Judge had failed to deal with  Article  8
        ECHR but a reading of the determination shows this was  dealt  with
        by her, albeit briefly, in paragraph 34 in which the Judge finds:


          34. In those circumstances I find the refusal to grant entry would
   breach the                   appellant's family life under Article 8 as a
   lawful and/or in disproportionate in          those circumstances.


    14. The Judge allowed the appeal under both the Immigration  Rules  and
        Article 8 but I have found legal error in relation to the Rules and
        find a proper Article 8 assessment as per the Razgar  criteria  was
        not undertaken, especially in light of  the  appeal  being  allowed
        under the Rules which appears to have  been  determinative  of  the
        Article 8 decision.


    15. I set the determination aside and proceed to remake the  appeal  by
        allowing it under Article 8 ECHR for the following reasons.


    16. When considering Article 8 issues it is necessary to  consider  the
        questions set out by Lord Bingham in paragraph 17 of the  judgement
        in the case of Razgar [2004] UKHL 27  which are:
        (1) Will the proposed  removal  be  an  interference  by  a  public
        authority with the exercise of the applicant's right to respect for
        his private or (as the case may be) family life?
        (2) If so, will such interference have consequences of such gravity
        as potentially to engage the operation of article 8?
               (3) If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?
        (4) If so, is such interference necessary in a  democratic  society
        in the  interests  of  national  security,  public  safety  or  the
        economic well- being of the country, for the prevention of disorder
        or crime, for the protection  of  health  or  morals,  or  for  the
        protection of the rights and freedoms of others?
        (5) If so, is such interference  proportionate  to  the  legitimate
        public  end sought to be achieved?


    17. In the situation where it is accepted parentage is as claimed, of a
        minor child, in relation to an application for family  reunion,  in
        which all other requirements of paragraph 301 can be met  are  met,
        the weight given to the fact that the appellant cannot satisfy  the
        Immigration Rules must be substantially reduced; especially if  the
        Rules make no provision for her personal circumstances.


    18. I am satisfied the Appellants parents have  maintained  a  material
        input into her life and provide input and support  as  demonstrated
        by the evidence. It was not disputed before  me  that  family  life
        recognised by Article 8 exists and I note the  positive  obligation
        upon  States  to  enable  the   development   of   genuine   family
        relationships.  Although it is accepted that the Secretary of State
        has a margin of appreciation under Article 8 and a valid legitimate
        aim in controlling immigration in relation to the  United  Kingdom,
        it has not been proved to be necessary in all the circumstances  of
        this case to exclude the Appellant.


    19. It was accepted the issue is one of proportionality and  I  am  not
        satisfied the Secretary of State has discharged the burden of proof
        upon her to the required standard to  show  that  the  decision  is
        proportionate. I allow the appeal under Article 8 ECHR.


Decision

    20. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the  original  Judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as
        follows. This appeal is allowed under Article 8 ECHR only.


   Anonymity.


    21. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


          I make no such order.







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 8th November 2013












