
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/13380/2013
                                                               OA/13381/2013
                                                               OA/13382/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly        |Decision & Reason Promulgated         |
|On 12 December 2014                   |On 29 December 2014                   |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                                ROBINA AUSAR
                                IQRA ZULFIQAR
                                 ALIYA KHAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Timson counsel instructed by Zacharia & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVitie Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this  appeal  but
    in order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in
    the First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the  Secretary  of  State
    against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Pacey promulgated on 26
    February  2014  which  dismissed  the  Appellants  appeals  under   the
    Immigration Rules but held that it was  disproportionate  and  unlawful
    under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human  Rights  to  remove
    them to Pakistan.

Background

 3. The Appellants are a mother and her two daughters who are  citizens  of
    Pakistan.

 4. On 27 February 2013 the Appellants applied for entry clearance  to  the
    United Kingdom as the spouse and dependent children  of  Azam  Khan,  a
    British citizen

 5. On  20  May  2013  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
    application. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons but in essence
    they can be summarised the Appellant had  not  provided  the  specified
    evidence for the specified periods to show that  her  sponsor  met  the
    financial requirements of the rules.

The Judge's Decision

 6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Pacey ("the Judge") allowed the appeal against  the  Respondent's
    decision under Article 8. The Judge found the decision to refuse  would
    be disproportionate against the factual findings that he made.

 7. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on  27  June  2014  Designated  Judge
    Woodcraft Judge gave permission to appeal stating that it was  arguable
    that the Judge had not followed recent jurisprudence on Article  8  and
    all grounds were arguable.

 8. At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr McVitie  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent that:

      a) At the time of his decision the Judge's approach in making  a  free
         standing Article 8 assessment was inconsistent with the  prevailing
         caselaw but the decision had been, he conceded, overtaken  by  more
         recent caselaw.
      b) He suggested that there was a problem with the Judge's approach  in
         paragraph 12.
      c) The Judge had relied wrongly on the decision in MM  v  SSHD  [2013]
         EWHC 1900 .
      d) There  was  still  a  requirement  to  give  adequate  reasons  for
         departing from the Rules.
      e) He also conceded that the appeal was 4 months out of time and  that
         aspect of the appeal had not been adjudicated on.






 9. On behalf of the Respondent  Mr Timson submitted that :

      a) The appeal was late and there was no proper reason for the delay.
      b) The Judge had given adequate reasons for the decision he made.


Finding on Material Error

10. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made no material errors of law.

11. This appeal was out of time and the grounds included an application for
    the time limit to be extended.  There  was,  contrary  to  Mr  Timson's
    assertion, an explanation given for the delay, that the Respondent  was
    undergoing a period of 'unprecedented staff shortages.'  This  was  not
    adjudicated on in the  permission  but  I  am  satisfied  that  in  the
    circumstances it is right to extend the time and hear the appeal.

12. This was a refusal against entry clearance as a  spouse  where  it  was
    rightly conceded and recorded by the Judge that the Appellant could not
    met the requirements of the Rules. The Judge however found  as  a  fact
    (paragraphs 4-10) that  on  the  basis  of  the  documentary  and  oral
    evidence before him that this failure was not on  the  basis  that  the
    Appellant did not meet the financial threshold required but simply that
    he had two jobs and one of them he had not  held  for  long  enough  to
    provide the specified evidence at the time of the application.

13. The grounds argue that the Judge misdirected himself in considering the
    case under Article 8 outside the Rules, relying on Gulshan [2013]  UKUT
    00640 (IAC) and that the Judge failed to identify any arguable case  to
    exercise a discretion outside the Rules,  compelling  circumstances  to
    depart from the requirements of the Rules.

14. In relation to claims under Article 8 these are addressed  by  Appendix
    FM and paragraph 276ADE of the  Rules  and  the  Secretary  of  State's
    Guidance. If an applicant does not meet the criteria  set  out  in  the
    Rules then guidance issued by the Secretary of State  in  the  form  of
    instructions provides in effect, that leave to remain outside the rules
    could be granted in the exercise of residual discretion in 'exceptional
    circumstances' which are defined in the guidance and must be  exercised
    on the basis of Article 8 considerations, in particular  assessing  all
    relevant factors in determining whether  a  decision  is  proportionate
    under Article 8.2.

15. Mr Mc Vitie rightly conceded in my view that there have been  a  number
    of recent cases, after the date when permission was granted, which have
    considered the relationship between the new Rules and Article 8    such
    as R(MM (Lebanon)) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 985,  R(on the application of
    Esther Ebun Oludoyi & Ors) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
    (Article 8 - MM (Lebanon) and Nagre) IJR [2014] UKUT  00539  (IAC)  and
    Adiya [2014] EWHC 3919 (Admin).

16. This line of cases accepts that Appendix FM is not a complete code  and
    the Secretary of State always has a discretion to grant  leave  outside
    the Rules. That discretion must be exercised on the basis of Article  8
    considerations by assessing all relevant factors in determining whether
    a decision is proportionate under Article 8.2. There is in principle no
    'threshold' criterion of 'arguability'

17. The Judge in this case therefore having determined that  the  Appellant
    did not meet the requirements of the Rules made an  evaluation  of  the
    case under Article 8 at paragraphs 12-15. While it might be argued that
    the decision he made was a generous one I am  satisfied  that  he  took
    into account all of the relevant factors in  the  case  and  reached  a
    decision on proportionality that was open to him on the  basis  of  his
    factual findings. The only challenge open would be that his conclusions
    were perverse but this has a high threshold and  I  am  satisfied  that
    such a challenge is not made out in this case.

CONCLUSION

18. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

19. The appeal is dismissed.



Signed      Date 24.12.2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
