
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/13216/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 1 August 2014                              |On 22 August 2014            |
|Prepared 1 August 2014                        |                             |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Leila Haghani

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Harding of Counsel instructed by Bhogal
Partners Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   In this determination the Respondent is referred  to  as  the  Claimant
    and the Appellant is referred to as the Secretary of State.

2.   The Claimant, a national of Iran,  date  of  birth  24  February  1974,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision dated 20 June 2013 to refuse
    an application to settle as a pre-flight family member under  paragraph
    352A of the Immigration Rules (as amended)(The Rules) and under Article
    8 of the ECHR.  The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Amin
    (The Judge) who on 8 May 2014 allowed the appeal under Article 8 of the
    ECHR.

3.   Permission to appeal that decision was  given  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge C Andrew on 6 June 2014.

4.   The Secretary of States' first ground is  essentially  that  the  judge
    should have, having concluded  that  the  Claimant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 352A(ii) of the Rules,  gone on  to  consider
    whether the Claimant could meet the family life requirements  contained
    within Appendix FM of the Rules, presumably on the category of E-LTRPT.
     The fact of the matter, as was accepted  in  argument,  was  that  the
    Claimant could not have succeeded because EX.1 did not exempt her  from
    the requirements  of  E-LTRPT  in  relation  to  English  language  and
    financial requirements. Accordingly the first ground takes  the  matter
    no further.

5.   In submissions before the judge it was  accepted  by  the  Respondent's
    representative and the Claimant's could not succeed under the Rules and
    there was no other specific provision to apply to her to  obtain  entry
    under the Rules. It may be that an  application  could  be  made  under
    paragraph 281 of the Rules as the grounds now argue but  that  was  not
    how the Respondent's case was put to the judge. It was  argued  by  the
    Claimant that in those circumstances there were evidently compelling or
    exceptional circumstances which were not sufficiently recognised by the
    new Rules and justified considering an Article 8 ECHR claim outside the
    Rules. The judge agreed in the determination at paragraphs 26-30, 32-35
    having accepted there was  a  genuine,  subsisting   marriage  and  the
    parties to it intended to remain together.

6.   The judge's analysis of the Article 8 ECHR issues was a matter for  him
    given the Iranian nationality of the Sponsor and the Claimant, the fact
    that the Sponsor is a refugee, the fact that they may have holidayed in
    Turkey on more than one occasion really does not show that the Claimant
    and Sponsor can go and have a family life together in  Turkey,  as  the
    Secretary of State argued; particularly when both are nationals of Iran
    and have no entitlement to reside in Turkey.
7.   There was nothing to indicate, even though they did  meet  in  Istanbul
    that there is any basis for the Appellant and Sponsor to return to live
    there.  They have met there from  time  to  time  during  the  marriage
    because there was nowhere else where they may do so.
8.   It cannot be seriously argued that it would be  reasonable  to  require
    them to return to Turkey where neither of them has any status  to  make
    their life there.  The judge  was  perfectly  entitled  to  reject  the
    submission that they should do so.  The judge plainly had in  mind  the
    differential position between spouses  whose  marriages  pre-dated  and
    post-dated the flight  of  the  spouse,  later  granted  ILR,  and  the
    different way in which they are respectively treated under the Rules.
9.   In the circumstances, although the reasoning should  have  been  better
    presented, the relevant cases of Nagre and MF(Nigeria) as they  applied
    should have been refered to but  I conclude that there  is  nothing  to
    indicate that the judge made a material error of law in the  assessment
    of compelling  circumstances  not  sufficiently  recognised  under  the
    rules; particularly when the evidence  did  not  show  another  country
    where they could establish a family life. It is to be  noted  that  the
    Secretary of State did not challenge the judge' findings on Article  8.
    It would have been better for the judge  to  have  fully  set  out  the
    Article 8 issues following the cases of Razgar and Huang.
10.   The original Tribunal decision stands.

11.  The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.


Signed                                  Date19 August 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
