
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/13964/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 18 August 2014                             |On 3 September 2014          |
|Prepared 18 August 2014                       |                             |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Mr Safal Gurung
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Puar, Counsel instructed by N. C. Brothers & Co
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   In this determination I shall refer to the Respondent as  the  Claimant
    and to the Appellant as the ECO - New Delhi.

2.   The Claimant, a national of Nepal, appealed against the ECO's  decision
    of 17 June 2013 to refuse entry clearance as a dependent child of an ex-
    Gurkha  solder  under  paragraph  EC-DR.1.1  of  Appendix  FM  of   the
    Immigration Rules HC 395 and with respect to the Secretary  of  State's
    policy as identified in IDI Chapter 15 Section 2A 13.2 as amended.  The
    appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Kainth  (the  judge)  who
    allowed the appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.

3.   No issue is taken with the position as the judge found it to be for  it
    was accepted that the Claimant could not succeed under the  Immigration
    Rules.

4.   The ECO's complaints were essentially a lack of  adequate  reasons  for
    the judge's acceptance of there  being  dependency  beyond  the  normal
    emotional ties between an adult child  and  parent  with  reference  to
    Kugathas v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003]  EWCA  Civ
    31.

5.   It was further complained that the judge had  failed  to  consider  how
    when the Claimant was of the age he was and had not  been  living  with
    the Sponsor for five years there were continuing emotional ties between
    the Claimant and Sponsor.  There  is  of  itself  no  attack  upon  the
    findings of fact made so much as the reasoning for the conclusion  that
    Article 8 ECHR was engaged.

6.   At the hearing of the appeal before  the  judge  the  Sponsor  for  the
    Claimant, his father, gave evidence and produced a witness statement as
    did the Claimant.  It is evident  from  the  statement  that  there  is
    virtually no description of emotional ties as between the Claimant  and
    the Sponsor or the Sponsor's wife, the mother of the Claimant.

7.    The  judge  plainly  had  evidence  to  show  that  the  Claimant  was
    financially dependent on his father and were it not for such  financial
    support  the  Claimant  simply  would  not  be  able  to  continue  his
    protracted studies nor would he be able  to  support  himself  claiming
    that employment prospects and the like were so poor in  Nepal  that  he
    would not, at any stage even it would appear with  education  complete,
    be able to find work.

8.   The judge's determination is not  particularly  clearly  written.   For
    example  at  paragraph  19  of  the  determination,  contrary  to  what
    thereafter follows, the judge said without it being in quotes, contrary
    to Mr Puar's submissions that it should be,  "... I have every  empathy
    with respect to the  position  the  Appellant  now  finds  himself  in.
    However, for reasons which will  become  clearer  the  Claimant  cannot
    succeed under Article 8".  However, it is sufficient  to  say  that  as
    thereafter set out the judge found  the  exact  opposite,  allowed  the
    appeal under Article 8 ECHR and never reconciled  one  conclusion  with
    the other.  It could be that this was a typographical error but even if
    the 'not' was not included, the sentence still does not make that  much
    sense or why explain why empathy might be relevant.

9.   Similarly the judge makes a clear and unequivocal finding of fact  when
    he stated at paragraph 23 "I accept the unchallenged  evidence  of  the
    Sponsor that the Appellant (Claimant) is entirely reliant on his father
    for support and maintenance".  The judge goes on  at  paragraph  25  to
    say:

         "It is clear to me that prior to 2009, the Appellant enjoyed family
         life with his parents.  Thereafter the Appellant in  my  assessment
         has formed a limited independent life for himself.  I  accept  that
         the Sponsor  provides  financial  support  for  the  Appellant.   I
         therefore conclude that in answer to question (1) [of  Razgar]  the
         removal would breach the United Kingdom's obligations under Article
         8.  The interference would not be legitimate and in accordance with
         the law.  The interference engages the operation of Article  8  and
         it would not be proportionate to the legitimate public  end  sought
         to be achieved.  In answering  questions  (3),  (4)  and  (5),  the
         proposed interference would not be  proportionate,  legitimate  and
         would deprive the Appellant of ongoing  contact  with  his  family.
         The separation of the family unit was never intended to be anything
         more than temporary."

10.  As to why refusing the  application  would  deprive  the  Appellant  of
    ongoing contact is less than clear because of course there was  nothing
    to  stop  the  telephone  contact  which  was  apparently  regular  and
    continuing.  If the judge intended to mean that it  would  deprive  the
    Claimant of contact with his family simply as  a  fact  in  the  direct
    physical contact sense then that may be adequate as an explanation.

11.  As to the intentions over the separation of the family unit that  seems
    to me to be entirely a separate  matter  completely  unrelated  to  the
    required exercise because of course  it  was  ultimately  a  matter  of
    choice that the family separated by the arrangements being made and the
    factual circumstances at the time of the application.

12.  It is said by Mr Puar that it is not for me to go behind the  reasoning
    of the judge's finding as to the support, that  is  emotional  support,
    that the Claimant gathered from the Sponsor.  Therefore much  turns  on
    what can sensibly, on  the  evidence,  be  the  factual  basis  of  the
    conclusion that the Claimant was entirely reliant  on  his  father  for
    support.

13.  I should say that the statement  of  the  Claimant  does  not  actually
    identify any particular emotional connection with  his  father  or  his
    mother or indeed any other relative with whom  he  would  wish  to  re-
    establish connection or plays in his life or in his decision-making  or
    any other aspect of his social life with whom  he  has  connections  or
    indeed might play a part in the emotional life.

14.  Similarly the statement of the Sponsor again identifies the support  he
    provides which he plainly identifies as financial and he too  makes  no
    particular reference to the emotional connections which are  prayed  in
    aid as the interpretation of the word 'support'.

15.  It seems to me, were it  for  me  to  consider,  the  matter  that  the
    evidence simply was not there to show the  emotional  support  or  ties
    that were of significance so as to engage Article 8.1 in that  respect.
    However, the judge did make a number of findings of fact in the context
    of the relevant case law and concluded that in the judgment exercise in
    answer to the fifth question raised in Razgar the position was that the
    ECO's decision was disproportionate.   I  have  in  mind  the  guidance
    contained within R (Iran) [2005] EWCA Civ 982 as well as E &  R  [2004]
    QB 1044 CA and the general guidance repeatedly given in  the  Court  of
    Appeal that the Upper Tribunal should not interfere with decisions made
    by judges simply because it disagrees with the outcome  or  would  have
    reached a different conclusion itself.

16.  I find in this case that, despite  the  poorly  written  decision,  the
    Respondent's grounds which have not been amended  since  either  before
    permission was given or after cannot avoid the finding that  the  judge
    made as to the dependency arising between the Claimant and the Sponsor.
     The analysis by the judge was  superficial  and  bordered  upon  being
    inadequate but I do not find it sufficiently deficient to conclude that
    the claim of inadequate reasons as to how Article 8 was  engaged  means
    that the original Tribunal's decision should not stand.

17.  In the circumstances, confined as I am to  the  grounds  of  appeal,  I
    find that in this case, although on grounds being differently drafted I
    could well have reached a different decision that the appeal by the ECO
    fails.

18.  The original Tribunal's decision stands.


Signed                                  Date 27 August 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey




