
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Numbers:
OA/13236/2014

                                               oa/13238/2014

                                               oa/13241/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 15 April 2016                         |On 29 April 2016                    |
|Prepared on 15 April 2016                |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY

                                   Between

                       entry clearance officer - accra
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     A S
                                     K S
                                     J G
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr A Barnfield, Counsel instructed by D & A
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   In this decision the Appellant is  referred  to  as  the  ECO  and  the
    Respondents are referred to as the Claimants.  The first Claimant, date
    of birth 10 May 1999, the second Claimant, date  of  birth  17  October
    2001, and the  third  Claimant,  date  of  birth  6  August  1998,  are
    nationals of Sierra Leone who  appealed  against  the  ECO's  decisions
    dated 21 August 2014. Their sponsors were Mr B S and Mrs H S. The first
    claimant is the child of the Sponsors. The second claimant is the child
    of Mr B S and another. The third Claimant is the  child  of  Mrs  H  S.
    Their ages in August 2014 were 15, 12 and 16 years respectively.

2.    Their appeals  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Stott,  (the
    judge), and were appeals allowed on 16 February 2015.  On  25  February
    the ECO challenged the judge's decisions and permission was granted  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Shimmin on 7 April 2015.

3.   On 20 August 2015 I heard and decided, giving an oral judgment  in  the
    matter, the Original Tribunal's decision could  not  stand  because  of
    material errors of law. The matter  was  to  be  relisted  as  soon  as
    possible for a  resumed  hearing  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  before  me.
    Unfortunately, the file and my typed decision were mislocated until the
    decision was finally promulgated on 8 January 2016.

4.   The ECO's decisions  fully  identified  shortcomings  in  the  evidence
    provided at the date of the decisions on 21 May  2014.   There  was  no
    challenge  to  the  ECO's  findings  on  the  applications  under   the
    immigration rules. A point  further  conceded  before  the  judge.   Mr
    Barnfield argued, the sole issue was whether or not the Claimants could
    engage with Article 8 of the ECHR on the basis  that  the  Respondent's
    decision  was  not  ECHR  compliant  and  in  particular  that  it  was
    disproportionate to exclude them from the United  Kingdom  and  prevent
    them re-establishing contact with their parents (the Sponsors) resident
    in the United Kingdom with four additional children  latterly  born  in
    the United Kingdom.

5.   The relevant date for consideration of the Article  8  ECHR  claim  was
    the date of the ECO's decisions; 1  August  2014.   I  note  the  judge
    considered  whether  the  Claimants  were  in  'dire  and   compelling'
    circumstances [D 12] having referred to the case  of  Nagre.  [D7].  No
    point was taken in the ECO's grounds  that  the  judge  had  failed  to
    consider the provisions of the rules but rather the failure to  provide
    adequate reasons for finding the ECO's  decisions  disproportionate.  I
    find the ECO's approach consistent with SS (Congo)[2015] EWCA  Civ  387
    [39-42]  and  with  reference  LTE  claims  being   established   where
    individuals interests are such  that  a  good  claim  for  LTE  may  be
    established outside the Rules [40]. At the resumed hearing the  Article
    8 claim and proportionality were all that were argued.
Background
6.   At the date of decision, the background evidence  showed  that  between
    c2001-2011 the Claimants had been accommodated by an aunt who had  died
    on 10 January 2011. They were subsequently taken care of  by  Mr  S,  a
    teacher and family friend.   He  has,  since  the  date  of  the  ECO's
    decision, moved on to a new school,  in  a  different  area  of  Sierra
    Leone, in October 2014. He  had made arrangements for the  children  to
    be left living with a neighbour, Mr I who had a wife and  two  children
    but  would  be  moving  away  leading  to  further  disruption  in  the
    children's lives with no certainly as to where they might  live.  Mr  I
    and his family moved elsewhere in about early December 2014 Mr B S said
    that since about 25 January  2015  the  Claimants  had  been  homeless,
    living on the streets, destitute and the Sponsors  had  lost  telephone
    contact with them about the end of March 2016.   Nevertheless,  at  the
    material time, the date of the ECO's decision, the Claimants were being
    accommodated and had shelter and reasonable living conditions.

7.     The three statements of Mr B S (16 January 2015,9 December  2015  and
    5 April 2016)  give  very  limited  information  about  the  Appellants
    circumstances and living conditions, post date the  decisions  or  were
    not contemplated at the date of the ECO's decisions. Mr  B  S,  in  his
    statement of 9 December 2015, refers to the Claimants being  destitute,
    living in squalid conditions, the  second  Claimant  almost  being  the
    victim of multiple rape and the third  Claimant  being  injured  whilst
    defending her; An attempt to complain to the  police  did  not  achieve
    anything. Other information refers to the Claimants being ill and badly
    affected by flooding in September 2015 (AB2 E1.-E12) (AB1 pp534-543).

8.      Mr B S, date of birth 22 May 1976, claims to be a  British  National
    by naturalisation as does Mrs H S, date of birth  22  May  1976.  Their
    children, said to be British nationals, names  are  Z  (dob.  2003),  A
    (dob. 2004), H (dob. 2006) and J (dob. 2011) possible ages 12,11,9  and
    5 years. They live with the Sponsors in  Birmingham  and  attend  local
    schools.

9.      It was the Sponsors' option to stay in  the  United  Kingdom  or  to
    return to care for their children in Sierra Leone in 2014 or 2015 given
    the difficulties it is claimed the Claimants faced;  Remaining  in  the
    United Kingdom  with  their  four  children  was  their  choice.  Their
    decision was not explained by reference to the UK based children's best
    interests or well being nor a lack of help to care  for  them  nor  the
    children's age nor was there evidence of those children's lives in  the
    UK adduced to support such a claim. It was  not  said  they  could  not
    return because of the seriousness of difficulties likely to be met e.g.
    Ebola. Mr Barnfield did not refer me to any statements from any of  the
    Claimants or letters seeking to join the Sponsors in  the  UK  or  even
    about their personal circumstances in 2014 or 2015  when  the  Sponsors
    claim to have been in touch with them by telephone.

10.    I fully take into account the cases of SS (Congo) 2015 EWCA  Civ  387
    and Azimi-Moyad [2013] UKUT  197.  Even  though  these  remain  out  of
    country appeals I have given substantial weight to apply the spirit  of
    Section 55 BCIA 2009. I applied the cases of  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27,
    Huang [2007] UKHL 11 and ZH (Tanzania). I have concluded that  at  that
    time the Claimants seeking  to  re-establish  family  life  with  their
    parents was an objective within Article 8(1) ECHR.

11.  I find the ECO's decisions were a significant interference  in  seeking
    to establish a new family life in the UK. I find  Article  8(1)  rights
    were engaged. On the face of  it,  that  was  also  resolvable  by  the
    Sponsor and his wife reuniting with the Claimants and their siblings as
    a family in Sierra Leone. The best interests of the UK or Sierra  Leone
    based children was not an issue raised before me  but  I  have  on  the
    extremely limited evidence adduced taken them into account in so far as
    common  sense  suggests  they  must  be  some  impacts  which  will  be
    interruptive or adverse. It is unfortunate  that  such  a  primary  and
    important issue  was scarcely referred to particularly given  the  time
    spent in the UK by the older children and the ages of the Claimants and
    the time to prepare these appeals: let alone the costs incurred.

12.  I was not provided with any information about the  Sponsors'  financial
    circumstances.  Mr  Barnfield  made  no  submissions  nor  took  me  to
    documentary evidence of the Sponsors' income, outgoings or obligations.
    The bundles (AB1, 2&3) may contain some information but it was not  for
    me to try to select and assemble the evidence.  I have  no  information
    on the impact of  or  estimated  costs  of  clothing,  feeding,  living
    expenses, daily travel, education/college costs  of  the  Claimants.  I
    highlighted the deficiencies in August 2015 and by my written  decision
    of  8  January  2016  In  these  circumstances  it  would  be  complete
    speculation on my part about the burden on  the  taxpayers  and/or  the
    Sponsor's ability to maintain and accommodate them when considering the
    public interest or proportionality. No submissions were made to  me  on
    the points or Mr B S's status which might have affected the matter.

13.    It was also not argued the ECO's decisions were unlawful or  did  not
    fall within the objects of Article 8(2) ECHR

14.   In the  light  of  the  very  limited  evidence  about  the  Claimants
    circumstances at the date  of  the  ECO's  decision  I  find  that  the
    evidence  did  not  show  that  the  refusal  of  entry  clearance  for
    settlement purposes was disproportionate. In reaching  that  finding  I
    have given significant weight to the public  interest  as  required  by
    Sections 117A(1), (2)(a), (3) and 117B (1), (2) and (3) NIAA 2002 for I
    have no information about the Claimants  English  language   skills  or
    financial circumstances.  I have not taken into account  after  arising
    matters referred to in the evidence of the Claimants' father concerning
    the claimed uncertain circumstances which  the  children  now  face  in
    relation to both in general terms or the outbreak of Ebola and  whether
    or not they were likely to be accommodated or have a  roof  over  their
    heads.  Those are after arising matters that were not in  contemplation
    at the date of the ECO's decision.

15.  It remains my view that the judge erred in law in taking those  matters
    into account when considering the matter as at February 2015,  about  a
    year after the ECO's decision.  Plainly, those changes in circumstances
    could have been a basis for a further application to be pursued in  the
    light of evidence of the destitution claimed and the  circumstances  in
    which the three children were living.  I do  not  therefore  find  that
    material thereafter, however much it may generate sympathy and  present
    concern for the wellbeing of the Appellants.

16   Rather, I concluded that if, as now being  described,  the  destitution
    the Claimants face is as grave as it is claimed  for  about  one  year,
    there is a current loss of contact with the Claimants from early  April
    2016, and uncertainly as to their accommodation and  arrangements  with
    near destitution since about January 2015,  it  is  a  matter  of  some
    concern of that no meaningful steps or at all have been taken about the
    care of the Claimants by anyone acting for the  Sponsors  or  by  them.
    Over nearly the whole of 2015 and 2016, if Mr B S is correct, there has
    been no contact with the UNHCR or NGOs dealing with children in  Sierra
    Leone or with the Red Cross or Red Crescent. I find very surprising the
    absence of contact by the Sponsors with the Sierra Leonean  authorities
    either based in the United Kingdom or in Sierra Leone in the  light  of
    what on their view is a seriously deteriorating  set  of  circumstances
    over  many  months.  I  can  see  no  reason,  when  they   had   legal
    representatives, why they did not seek help. Mr B S did  not  give  any
    sensible explanation for the Sponsors inaction.

17.     However there is at least one explanation  for  the  lack  of  steps
    that the Sponsors have taken and that is they actually know  where  the
    Claimants are and the circumstances in which they are living. Thus  the
    Sponsors are not worried, as currently claimed,  as  to  the  Claimants
    whereabouts.  It is not for me to investigate these matters or to  make
    any findings upon the evidence. For the avoidance of  doubt  I  do  not
    regard the
         unresolved point as significant in remaking the decisions.

17.  Thus, I find that the Article 8  claim  fails  for  the  reasons  given
    above.  It may well be a different case could be presented to  make  an
    Article 8 ECHR claim but on the brief evidence not essentially directed
    at  critical  issues  I  do  not  find   the   ECO's   decisions   were
    disproportionate.

NOTICE OF DECISION
The Original Tribunal's decisions can not  stand.  The  following  decisions
are substituted.
The appeals of the Claimants on Article 8 ECHR grounds are dismissed

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

An anonymity order has previously been made and should be continued.

Signed                                  Date 24 April 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeals of the Claimants have failed and accordingly no awards of  costs
are made.

Signed                                  Date 24 April 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey


