
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/13757/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 October 2015                            |On 12 May 2016                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISLAMABAD

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     HA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Wheeler, instructed by Kirklees Law Centre


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I shall refer in this decision to the appellant as the  respondent  and
    to the respondent as  the  appellant,  as  they  appeared  respectively
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant, HA was born in 2011 and is aged 4 years.  The sponsor is
    the appellant's father and lives in Sheffield.  The sponsor's wife (the
    appellant's mother) who has successfully obtained  entry  clearance  to
    the  United  Kingdom  has  returned  to  Pakistan  to  look  after  the
    appellant.  Before the First-tier Tribunal (Judge M Davies) the sponsor
    father accepted  that  the  appellant  could  not  meet  the  financial
    requirements of the Immigration Rules [14]. Judge  Davies  allowed  the
    appeal  on  Article  8  grounds.   The  respondent  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 3. Judge Davies recorded at [13] the  reasons  why  the  sponsor  had  not
    applied for the appellant to enter the United Kingdom at the same  time
    as his wife.  It appears that the sponsor erroneously believed that the
    appellant was entitled to British nationality.  The judge noted that it
    appeared that the Appellant could now (as at the date of the First-tier
    Tribunal hearing) meet the financial requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  He rejected the Presenting  Officer's  submission  that  a  new
    application should be made.

 4. I find that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  should  be  set
    aside.  I have reached  that  conclusion  for  the  following  reasons.
    There is an inadequacy of reasoning  on  the  part  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  At [15], the judge wrote:

         "However I find that the circumstances  of  this  appeal  are  both
         compelling  and  exceptional  which  justifies  me  in  considering
         whether the appeal should be allowed on Article 8 grounds.  I found
         that they are exceptional as  set  out  in  the  sponsor's  witness
         statement."

 5. The judge has failed to make any attempt to specify what it was in  the
    sponsor's witness statement which led  him  to  find  that  there  were
    exceptional circumstances in this  instance;  the  judge  has  made  an
    assertion, rather than a proper evidence-based finding.  The judge goes
    on [17] to find that there would be  "no  purpose  [to  be  served]  by
    expecting the appellant to make a fresh application.  He  would  simply
    be denied the comfort and security of living with both his  mother  and
    father."  Mrs Pettersen, for the respondent, submitted that  the  judge
    had simply used Article 8 as a "general dispensing provision."  I  find
    that that is exactly what he has  done.   The  judge  made  no  attempt
    whatever to explain why he believes that the post-decision evidence  as
    regards financial circumstances now submitted by the  sponsor  is  such
    that the appellant satisfies  the  Immigration  Rules.   There  was  no
    concession by the Presenting Officer  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    that the Rules could now be met; at [9], the judge simply records  that
    the Presenting Officer submitted that, if the Rules could now be met, a
    new application should be made.  The judge has  assumed  the  financial
    requirements could be met and  has  vaulted  from  that  assumption  to
    allowing the appeal without more ado under Article 8.   He  has  failed
    properly to consider the public interest  having  made  no  proper  and
    sustainable finding that the financial circumstances of the sponsor are
    now such that there would be no burden upon  the  public  purse.    The
    judge pays lip service to  the  public  interest  but  otherwise  fails
    entirely to engage with it [18]. I find that the decision is flawed  to
    the extent that I should set it aside.

 6. The appellant cannot succeed under  the  Immigration  Rules.   In  this
    instance, I find that Article 8 need only be invoked if the failure  of
    the appellant to meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules is such
    as to cause unnecessary and significant hardship to this family  but  I
    have no evidence to indicate that it does so.  If the sponsor  believes
    that he can now meet the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules,  the
    appellant should make a new application and a proper assessment by  the
    Entry Clearance Officer of the sponsor's financial circumstances can be
    carried out in the normal way.  I cannot find that this out of  country
    application  falls  into  that  rare  category  of  cases   where   the
    circumstances  are  such  that  Article  8  must  be  used  to  prevent
    significant injustice occurring.   The  appellant  is  very  young  and
    enjoys the daily care and attention of his mother.  He may  soon  enjoy
    the company of his father also provided a prompt  application  is  made
    for entry clearance.

Notice of Decision

 7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which is dated 2 June  2015  is
    set aside.  I have remade the decision  in  the  Upper  Tribunal.   The
    appeal of the appellant against the decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer dated 8 October 2014 is dismissed under the  Immigration  Rules
    and on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 20 December 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal against the immigration decision  and  therefore
there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 20 December 2105

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
