
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
OA/13855/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 15th February 2016                    |  On 7th April 2016                 |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                               mr ali raza mir
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTIon NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER -Islamabad
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     None but Lee Valley Solicitors on File
For the Respondent:    Ms S Sreeraman, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Lamb dismissing the appellant's appeal against  the
    Entry Clearance Officer's refusal of his application under Appendix FM.
     That application was refused on 9th October 2014 under  paragraph  EC-
    P.1.1(c) whereby an applicant must not fall for refusal  under  any  of
    the grounds in Section S-EC: suitability - entry clearance.

 2. The appellant was born on 21st  October  1988  and  is  a  national  of
    Pakistan and applied for entry clearance as a partner under Appendix FM
    of the Immigration Rules.

 3. In the notice of immigration decision issued  by  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer the Entry Clearance Officer stated that the appellant signed  a
    declaration on his Visa Application Form on 30th January  2014  to  say
    that the information contained within it  was  correct  and  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer stated  the following;

    'In answer to question 27 "have you made an  application  to  the  Home
    Office to remain in the UK in the last ten years" you said "no".

    In answer to question 30 "have you been deported, removed or  otherwise
    required to leave any country including the UK in the last  ten  years"
    you said no.

    In answer to question 31 have you ever voluntarily  elected  to  depart
    the UK you said no.

    I am satisfied that statements made above were false.  This is  because
    the Home Office records show that you were previously in  the  UK  with
    valid leave as a student and on 11th June 2012 your existing leave  was
    curtailed.  Our records also show that on 8th January 2013 you  applied
    for leave to remain in the UK under the domestic  violence  concession.
    As a result of your visa curtailment you subsequently left  the  UK  on
    25th February 2014.

    In the light of the above I  am  satisfied  that  you  have  failed  to
    disclose  material  facts  in  relation  to  his  application  and  his
    application was refused further to EC-P.1.1(c) of Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules (S-EC.2.2(a))'.

 4. The matter came before the First-tier Tribunal Judge who found that  at
    paragraph 18 that although reference was made by  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer to the curtailment of the appellant's leave on 11th June  2012,
    no evidence in support of that statement was presented to the  Tribunal
    and it was denied by the appellant.  The Judge found that he  would  at
    least have expected to have seen a letter to the appellant stating that
    curtailment.  None was forthcoming.

 5. Judge Lamb also found at [19] of his decision that the application  for
    entry clearance stated, in answer to question 23,  that  the  visa  was
    issued on 28th April 2011  and  expired  on  28th  February  2013,  the
    refusal notice by the Entry Clearance Officer states 'as  a  result  of
    your visa curtailment you subsequently left the  UK  on  25th  February
    2014'.  The Judge stated

         "That date is  clearly  an  error.   However  the  Entry  Clearance
         Manager repeated it in the following sentence."

 6. The Judge  found  that  considering  the  importance  attached  by  the
    respondent to the date, the lack of  attention  to  detail  caused  him
    serious doubt about the reliability of the remainder of the decision.

 7. The Judge at [20] recorded that there was a  letter  showing  that  the
    appellant and his wife consulted solicitors in Bristol about the  legal
    basis upon which he might remain in the UK and the solicitors submitted
    that there was no application made.  The Judge found

         "I find that what probably happened  was  the  solicitors  made  an
         enquiry by telephone  to  ascertain  whether  such  leave  and  the
         concession might be forthcoming and that was  why  the  letter  was
         worded as it was, expressly  stating  it  as  a  finding  that  the
         appellant was not eligible and that the letter was not a  decision.
         This also explains why there was  no  written  application  on  the
         respondent's file."

 8. The Judge found that what was a known fact was that the  appellant  and
    his wife married in Pakistan on 27th February 2013 and  lived  together
    until 17th May 2013 when she returned to the United Kingdom  to  resume
    her employment.

 9. As a result the Judge found that the answer given by the  appellant  to
    question 25 in his application form was in fact  truthful  "because  he
    had made no application.  All that he had done was to make  an  enquiry
    through his solicitors" [22].  The judge found  that  "his  failure  to
    mention that was not a failure to answer accurately any question in the
    application nor was it a failure to disclose material facts".

10. The Judge then stated the following:

         "23. On the basis  of  the  evidence  which  I  have  set  out  and
             discussed above, I find that the  Appellant  left  the  United
             Kingdom on 25 February 2013,  voluntarily,  knowing  that  his
             visa was due to expire on 28 February and intending  to  marry
             in Pakistan on the 27th.  I do  not  see  how  that  could  be
             anything other than a voluntary election to depart the  United
             Kingdom, and therefore the accurate answer to question  29  in
             his entry clearance application form was yes, instead  of  no.
             In his witness statement, the Appellant  states  that  he  was
             never asked by the respondent to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.
             His wife in her witness  statement  states  that  he  did  not
             receive any notice from the respondent  to  leave  the  United
             Kingdom, but rather he returned to Pakistan as  his  visa  was
             expiring.  Those statements address the  wording  of  question
             28, referred to by the clearance officer as question  30,  but
             not the wording of question 29, referred to as question 31."

11. As such the Judge stated that when referring to  the  exercise  of  the
    discretion of the Entry  Clearance  Officer  that  the  respondent  had
    justification on the basis of the response  by  the  appellant  to  the
    query about voluntary election to depart.

12. Grounds for permission to appeal were lodged  on  the  basis  that  the
    respondent had not discharged the burden of proof by establishing  that
    there was an  element  of  dishonesty  on  the  appellant's  part  when
    responding to the application question.  Secondly it was submitted that
    the respondent had asserted that the appellant's  leave  was  curtailed
    but in fact it was the appellant's case that he had  not  received  any
    letter from the respondent and further to Syed  (Curtailment  of  Leave
    Notice) India [2013] UKUT 114 (IAC) "at paragraph 28:

         "The Secretary of State has to be able to prove that notice of  the
         decision varying leave to  remain  under  Section  3(3)(a)  of  the
         Immigration Act  1971  where  there  is  no  right  of  appeal  was
         communicated to the person concerned for it to be effective.  Where
         there  is  no  'immigration  decision'  the  Immigration  (Notices)
         Regulations 2003 do not apply".

    In effect the Secretary of  State  could  not  rely  on  deemed  postal
    service.

13. As in the case of Syed it was submitted that the respondent  could  not
    prove that notice of a decision varying leave to remain  under  Section
    3(3)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971, was communicated to the  appellant
    effectively.

14. Permission to appeal was granted in somewhat obscure terms but  to  the
    effect that in the circumstances it was arguable that the  totality  of
    information and documentation potentially available  should  have  been
    assessed before the hearing proceeded.

15. A Rule 24 Notice was submitted stating that at paragraph 23  the  Judge
    found that the appellant's answer to question  29  in  the  application
    "have you ever voluntarily elected to depart the UK" should  have  been
    'yes' and not 'no'.  It was submitted that  a  failure  to  disclose  a
    material fact did not require dishonesty and the  appellant's  reliance
    on AA (Nigeria) was misplaced.  S-EC2.2 states  "false  information  in
    relation to the application or failure  to  disclose  material  facts".
    There was nothing in the  express  wording  of  S-EC2.2  that  requires
    dishonest failure to disclose.

16. At the hearing there was no representation for  the  appellant  on  the
    basis that it appeared the sponsor had  not  been  able  to  place  the
    solicitors in funds and an adjournment was requested.

17. I was not persuaded that the matter could not be dealt with  fairly  on
    the day.  There was no guarantee that  the  appellant's  representative
    would be in funds at any later date.

18. Ms Sreeraman conceded that there was an error of law on the basis  that
    voluntary election to depart in the context of the application referred
    to when the appellant ceases to have leave.  As  the  Judge  stated  at
    paragraph 18 there was no  letter  regarding  the  curtailment  of  the
    appellant's leave and no evidence or proof further  to  Syed  that  the
    curtailment notice had been served on the appellant.  The reference  to
    the voluntary election to depart in the application  form,  is  in  the
    context of questions as to  whether  the  appellant  has  been  refused
    entry, deported, removed or otherwise required to leave a  country  was
    confused by the Judge.  Indeed at  the  top  and  at  question  23  the
    appellant clearly states that he left the country on 26  February  2013
    and therefore he did declare that he left the country.

19. I conclude that the interpretation of the phrase "voluntary elected  to
    depart the UK" is that it  should  be  interpreted  in  line  with  the
    guidance issued by the Secretary of State  which  refers  to  voluntary
    departure in terms of presence in the UK without leave.  As  stated  it
    had not been accepted that the curtailment notice had been  effectively
    served on the appellant.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge's  misconstrued
    the appellant's responses in his application  form.  I  find  therefore
    that there has been an error of law which may be material.  I  set  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision aside but preserve the findings of
    fact at [18], [19] [20] and [22].

20. The Entry Clearance Officer's decision is  unsatisfactory.   The  dates
    referred to in that decision regarding the  appellant's  departure  are
    contradictory  and  inconsistent  and   suggest   that   perhaps   this
    application was confused with another.   The  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    referred to the date of 25th February 2014 whilst the appellant  stated
    that the date of departure was 26th February 2013.  The  references  to
    the questions were not consistent either.  The Entry Clearance  Officer
    referred to question 31 "have you ever voluntarily  elected  to  depart
    the UK".  That question was in fact question 29 of the appellant's visa
    application.

21. The Entry Clearance Officer has not considered the  substantive  merits
    of this matter and, in the light of these findings,  has  proceeded  on
    erroneous grounds and without, it would appear, any firm evidence  that
    the appellant's  leave  had  indeed  been  effectively  curtailed.   Ms
    Sreeraman agreed having taken instructions from a senior  case  working
    officer that the matter should be remitted back to the Entry  Clearance
    Officer for a lawful decision.

Order

The Judge erred materially for the reasons  identified.   I  set  aside  the
decision  pursuant  to  Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals   Courts   and
Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007) and remake the decision under section  12(2)
(b) (ii) of the TCE 2007.

I allow the appeal for the reasons given above to  the  extent  that  matter
awaits a lawful decision by the Entry Clearance Officer.

No anonymity direction is made.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington            Date 24th March 2016


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no  fee  award
because the appeal was only allowed to a limited extent.



Signed                                  Date 24th March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


