
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/13832/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 April 2016                               |On 15 April 2016              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA

                                   Between

                              SHAKEELA RAFIQUE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss C H Bexen, Counsel, instructed by Magna
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 20 September 1954.   She
    appeals against the respondent's decision of 1 October 2014  to  refuse
    her leave to enter the United Kingdom as a returning residence to  join
    her British citizen husband.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  A  E  Walker
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against which  she  appealed.   First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Nicholson granted permission to appeal stating that
    it is arguable that "freedom to mourn and participate in the funeral of
    a spouse is integral to a person's  identity  thus  generally  engaging
    private life".

2.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Walker made the  following  findings  in  his
    determination.  It was accepted that the appellant does  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration  Rules  and  her  appeal  stood  to  be
    considered under Article 8.   The judge noted that  the  appellant  has
    lived in Pakistan for much of her life, is a highly  intelligent  woman
    who has made her own way in  the  world  as  she  herself  states.  She
    achieved high academic achievement and was able to sustain a post at  a
    good school as a  teacher.   I  do  not  accept  that  she  is  without
    community ties in Pakistan. She clearly has friends there, as she says.
    It was accepted that were the appellant to live in the  United  Kingdom
    she would  not  be  a  drain  on  public  resources  as  she  has  been
    comfortably left off by her late husband.   It was also  noted  by  the
    judge that she lives well within her means in Pakistan.  There was also
    no suggestion that she has any medical condition and she  still  has  a
    brother alive and living not too far from her in Pakistan.

3.   The judge stated:

         "I consider that the chain of events that unfolded at  Heathrow  in
         2014 when she was detained the effect of which  was  that  she  was
         unable to attend her husband's funeral was lamentable and  she  has
         my sympathy for the situation that she found herself  in.  However,
         that does not change my findings that the appellant's ties  are  in
         Pakistan.  I realise that her family are concerned for her and that
         she misses her children and grandchildren.  However, these feelings
         would be able to be met by the appellant visiting her  as  she  has
         done in  the  past.   I  do  not  accept  the  criticism  that  the
         respondent has levelled against her for previously applying as  the
         dependant of her son.  It is clear that she is a highly honest lady
         because that was the reason why she found herself in difficulty  at
         Heathrow."

4.   It was said that her husband had died. The Border  Agency  staff  would
    not have refused her  entry  on  the  visa  she  had.   Therefore,  the
    appellant does not meet the requirements of the Rules  with  regard  to
    returning residents.  The judge found at paragraph 31 that

         "The appellant may continue to enjoy her family life by  visits  as
         she has done up to now and by modern means  of  communication.   He
         noted that she seeks to maintain her relationship  with  her  adult
         children all of whom have flown the nest, to quote the sponsor.  It
         is a normal feature of life that adult children leave home  and  it
         does not follow that their parents have  to  live  with  them.   It
         follows that I consider that the refusal does  not  interfere  with
         the appellant's family life."

    and dismissed the appeal.

5.    The  grounds  of  appeal  state  that  the  appellant  applied  for  a
    settlement visa as a wife of a British citizen  which  was  granted  in
    March 2014. The appellant travelled to the United Kingdom on  15  April
    and her visa was curtailed because of the change of circumstances.  The
    temporary admission she was granted was not in time  to  allow  her  to
    attend her husband's funeral.  This was in breach  of  the  appellant's
    private life and her  right  to  participate  in  the  funeral  of  her
    husband.

6.   It is the appellant's case that since the death of her husband  she  is
    lonely and deserted.  The  judge  when  considering  her  human  rights
    played  little  regard  to  the   fundamental   point   in   Strasbourg
    jurisprudence, namely that states have a positive duty to show  respect
    for family life. The judge did not demonstrate a proper appreciation of
    the basic proposition that  a  person's  family  life  depends  on  one
    another, socially, physically and emotionally particularly  when  there
    has been a determination in the  family.   The  judge  failed  to  give
    adequate and sufficient consideration to the fact that the appellant is
    lonely and depressed.  There is a positive obligation on the  state  to
    foster family relationships.

7.   In EB (Kosovo) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  [2008]
    UKHL 41 Lord Bingham reaffirmed that point made in Huang v Secretary of
    State [2007] UKHL at paragraph 18  that  the  Strasbourg  jurisprudence
    recognise that Article 8 imposes  on  contracting  states  not  only  a
    negative duty to refrain from unjustified interference with a  person's
    right to respect for his family but a positive duty to show respect for
    it.  The judge failed to adequately consider the appellant's case.

8.   The Rule 24 response by the respondent states that  the  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal directed himself appropriately  in  a  lengthy  and
    detailed determination. The judge considered the long  and  complicated
    history  of  this  particular  appellant  including   the   unfortunate
    circumstances of losing her husband and not being able  to  attend  her
    husband's funeral.  However, taking a holistic approach to the findings
    it is difficult to see how Judge Walker erred  in  his  assessment  and
    findings. The appellant cannot succeed under the Rules and as the judge
    has observed, the  status  quo  of  visiting  her  adult  children  can
    continue and thus she can maintain a family life as she has done.

9.   It was open to the judge to find that the appellant had  no  Article  8
    protected family life with adult children.  The grounds have  no  merit
    and the appeal should be dismissed.

10.  At the hearing I heard submissions from  both  parties  as  to  whether
    there is an error of law in  the  determination.   Miss  Bexen  in  her
    submissions set out the history of the appellant in that she is  a  60-
    year-old lady and has had a long history of  leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom and ostensibly has lived here for about  eight  or  nine
    years of her life.  She was  very  honest  when  she  declared  to  the
    Immigration Officers at the airport that her husband had died  the  day
    before she landed. That was definitely in breach of  her  private  life
    not to allow her to attend the funeral.

11.  In respect of family life she  argued  that  the  appellant  needs  her
    children at this stage of her life and also has  grandchildren  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The appellant is in a vulnerable position in  Pakistan
    as a woman living alone.  She cited the case of EB  (Kosovo)  and  said
    that the judge should have had regard to  the  cultural  conditions  in
    Pakistan.

12.  Mr Avery in his submissions on behalf of  the  respondent  stated  that
    the basis of her entry clearance to  join  her  husband  is  no  longer
    sustainable because her husband has died.  The Article 8 claim  has  no
    merit.  The appellant has been living apart from her husband by her own
    choice with her children in  Pakistan  because  the  children  went  to
    schools there. The children  are  now  adults.   The  judge  took  into
    account all the circumstances and said that the appellant can  continue
    family life with visits to the United Kingdom as she has  done  in  the
    past.  The appellant should not attempt to circumvent  the  Immigration
    Rules because she can make an application from  Pakistan  to  join  her
    family in this country.

13.  Miss Bexen in reply said that it was not an attempt to  circumvent  the
    Immigration Rules.  The appellant does not have any family in  Pakistan
    and all her family are here.  She  is  an  educated  woman.  She  is  a
    chemistry teacher and  she  will  not  be  a  drain  on  the  financial
    resources of this country.

My Findings

14.  There is no dispute that the appellant does not meet  the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules  for  a  returning  resident.  Therefore,  her
    appeal was considered pursuant to Article 8.  The complaint made  about
    the  judge  is  that  the  judge  did  not  consider  the   appellant's
    circumstances in totality and the fact that she is now left in Pakistan
    alone.  The judge in his determination put much emphasis  on  the  fact
    that the appellant has lived in Pakistan  for  most  of  her  life  and
    therefore can continue to do so.

15. The judge did not take into account that the appellant, when  she  lived
   in Pakistan lived with her children, even though she did  not  live  with
   her husband who remained in this country.  The judge also  did  not  take
   into account that the appellant's  circumstances  have  now  changed  and
   while she could live in Pakistan before as her children  were  with  her,
   now that all her children and grandchildren are in  the  United  Kingdom,
   she would be alone in Pakistan. This is  why  she  decided  to  join  her
   husband and her children in the  United  Kingdom  but  unfortunately  her
   husband died the day before she arrived  at  Heathrow  airport.  Had  she
   arrived a day earlier, she would have entered the country.


16. I therefore find that the judge made a material  error  of  law  in  not
   looking at the appellant's circumstances at the present time and  putting
   too much emphasis on her past circumstances.   Circumstances  are  always
   evolving and a person's life evolves with them.  The  appellant  has  had
   two indefinite leaves to remain in the United Kingdom.  She tried to come
   back as a returning resident and could not meet the requirements  of  the
   Immigration Rules due to our husband's death.


17. In this instance I find that there are exceptional  circumstances  where
   she should be granted leave to remain  under  Article  8  even  when  she
   cannot meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.   All  her  family
   are in this country.  She lived with her children in Pakistan.  I  accept
   that they are adult children but she has always attempted  to  live  with
   them wherever they have been, first in Pakistan and  now  in  the  United
   Kingdom.


18. I do not think that the appellant would be able to now  continue  family
   life by visits, although I am not prejudging the  situation,  but  it  is
   commonsense that it would be a little more difficult for her to get leave
   to come to the United Kingdom to visit her children given her immigration
   record.


19. Be that as it may, I find that the appellant has demonstrated  that  her
   circumstances are not catered for within the Immigration Rules.  This  is
   a woman who lived with her husband who is a British citizen and  now  she
   is 60 years old and needs to be with her family.  I accept  Miss  Bexen's
   submissions that the cultural aspects of  the  appellant's  circumstances
   must be taken into account which is to  be  with  her  children  for  the
   remaining days of her life.

Notice of Decision

18.  I therefore set aside the determination of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Walker and substitute my decision  and  allow  the  appellant's  appeal
    under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights  in  respect
    of her family life in this country.

19.  Appeal allowed.

20.  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 4 April 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no  fee  award
as none was requested.


Signed                                  Date 4 April 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana
