

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/14289/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at  Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3rd August 2016                            |On 4th August 2016           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                  GA BLACK

                                   Between



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Mrs HENA FATEMA SYEDA
                                                         Claimant/Respondent

                           NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin ( Home Office Presenting officer)
For the Respondent:    Ms S  Mardner ( Counsel instructed  by Nasim & Co
solicitors)


                            DECISION  AND REASONS


   1. The appellant in this error of law matter is the  Secretary  of  State
      and I shall refer to the parties as " the Secretary of State"  and  to
      the appellant in the First-tier Tribunal as the "Claimant".


   2. The Secretary of State appeals against a decision made  by  First-tier
      Tribunal (Judge Hosie) (FTT) promulgated on 1st December 2015 in which
      she allowed the Claimant's appeal against a  decision  to  refuse  her
      entry clearance as the spouse of a person settled in the UK outside of
      the rules under Article 8 ECHR.



   3. The FTT allowed the appeal under Article 8 [17-25] having  found  that
      there was family life and an interference  that  was  disproportionate
      having  regard to the interests of the family. The FTT  accepted  that
      the Claimant had not met the relevant rules as the sponsor was  not  a
      settled person in the UK and both he and the Claimant's step  children
      had been granted discretionary leave until 2017.  Reference  was  made
      to the sponsor as a person who stood to be removed and the children as
      "qualifying " under section 117B of the 2002 Act as amended.  The  FTT
      found evidence that it was in the best interest of the  family  member
      to remain in the UK [24].


   4. In grounds of application for permission the Secretary of State argued
      that  the FTT erred a) by misdirection of law in its consideration  of
      section  117B  2002  Act  as  amended  and  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
      Immigration Rules in the light of  there  being  no  application  made
      under those provisions and no removal  directions  made.   Further  b)
      the FTT erred in considering the evidence as at the  date  of  hearing
      rather than at the date of decision which  was  applicable  for  entry
      clearance appeals.  The FTT  erred  by  c)  assessing  the  appeal  by
      reference to the removal of the sponsor where that was  not  in  issue
      and  in  considering  Article  8  proportionality  took  into  account
      erroneous matters such as Paragraph 276 ADE and section  117B(6),  and
      by taking the view that the sponsor choice  of  residence  in  the  UK
      outweighed the right  to control borders.

   5. Permission was granted on  all grounds   singularly  or  cumulatively.
      It was  arguable that the FTT in applying Article  8   approached  the
      matter as if it were a guaranteed right for a couple to  choose  where
      they lived and the proportionality assessment was flawed.

   6.  The Claimant relied on a  Rule  24  response  arguing  that  the  FTT
      correctly applied the law in the appeal.

   7.  At the  hearing  before  me  both  representatives  agreed  that  the
      decision and reasons could not be sustained and that the FTT erred  in
      all respects by failing to apply the correct law to the  issues  under
      appeal.   The  sponsor  was  a  not  a  settled  person  as   he   had
      discretionary leave to remain in the UK and the issues ought  to  have
      been considered under Article 8, if justified (SS (Congo)  &  others),
      in terms of reasonableness of relocation .





Decision

   8.  There are material errors in law and I set  aside  the  decision  and
      reasons.  I allow the appeal by the Secretary of State on all grounds.
       I remit the matter for a fresh hearing to the  FTT  at  Hatton  Cross
      (excluding Judge Hosie).  There were no findings of fact that could be
      preserved and given that the errors were  entirely  with  the  FTT,  I
      decided that it was fair for  the Claimant to have a  further  hearing
      before a differently constituted Tribunal .



                               Signed                     Date 3.8.2016


                               GA Black
                               Deputy  Judge of the Upper Tribunal






                               NO ANONYMITY ORDER
                               NO FEE AWARD.


                               Signed                     Date 3.8.2016


                               GA Black
                               Deputy  Judge of the Upper Tribunal


