
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/14996/2014
                                                               OA/14998/2014
                                                               OA/15000/2014
                                                               OA/15001/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 September 2016                          |On 14 October 2016            |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                  LUBNA [A]
                                    [h s]
                                    [a f]
                                    [h z]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ISLAMABAD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Fletcher, Counsel, instructed by Marks & Marks
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellants against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Shand, QC (the judge), promulgated on 17 March 2016,  by
    which he dismissed the appeals under the Immigration Rules.  The  first
    Appellant is the mother of the other three. By applications made on  20
    February 2014, the Appellants sought to join  the  sponsor  (the  first
    Appellant's husband) and the father of the other three) in  the  United
    Kingdom. The applications were refused on 30 October 2014.  In light of
    the initial refusal and the Entry Clearance Manager's review  the  sole
    issue related to specified financial evidence under Appendix  FM-SE  to
    the Immigration Rules.  In  particular,  the  relevant  bank  statement
    indicating the required level of savings  ended  on  20  January  2014.
    This was short (only just) of the required 28-day period leading up  to
    the date of the application.

The judge's decision

 2. Having set out the evidence before him the judge goes on to  deal  with
    the evidence at paragraph 17 onwards.  He  states  that  the  financial
    requirements of  Appendix  FM  -SE  are  mandatory,  relying  for  this
    proposition on the Upper Tribunal decision in Sultana [2014] UKUT 00540
    (IAC). He notes that the appellants' Counsel (Mr Chohan)  accepted  the
    relevant bank statements were dated earlier than the  28  day  required
    period.

 3. In paragraph 18 the judge refers to a  submission  made  by  Mr  Chohan
    concerning paragraph 245DD of the Rules.   The judge comments correctly
    that this paragraph had no application to the appellants' case as 245DD
    relates to Points-Based System cases.   The judge goes on  to  look  at
    the correct provision in respect of the arguments put  forward  on  the
    appellants'  behalf,  namely  paragraph  D  of  Appendix  FM-SE.   This
    provision confers upon the Respondent a discretion as to the waiver  of
    the strict evidential requirements imposed by Appendix  FM  SE  and  in
    respect of any further enquiry as to additional  evidence.   The  judge
    concluded that in the present case no issue of discretion arose.  It is
    said that this resulted from the  fact  that  the  Appellants  had  not
    sought to raise the issue of discretion when making their applications,
    or indeed by way of a covering letter  from  the  solicitors  dated  20
    February 2014. The judge concludes that the  Respondent  was  under  no
    obligation to enquire whether  or  not  an  additional  bank  statement
    covering the  requisite  28-day  period  either  existed  or  could  be
    produced.  The appeals were  therefore  dismissed  in  respect  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 4. At paragraph 20 the judge notes that whilst Article 8 is referred to in
    bare terms in the notice of appeal, no submissions upon this  provision
    were made to him. In those circumstances the judge  concluded  that  he
    need not address the issue.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 5. At paragraph 5 of the grounds of appeal  it  is  said  that  there  was
    indeed a discretion available to  the  Respondent  in  respect  of  the
    missing financial evidence.   This  discretion  arose  under  paragraph
    D(e)(i)(aa) of Appendix FM-SE.

 6. At paragraph 6 of the grounds and in reliance upon Sultana it  is  said
    that the discretion should  have  been  considered  by  the  Respondent
    notwithstanding the fact that the appellants had not raised it  at  any
    stage prior to the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer being  made.



 7. It is contended at paragraph 9  of  the  grounds  that  the  evidential
    deficit in this case was minor.

 8. The second ground of challenge is that the judge should it is said have
    dealt  with  Article  8  himself  notwithstanding  the  fact  that   no
    submissions were made on the point at the hearing.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson
    on 30 August 2016.  He regarded both grounds as being arguable.

The hearing before me

10. Miss Fletcher relied on the grounds.  She  accepted,  as  it  had  been
    before the judge, that the evidence submitted with the application  was
    indeed deficient, albeit only by some two days. Miss Fletcher submitted
    that nonetheless the Respondent did have  a  discretion  and  that  the
    judge was wrong not to have found that this was the case. Miss Fletcher
    accepted that paragraph D(e) of Appendix FM-SE had not been  raised  in
    the grounds or indeed before the First-tier Tribunal.

11. Mr Walker relied on the Respondent's Rule  24  reply.  He  acknowledged
    that the judge's decision may seem somewhat harsh  but  nonetheless  it
    was open to him in the circumstances, particularly given the fact  that
    the issue of discretion had not been raised before the Entry  Clearance
    Officer and also that the deficiency in the financial evidence did  not
    constitute a missing document from a sequence but  was  simply  missing
    mandatory evidence.

Decision on error of law

12. Although I have considerable sympathy with the Appellants in this case,
    I conclude that the judge did not materially error of law.  My  reasons
    for this conclusion are as follows.

13. First, it is simply a fact that despite the  Appellants  being  legally
    represented at the time that the applications were  made,  nothing  was
    said at that point about  the  deficiency  in  the  financial  evidence
    despite (I assume) this being known about.  There  is  nothing  in  the
    application or in the covering letter from  the  solicitors.   This  is
    somewhat unfortunate to say the least, particularly given  the  warning
    provided by the Upper Tribunal at paragraph 20 of Sultana.

14. Second, the financial requirements of Appendix FM-SE are mandatory  and
    the judge was right to have said so.

15. Third, the  only  basis  upon  which  the  Appellants  have  sought  to
    challenge the judge's conclusions on the discretion issue  is  reliance
    upon paragraph  D(b)(e)(i)(aa)  of  Appendix  FM-SE.   This  particular
    provision states that where a document within a sequence is found to be
    missing, contact can be made with the applicant in order to rectify the
    situation.  The potential discretion under paragraph E(e)  of  Appendix
    FM -SE is not raised  in  the  grounds  of  appeal,  nor  has  it  been
    specifically relied upon before me.

16. Fourth, I accept that whilst the case of Sultana makes  it  clear  that
    evidential deficiencies and reliance upon discretion should  be  raised
    by applicants or other representatives at the  outset,  this  does  not
    necessarily mean that the first  instance  decision  maker  should  not
    consider exercising a discretion  in  an  appropriate  case.  In  other
    words, Sultana does not  represent an absolute bar to the consideration
    of a discretion under Appendix FM-SE.

17. Fifth, to the extent that the  judge  might  appear  to  have  regarded
    Sultana as representing such an absolute bar, I would conclude that  he
    erred. Having said that it is unclear perhaps  as  to  whether  he  has
    indeed adopted this position.

18. Sixth, for the sake of argument, I will assume that the judge has erred
    in the manner described above. However, there is a major, and indeed an
    insuperable, obstacle to the Appellants' challenge  on  the  discretion
    issue in this case.

19. I have looked  at  the  relevant  bank  statement  submitted  with  the
    application.  It is not, I find, part of a sequence of documents any of
    which were missing. It is in effect a stand-alone  document  comprising
    of two pages and covering a particular period of time. That  period  of
    time of course fell short of the requisite 28-day period.

20. Having regard to the comments of Mr Justice Foskett in the case  of  GU
    [2014] EWHC 1634 Admin and the bank statement in  evidence  before  me,
    there is only one conclusion that can properly be reached, namely  that
    the bank statement was not part of a sequence of  documents.   In  fact
    what was missing from the evidence submitted with the application was a
    further bank statement. In this regard specified and mandatory evidence
    had simply not been provided.  In light of this the argument based upon
    paragraph D(b)(i)(aa) cannot succeed.

21. Seventh, no other basis for the contended exercise of discretion by the
    Respondent has been raised. I have myself looked at the guidance on the
    financial evidence contained in Appendix FM Section FM 1.7 May 2016, at
    paragraph 3.4.1 onwards and there is nothing there that can assist  the
    Appellants, not least because there has never been as far as I can  see
    any argument or challenge on the basis that any policy guidance was not
    properly followed by the Respondent.

22. Eighth, as a result of the foregoing, any error by the judge in respect
    of the discretionary issue was in any event immaterial to  the  outcome
    of the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

23. Ninth, in respect of the Article  8  point,  Miss  Fletcher  could  not
    explain why the Article 8 issue ws not pursued by  way  of  submissions
    and/or evidence at the First-tier Tribunal hearing.  I find as  a  fact
    that it was not, having regard to the papers before me and  the  Record
    of Proceedings contained on file. It is right that Article 8 was stated
    in bald terms in the notice of appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    that it was not formally withdraw before the judge.

24. However, with any relevant evidence being led and/or submissions  being
    made on what is not an entirely straightforward element of any case  in
    this day and age, it is simply untenable  to  suggest  that  the  judge
    erred in failing to address the issue in any substance. It may be  that
    Counsel before the First-tier decided that any Article  8  case  simply
    lacked sufficient merit to pursue the point  at  the  hearing.  In  any
    event, on the state of the case law as it stands, and the fact that the
    Appellants would have failed  to  have  met  the  relevant  Immigration
    Rules, it is very difficult indeed to see how they could have succeeded
    on Article 8 grounds in any event.

25. For all of the above reasons the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    stands.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The Appellants' appeals to the Upper Tribunal are dismissed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date: 12 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor





TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                                  Date: 12 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


