

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/14177/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Determination Promulgated    |
|On  10 September 2014                         |On 19 September 2014         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between


                                 RUNA BEGUM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:  Mr A Bashir, Bashir Consultancy
For the Respondent: Mr Diwncyz, HOPO

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. This appeal came before Judge Turnock on 16 May 2014.
   2. Two days before the hearing, in breach of directions,  the  respondent
      served additional evidence which the judge decided to admit,  although
      he gave no reason in the determination for  doing  so.  The  appellant
      sought an adjournment to address the points arising from that evidence
      which the judge refused.
   3. The grounds argue that he acted in a  manner  which  was  procedurally
      unfair by depriving the appellant of  an  opportunity  to  adduce  any
      documentary evidence in reply.
   4. Furthermore the judge took into account redacted material  upon  which
      the presenting officer said that she did not wish to rely.
   5. Permission to appeal was granted. Mr Diwncyz, for the respondent,  did
      not wish to defend the determination and said that he had no objection
      to a remittal.
   6. The determination is characteristically thorough  and  well  reasoned,
      but I find that the judge did err in  law  for  the  reasons  set  out
      above, and his actions deprived the appellant of a full opportunity to
      put his case.
   7.  The appeal should be reheard by a differently constituted  first-tier
      tribunal, not to include Judge Turnock at Bradford.



Signed                                  Date




                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
