
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/14960/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 December 2015                   |On 28 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                     Entry Clearance Officer - Islamabad
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MARYAM FATIMA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Hussain, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and to the  respondent
    as the appellant (as they appeared respectively before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The appellant, Maryam Fatima, was born on 9 March 1994  and
    is a female citizen of Pakistan.  She applied to  come  to  the  United
    Kingdom to join  her  husband  (the  sponsor).   That  application  was
    refused on 28 October 2014.  She appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Caswell) which, in  a  decision  promulgated  on  2  July  2015,
    allowed the appeal on Article  8  ECHR  grounds.   The  respondent  now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Both parties agreed that the appellant  could  not  succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules.  The deposits in the sponsor's bank account did  not
    match his stated earnings as disclosed in his wage slips.  At [17], the
    judge considered Article 8 ECHR:

         "This is of course an entry clearance case, and  the  applicability
         of Article 8 outside the rules is not as strongly endorsed as in an
         in-country appeal (see SS (Congo) for instance). However, there  is
         a very young child here who is a British  national,  and  I  accept
         that there is a bond between father and daughter, which was  formed
         when he was there for her birth and spent several months  with  her
         as a newborn. The photographs  demonstrate  the  closeness  of  the
         family group, and the sponsor was eloquent about the pain he  feels
         at being separated from his daughter. Given these matters,  I  find
         that there are here circumstances which merit consideration of  the
         appeal on general Article 8 grounds outside the Rules."

 3. She went on to consider the familiar five  stage  "test"  contained  in
    Razgar 2004 UKHL 27.  She noted, in particular, that the child  of  the
    appellant and sponsor is  British.   The  child  was  living  with  the
    appellant in Pakistan at the time of the hearing and  continues  to  do
    so.  The judge observed that the sponsor would have to give up work  if
    he moved to Pakistan and that the family could then have no  chance  of
    meeting the financial requirements of the Immigration Rules.  The judge
    properly considered the public  interest  [21].   She  found  that  the
    sponsor actually earned an income in excess of the levels  required  by
    the Immigration Rules and observed there would

         "... not be any extra drain on public resources  if  the  appellant
         and [the child] joined the sponsor here.  The sponsor  is  entitled
         to have his wife here under the Rules if the criteria  is  met  and
         [the child] is a British citizen entitled to the benefits of  being
         in the UK in her own right."

    She noted that the ECO's own case was that separation would be  limited
    in duration as the appellant could apply again and this time  meet  the
    requirements.  However, the judge was concerned not to  "fragment"  the
    bond which had been formed between the sponsor and the child.   At  the
    time of the hearing before the judge, the child of  the  appellant  and
    sponsor was only 5 months old.

 4. The  grounds  of  appeal  assert  that  there  were  no  insurmountable
    obstacles preventing  the  sponsor  from  living  with  his  family  in
    Pakistan.  The grounds record (as did the judge at [17])  the  judgment
    of the Court of  Appeal  in  SS  (Congo)  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387;  "the
    requirements upon the state in regard to Article 8 are  less  stringent
    in a leave  to  enter  application  and  family  life  can  be  enjoyed
    elsewhere" [Grounds of appeal, 4].  The grounds criticise the judge for
    not  making  any  discrete  finding   that   there   were   exceptional
    circumstances in the case such as to engage Article 8.

 5. I find that the grounds are unpersuasive.  It is not for the  judge  to
    search through the facts in order to  find  exceptional  circumstances.
    What the judge has said at [17] (see above) is, in my opinion, adequate
    to bring Article 8 ECHR into play in  this  appeal.   Having  correctly
    found that Article 8 was engaged, the judge has properly worked her way
    through the Razgar stages and has (crucially) paid proper attention  to
    the public interest concerned with upholding the decision of  the  ECO.
    Given that the sponsor's failure to show that the  sums  which  he  was
    earning were evidenced in  his  bank  statements  whilst  he  otherwise
    persuaded the judge that he was earning in excess of  the  minimum  sum
    required by the Immigration Rules, the remarks of the Court  of  Appeal
    in SS (Congo) are pertinent:

         "55.  In  our  judgment,  the  true  position  lies  between  these
             submissions. Contrary to the argument of the respondents, that
             fact that an applicant may be able to say that their case is a
             'near miss' in relation to satisfying the requirements of  the
             Rules will by no  means  show  that  compelling  circumstances
             exist requiring the grant of LTE outside  the  Rules.  A  good
             deal more than this would need to be shown to make out such  a
             case. The respondents' argument fails to recognise  the  value
             to be attached to having a clear statement  of  the  standards
             applicable to everyone and fails to give proper weight to  the
             judgment of the Secretary of State, as expressed in the Rules,
             regarding what is needed to meet the public interest which  is
             in issue. The 'near miss' argument of the  respondents  cannot
             be sustained in the light  of  these  considerations  and  the
             authority of Miah v Secretary of State for the Home Department
             [2012] EWCA Civ 261, especially at [21]-[26].

         56.  However, it cannot be said that the fact that a case  involves
             a 'near miss' in relation to the requirements set out  in  the
             Rules is wholly irrelevant to the balancing exercise  required
             under Article 8. If an  applicant  can  show  that  there  are
             individual interests at stake covered by Article 8 which  give
             rise to a strong claim that compelling circumstances may exist
             to justify the grant of LTE outside the Rules, the  fact  that
             their case is also a  'near  miss'  case  may  be  a  relevant
             consideration which tips the balance under Article 8 in  their
             favour. In such a case, the applicant will be able to say that
             the detrimental impact on the public interest in issue if  LTE
             is granted in their favour will be somewhat  less  than  in  a
             case where the gap between the applicant's  position  and  the
             requirements of the Rules is great, and the risk that they may
             end up having  recourse  to  public  funds  and  resources  is
             therefore greater.

 6. In my opinion, the judge has identified "individual interests at  stake
    covered by Article 8" and also "compelling circumstances"  particularly
    in relation to the nationality of  the  child,  her  continued  absence
    abroad and, importantly, her separation  from  her  father.  Any  "Near
    miss" elements in this case are relevant in the way identified  by  the
    Court of Appeal in SS Congo [56].  The  judge  has  made  the  specific
    finding that the family will have sufficient funds  to  avoid  being  a
    drain on public  resources,  a  factor  which  clearly  diminishes  the
    particular public interest concerned  with  the  appellant's  exclusion
    from the country.  This is a case, to use the words  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal, "where  the  gap  between  the  applicant's  position  and  the
    requirements of the Rules" is not great.  It is possible  that  another
    Tribunal would have reached a different decision but that  is  not  the
    point.  The outcome in the appeal which was reached by Judge Caswell is
    not perverse on the facts and the route which she  has  taken  to  that
    outcome are sound in law  and  practice.   In  the  circumstances,  the
    appeal is dismissed.





Notice of Decision

 7. This appeal is dismissed.

    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 1 January 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

