
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/14045/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 25 April 2013                                |On 12 July 2013            |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE conway

                                   Between

                           Muhammad jahangir Asif
                        (no anoNYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - Islamabad

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Uzma Rehman (Sponsor)
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Mr Asif, to whom I will refer as the appellant as  he  was  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, although he is strictly  speaking  the  respondent
    before me, is a citizen of Pakistan born in 1958.  He appealed  against
    a decision of the Entry Clearance Officer, Islamabad on 4 July 2012  to
    refuse entry clearance under paragraphs 319C(a), (b), (c), (d) and  (e)
    and 320(7A) of the Immigration Rules.

 2. The appellant sought entry clearance to join Uzma Rehman, a Tier 1  PBS
    migrant in the UK, as her spouse.  The application was refused  because
    the respondent was satisfied that  marriage  documents  submitted  were
    false because the issuing authority, NADRA, had indicated that they did
    not have any record of his marriage to Uzma Rehman.   Further,  NADRA's
    records indicated that he was married to someone else, Shazia Jehangir,
    and has three children by her yet on the Visa Application Form dated  7
    June 2012 had declared that he had no children.  The information  about
    his wife and children was contained in a document  verification  report
    dated 26 June 2012.

 3. He appealed.  The grounds of appeal were in general terms only.

 4. Following a hearing at Taylor House on 6 February  2013  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Brenells allowed the appeal under  the  Immigration
    Rules. It seems he did so in respect of paragraph 320 (7A). It  is  not
    clear that having done so he then went on to consider the refusal under
    paragraph 319C. He dismissed it on human rights grounds (Article 8).

 5. In his determination the judge noted a statement dated 11 January  2013
    from the appellant in which he said that  he  is  married  to  Ms  Uzma
    Rehman whom he had married with  the  permission  of  his  first  wife,
    Shazia Jehangir.  His marriage document was registered  on  25  October
    2010 in the record of the Union Council.  Although  not  at  that  time
    registered with NADRA it was nonetheless a valid and genuine  marriage.
    The marriage document was supported by an affidavit from the person who
    solemnized the marriage.  A computerised certificate of registration of
    marriage was issued by the Secretary of the Union  Council  on  30  May
    2012 and the date communicated to the office of NADRA on 25 July  2012.
    They subsequently issued a new certificate to Ms Rahman by entering her
    name as the appellant's wife.

 6. The sponsor's statement adopted in oral evidence at the hearing was  in
    near identical terms.  She maintained  that  the  marriage  certificate
    should have been verified with the Union Council instead of NADRA.   No
    false documents were submitted with the application form.

 7. The judge noted an affidavit  from  Shazia  Jahangir,  the  appellant's
    first wife in which  she  stated  that  she  consented  to  his  second
    marriage although there was no evidence as to the  date  on  which  she
    gave consent.

 8. The judge in his findings noted that nowhere in the application did the
    appellant indicate that he was married to his first  wife  [15].   This
    was  only  disclosed  when  enquiries  were  made   by   the   Document
    Verification Officer.  Nor did he disclose in the application  that  he
    had  three  children  although  the  form  specifically  asks   whether
    applicants have children [15].

 9. On the issue of the marriage certificate the judge noted that  an  item
    in the translation asked 'whether the bridegroom has any existing wife,
    and if so whether he has secured  the  permission  of  the  Arbitration
    Council under the Muslim Family Laws Ordinance 1961 to contract another
    marriage', and that the answer given reads  'N/A'.   The  judge  stated
    that 'that information was incorrect and no evidence has been  provided
    to show that the necessary permission had been obtained from the  first
    wife and the Council prior to  the  marriage'.   Also,  in  an  English
    version  of  the  marriage  registration  certificate  it   gives   the
    appellant's marital status as 'virgin' which the judge  took  to  be  a
    mistranslation for 'single'.  The judge considered that this error  may
    have been caused by the registrar taking incorrect information from the
    marriage certificate.  However, 'the errors on both certificates  would
    have been obvious to both the appellant and the sponsor and  they  have
    said nothing in relation to these errors' [18].

10. As for the lack of information about  children,  the  judge  noted  the
    appellant's statement that he filled out the application form  'with  a
    mind set as a couple with Ms Uzma Rehman and since we as  a  couple  do
    not have children together from this wedlock as yet hence my answer was
    "no" ' [16].  Ms Rehman's position was virtually identical.

11. The judge in his conclusion about the appellant's  wife  [at  17]  said
    that there is no provision in the Rules which would bar the application
    simply because he has two wives.  There was therefore 'no need for  him
    to conceal either the existence of his  first  wife  or  her  children.
    Nevertheless, both the appellant and the sponsor are  highly   educated
    people, both are qualified lawyers'.

12. He stated [14] 'Only the document verification report  was  adduced  on
    behalf of the respondent in relation to the validity of the appellant's
    marriage  to  the  sponsor.   No  further  evidence  was  submitted  to
    establish that the appellant's marriage to the sponsor was not valid'.

13. And, later, 'Despite the fact that there are errors on the face of  the
    marriage certificate and the  marriage  registration  certificate,  and
    there is no evidence that the appellant has secured the  permission  of
    the Arbitration Council under the Muslim Family Laws Ordinance 1961  to
    contract  another  marriage,  the  respondent   has   failed   by   not
    investigating these matters to discharge the burden of proof of showing
    that the marriage is not valid' [21].

14. As for non-disclosure of the children the judge stated 'The  form  says
    nothing about the paternity or maternity of any  children.   I  do  not
    therefore accept that the failure to declare his  children  was  not  a
    deliberate attempt at concealment by the Appellant' [17].

15. He went on, however, to state that he had to consider  whether  or  not
    the failure to disclose the existence of his  children  'amounts  to  a
    failure to disclose a material fact'  [22].   Noting  a  definition  of
    'material' in a Court of Appeal case in 1998 as whether 'the facts  not
    disclosed  would  be  likely  to  have  influenced  [the  respondent's]
    decision' [25], the judge concluded that they 'would  not  because  the
    fact that the appellant has three children in Pakistan  would  make  it
    more likely that he would have returned to Pakistan on  the  expiration
    of his visa' [26].

16. The respondent sought permission to appeal  which  was  granted  on  15
    March 2013 by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bowen who stated:

         "...

         2.   The grounds that the Respondent assert that the judge  in  his
             conclusions  on  the  burden  of  proof  relating   to   false
             documentation is unlawful given  that  contrary  to  what  the
             judge found the Entry Clearance Officer it is claimed provided
             evidence to substantiate the allegation  that  documents  that
             had  been  produced  were  forged  and  that  the  Appellant's
             marriage was not valid.  It is also asserted  that  the  judge
             erred in his approach to Article 320(7A) refusal which  it  is
             contended  by  the  Respondent  does  not  need  to  have   an
             additional mens rea where it  has  been  shown  that  a  false
             document  has  been  relied   upon   as   opposed   to   false
             representations having been made.  It is  submitted  that  the
             judge's findings on the Document Verification Report undermine
             his conclusions on false representations in  relation  to  the
             claim that the Appellant is married to a person in the  United
             Kingdom.

         3.   It  is  further  asserted  that  the  judge  made  a  material
             misdirection in law in  finding  that  the  Appellant's  false
             representations as regard to a failure  to  disclose  children
             are perverse.  That the failure to disclose three children  is
             clearly  material  to  the  application  to  enter  under  the
             provisions of 319C as it would inevitably alert  the  decision
             maker to the fact that there was a previous relationship.  The
             failure to disclose details of the children would have been an
             attempt  to  prevent  the  Respondent  from   asking   further
             questions and making checks on the  information  contained  in
             the Visa Application Form.

         4.   Examination of the application form for  entry  clearance  and
             supporting documents and having regard to the  fact  that  the
             Appellant and his Sponsor are educated  individuals  it  would
             appear despite the explanations given by the Appellant  as  to
             the  omission  of  information  that  this  may  have  been  a
             deliberate attempt on the part of the Appellant to enhance the
             success of his application.  The arguments put forward by  the
             Respondent in the grounds of application and in particular the
             judge's findings in  paragraph  22  of  his  determination  do
             suggest that there are arguable errors of law which have  been
             identified, therefore permission to appeal is granted."

17. At the error of law hearing Mr Bramble had little to add to the grounds
    seeking permission.  In essence,  the  ECO  had  provided  evidence  to
    substantiate the allegation that the marriage documents were forged and
    the marriage not valid.  The fact that the judge himself found  further
    reason in the documents to question their  authenticity  could  not  be
    used as a lawful reason for finding that the ECO did  not  satisfy  the
    burden on him in the first place.

18. Further, the failure to disclose the existence of the  three  children,
    found by the judge to have been deliberate, was clearly material to the
    application.  He should have found that false representations had  been
    made and that as a result the appeal had to fail.

19. In reply Ms Uzma Rehman, the sponsor, lodged  a  skeleton  argument  in
    which  she  repeated  that  the  marriage  documentation  was  genuine:
    'Improper and inefficient inquiry has been made by the ECO in a  casual
    manner by just relying upon the  NADRA  office  where  the  process  of
    registration has not been reached from the Office of Union Council  ...
    by that time.  The ECO did not bother to verify the document  from  the
    issuing authority which is the Union Council ...'  Documents  had  been
    supplied from the Secretary of the  Union  Council  and  the  'ultimate
    authority', NADRA which 'clearly negate the findings of the ECO on  one
    hand and on the other hand prove the genuineness of the ... marriage'.

20. Further, any errors in the marriage documents were  not  those  of  the
    appellant who did not complete them but rather those of the  solemnizer
    of the marriage ('such  people  having  only  religious  knowledge  and
    usually   uneducated')   and   the   translator   into   English    who
    'inadvertently'  wrote   'N/A',   and   the   software   system   which
    automatically picked up the word 'virgin.  There was no  bad  faith  on
    the part of the appellant.

21. Finally, about the children she and the appellant had a  'mind  set  as
    their own couple without having any children from this wedlock'.  There
    was no section in the form about any previous marriage and any children
    from a previous marriage.  There was  no  fault  on  the  part  of  the
    appellant in the filling out of the form.   There  was  nothing  to  be
    gained by hiding that information.

22. I reserved my determination.

23. In considering this matter I look first at the judge's treatment of the
    false marriage documents allegation.   As  the  judge  noted,  the  ECO
    relied on a document verification report in which  the  officer  stated
    that he was not satisfied that statements and marriage  documents  were
    genuine because the issuing authority NADRA stated  that  they  had  no
    record of his marriage to Uzma Rehman.  Rather, that he was married  to
    someone else and had three children.   He  had  also  declared  in  the
    application form that he had no children.

24. The judge correctly noted (at [7]) that in an appeal arising  from  the
    refusal of an application under paragraph 320(7A) the burden  of  proof
    is on the respondent to establish on a balance  of  probabilities  that
    the requirements of that  paragraph  are  made  out.   However,  in  my
    judgment he erred in stating (at [21]) that the  respondent  failed  by
    not  investigating  the  information  on  the  face  of  the   marriage
    documentation and thereby had not discharged the burden of showing that
    the marriage is not valid.

25. I agree with Mr Bramble that the ECO  did  in  fact  provide  evidence,
    namely the document verification report, to substantiate the allegation
    that the marriage documents were not genuine and false  representations
    made for the reasons given in the report.  The respondent has taken all
    reasonable steps to establish  the  genuineness  or  otherwise  of  the
    marriage documents which were  presented.  I  am  satisfied  that  this
    provides  ample,  cogent  evidence  to   establish   the   respondent's
    conclusion to the required standard. The judge having himself found (at
    [18])  further  reasons  in   these   documents   to   question   their
    authenticity, reasons which he was entitled to reach  on  the  evidence
    before him, it was irrational for him to then find that the ECO had not
    satisfied the burden.  It seems to me on the facts found by  him  about
    the marriage documents the judge was required to conclude that the  ECO
    had satisfied the burden and thus, dismiss the appeal  under  paragraph
    320 (7A) of the Immigration Rules.

26. Even if I am wrong on that matter there remains the issue of  the  non-
    disclosure of the appellant's children.

27. As indicated the judge noted that  the  application  form  specifically
    asked whether the applicant had any children.  The  form  says  nothing
    about the paternity or maternity of any children.   The  appellant  and
    sponsor are both highly educated.  On the evidence before him the judge
    was entitled to disbelieve the evidence of the  appellant  and  sponsor
    that they decided not to enter details of  his  children  'because  the
    form asks about me and my husband' [16].  The  judge  was  entitled  to
    conclude that the  appellant  was  required  to  declare  all  children
    whatever their parentage and that in not doing so such was a deliberate
    attempt at concealment by the appellant [17].

28. The judge noted the terms of paragraph  320(7A)  and  the  case  of  AA
    Nigeria v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 773 where it was stated that  dishonesty
    or deception is needed to render a false representation  a  ground  for
    mandatory refusal.

29. The judge went on, however, to consider that,  whilst  deliberate,  the
    false representation about the children was not  material  because  the
    fact that he has children in Pakistan would make it more likely that he
    would have returned to Pakistan on the expiry of his visa.

30. Whether the deliberate concealment of the existence of his children  in
    the application was or was not material does  not  matter  because  the
    judge, despite quoting the text of paragraph 320(7A),  failed  to  note
    that it states 'where false representations have  been  made  or  false
    documents or information have been submitted (whether or  not  material
    to the  application  [my  emphasis]  ...  [entry  clearance  is  to  be
    refused]'.

31. The judge erred in his application of the law. He has confused a  false
    representation with non disclosure of a material fact. On the facts  as
    found by him, namely, the  answer  that  the  appellant  did  not  have
    children when he has three, and that such  answer  was  deliberate  and
    dishonest for the purpose of obtaining the clearance, such amounted  to
    a false representation. The only conclusion open to him on that  aspect
    of the case as well was to dismiss the appeal under paragraph 320  (7A)
    of the Immigration Rules.

32. Despite having allowed the appeal under the Rules the judge went on  to
    dismiss it on human rights  grounds  (Article  8).  He  seems  to  have
    accepted that there is family life between the  appellant  and  sponsor
    and then to have advanced to proportionality. In a  brief  analysis  he
    noted that the sponsor chose to  marry  on  the  day  before  she  left
    Pakistan to study in the UK.  Instead of returning to Pakistan when her
    studies ended she chose to remain  in  the  UK  tutoring  children  and
    working part-time as a shop assistant rather than rejoining her  spouse
    and resuming  her  work  as  a  lawyer  or  using  her  newly  acquired
    qualifications in some other way. He also noted that the appellant, the
    senior partner of a law firm, had said nothing to explain how he  would
    wish to spend two years in the UK. The judge also noted that  the  ECHR
    does not give couples the right to choose  where  they  wish  to  live.
    These were conclusions he was entitled to reach on the evidence.

33. It was not submitted that, even in the  absence  of  the  findings  and
    conclusions on deception that the judge should have made, his  decision
    to dismiss on human rights  grounds  was  materially  flawed  and  that
    decision stands.

Decision

The First-tier Tribunal made an error of law in the making of its decision.

That decision is set aside and remade as follows:

The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules.

The decision to dismiss the appeal on human rights grounds stands.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Conway

