
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/14251/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 February 2016                   |On 15 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         SHANTABEN ISHWARBHAI PATEL
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr G Davison (Ratna and Co)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State against  the  decision
         of the First-tier Tribunal of Shantaben Ishwarbhai Patel, a citizen
         of India born 7 December 1928, to  allow  her  appeal  against  the
         Entry Clearance Officer's refusal  to  admit  her  as  a  returning
         resident dated 28 October 2014.

      2. Her claim for re-entry is summarised in the witness statement  that
         in itself comprises the greater part of the decision  below  in  so
         far as  that  document  actually  bears  on  the  issues  requiring
         determination. She had been a widow since her husband's death on 13
         September 1995. She had joined her youngest son here  in  1997  and
         was granted indefinite leave to remain as his dependent. She  lived
         in with him and his family, managing the grandchildren.

      3.  She  visited  her  other  sons  in  India  from  time   to   time.
         Unfortunately her eldest son had grown increasingly  ill,  and  the
         other sons were not in a position to look after him.  On  her  last
         visit to see her sons in India, she discovered that her eldest  son
         had retired from work and had fallen very ill.  His  wife  suffered
         from chronic arthritis and could not care for him.  He  had  become
         increasingly aggressive  and  would  only  listen  to  his  mother.
         Accordingly she remained there to  look  after  him,  and  as  time
         passed the two year maximum period for returning without any  query
         being raised as to her indefinite leave to remain passed.

      4. Her daughter sought to help her to apply as returning resident  but
         several applications were refused, and at one point she was advised
         to make  an  application  as  a  visitor  instead.  Eventually  she
         received the decision against which she now appealed. Her  youngest
         son and his wife continued to support her financially, letting  her
         retain the interest from the fixed deposits he and his wife held in
         India and also remitting funds to her. They spoke every weekend  by
         telephone, and they paid for her holidays. Her intention had always
         been to reside in the United Kingdom permanently.

      5. The First-tier Tribunal discussed the importance of maintaining the
         rule of law and adhering to  obligations  enshrined  in  the  Human
         Rights Convention, and noted that  there  was  judicial  authority,
         such as Sarwan Singh, for the proposition that the  Rules  had  not
         always been  applied  humanely.  Given  the  advanced  age  of  the
         Appellant and that she would not be a burden on  public  funds,  it
         was appropriate to grant her entry  clearance  in  order  that  she
         might spend the final phase of her life in comfort.

      6. Grounds of appeal took issue with the disposition of the appeal  on
         the basis that the First-tier Tribunal had not  correctly  resolved
         the question posed by Rule 19 as to the propriety of readmitting  a
         person who had stayed away for more than two years.

      7. Before me Mr Kotas submitted that there were no  reasons  given  to
         explain the decision made below. Mr Davidson contended that  whilst
         the  decision  was  not  a  thorough  one,  the  outcome  had  been
         inevitable and did not merit any detailed justification.

Findings and reasons

      8. I do not consider that the approach of the First-tier  Tribunal  is
         legally sustainable. The Entry Clearance Officer is a party to  the
         appeal and the public is entitled to expect that the judiciary will
         engage with  the  reasoning  of  a  representative  of  the  public
         interest  in  upholding  immigration  control.  However  poor   the
         decision subject to appeal may considered  to  be,  it  requires  a
         minimal level of engagement before the judicial  decision  properly
         respects the separation of powers that is a hallmark of the rule of
         law.

      9. Lord Bridge in Save Britain's Heritage v No 1 Poultry Ltd [1991]  1
         WLR 153 stated that:

             "The overriding test must always be: is the Tribunal providing
             both parties with the material which will enable them to  know
             that the Tribunal has made no error of  law  in  reaching  its
             findings of fact? ... A party appearing before a  Tribunal  is
             entitled  to  know,  either  expressly   stated   by   it   or
             inferentially stated, what it is  to  which  the  Tribunal  is
             addressing its mind. In some cases it may be perfectly obvious
             without any expressed reference to  it  by  the  Tribunal;  in
             other cases it may not. Secondly, the appellant is entitled to
             know the basis of fact upon  which  the  conclusion  has  been
             reached."

     10. The Immigration Rules set out:

             "18.      A person seeking leave to enter the  United  Kingdom
             as  a  returning  resident  may  be  admitted  for  settlement
             provided the Immigration Officer is satisfied that the  person
             concerned:

                  (i)  had indefinite leave to enter or remain in the United
                  Kingdom when he last left; and

                  (ii) has not been away from the United  Kingdom  for  more
                  than 2 years; and

                  (iii)      did not receive assistance  from  public  funds
                  towards the cost of leaving the United Kingdom; and

                  (iv) now seeks admission for the purpose of settlement.

             18A.      Those  who  qualify  for  admission  to  the  United
             Kingdom as returning residents in accordance with paragraph 18
             do not need a visa to enter the UK.

             19. A person who does not benefit from the preceding paragraph
             by reason only of having been away from the United Kingdom too
             long may nevertheless be admitted as a returning resident  if,
             for example, he has lived here for most of his life."

     11. Here the First-tier Tribunal was charged with  determining  whether
         the discretion in Rule 19 was properly exercised. That exercise  of
         discretion is fully reviewable given this appeal is  brought  under
         the saved provisions of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum  Act
         2002 with the consequence that under section 86(2)(b) thereof  "the
         Tribunal must allow the appeal in  so  far  as  it  thinks  that  a
         discretion exercised in making a decision against which the  appeal
         is brought  or  is  treated  as  being  brought  should  have  been
         exercised differently."

     12.  Mr  Davison  may  very  well  be  right  that   the   Respondent's
         circumstances represent a powerful case for a positive exercise  of
         discretion in her  favour,  given  her  evidence  that  she  always
         intended to live in this country,  her  strong  family  connections
         here, and her understandable wish to remain abroad to care for  her
         sick son. There is of course no requirement  that  she  present  an
         exceptional or compelling case: the discretion  represents  a  bare
         balancing exercise, to  which  a  consideration  of  her  right  to
         private and family life will be relevant.  However,  it  cannot  be
         said that her case was so unanswerable that it required no measured
         assessment whatsoever: for example it is not readily  apparent  for
         how long she remained back in India.

     13. The Respondent is an elderly lady of almost ninety years of age who
         asserts that she has always intended to make the United Kingdom her
         home, as she was entitled to do given the grant  of  settlement  to
         her almost twenty years ago. Given her advanced years  there  is  a
         clear public interest,  bearing  in  mind  the  importance  of  the
         overriding objective to ensure that the processes of  the  Tribunal
         are accessible and available to those subject to its  jurisdiction,
         in her appeal coming on again for hearing at the first  opportunity
         the First-tier Tribunal can reasonably find to list it.

    Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law.  As there are no lawful relevant findings upon which to build, the
    matter is  suitable  for  re-hearing  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    accordingly remit the appeal to that forum.




    Signed:      Date: 8 February 2016


    [pic]
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes


