
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: oa/14726/2013
     oa/14730/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Determination & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 27 February 2015                      |On 11 May 2015                      |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                              uma sijali magar
                             urmila sijali magar
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr M Henderson, Counsel instructed by Howe & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants are citizens of Nepal  born  on  10  June  1989  and  30
    October 1991, respectively.  They applied for entry  clearance  as  the
    dependent children of their father, Dambar Bahadur Sijali Magar, an ex-
    Gurkha soldier.  Their applications were refused in decisions dated  19
    June 2013.

 2. Their appeals against those decisions came before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Aujla on 31 July 2014, whereby he dismissed the appeals on  human
    rights grounds with reference to Article 8 of the ECHR but allowed  the
    appeals to the limited extent that the decisions were not in accordance
    with the law.  That conclusion related  to  the  Secretary  of  State's
    policy in relation to dependent children of ex-Gurkha soldiers.

    The Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal and submissions

 3. The grounds assert that Judge Aujla erred  in  law  in  dismissing  the
    Article 8 appeals, having concluded that were it not for s.117B of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") he  would
    have allowed them under Article 8.

 4. In the appellants' skeleton argument prepared for  the  hearing  before
    the Upper Tribunal the decision  in  Dube  (ss.117A-117D)  [2015]  UKUT
    00090 (IAC) is relied on in terms of the effect of ss.117A-D.  Reliance
    is also placed on the decision in Ghising  and  others  (Ghurkhas/BOCs:
    historic wrong; weight) [2013] UKUT 00567 (IAC), in terms of the weight
    to be afforded to the 'historic injustice'  as  it  relates  to  former
    members of the brigade of Gurkhas.

 5. It is argued that the matters identified at s.117B of the 2002  Act  in
    terms of financial independence and whether an appellant speaks English
    add nothing to the public interest  in  the  context  of  an  'historic
    wrong' case.

 6. The respondent's 'Rule 24' response which can  be  summarised,  opposes
    the appeal against the decision of Judge Aujla, asserting amongst other
    things that the judge was entitled  to  conclude  that  the  effect  of
    s.117B was such as to require him to dismiss the appeal.  Reference was
    also made to particular findings made by Judge Aujla in relation to the
    concept  of  the  'stranded  sibling'  and  the  appellants'  financial
    circumstances.

 7. I was informed by Mr Henderson that the  appellants'  applications  for
    entry clearance had again been refused by the Entry  Clearance  Officer
    ("ECO") with reference to the policy, the matter having  been  remitted
    to the ECO by Judge Aujla.

 8. However, Mr Tarlow, with reference to the decision  in  Dube,  accepted
    that there was an error of law in Judge Aujla's decision  in  terms  of
    his having concluded that s.117 prevented him from allowing the  appeal
    under Article 8.  Mr Tarlow indicated  that  none  of  the  facts  were
    challenged on appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.   He  did  not  expressly
    concede that in any re-making of the decision I should allow the appeal
    under Article 8, stating that he had no instructions on the matter.

 9. Mr Henderson submitted that the decisions in Ghising and R (Gurung  and
    others) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ  8
    concluded that the historic injustice outweighed the public interest in
    immigration control.  Thus, it was not necessary for appellants in  the
    circumstances that these appellants find themselves to show  that  they
    can support themselves without recourse to public funds.

10. In the alternative, it was  submitted  that  there  was  in  any  event
    further evidence in relation to their financial circumstances.

    Judge Aujla's determination

11. Judge Aujla noted that the appeal before him was based on Article 8 and
    the respondent's policy only.  It was accepted that the appellants were
    not able to meet the relevant requirements of the Article 8 Immigration
    Rules.

12. At [16] he stated that when determining the Article 8 ground he had  to
    have regard to the considerations  in  s.117B  of  the  2002  Act.   He
    referred to various authorities.  At [32] he stated as follows:

         "I accept the evidence of the Appellants that  they  had  no  other
         close relatives in Nepal apart from the  paternal  grandfather  and
         the aunt.  The only people that the Appellants  could  continue  to
         look to for guidance and financial support were their  parents  who
         were  in  the  United  Kingdom.   Although  the   Appellants   were
         physically separated from their family, I accept the  evidence  and
         find that the sponsor and his wife continued to  provide  emotional
         and other guidance to the Appellants as well as providing financial
         support to them.  They  could  not  have  continued  their  studies
         without a substantial financial support  from  their  parents  over
         time as well as the usual emotional support.  On the basis  of  the
         evidence before me, I am left  in  no  doubt  whatsoever  that  the
         Appellants did have an established family life with  their  parents
         as well as their brother."

13. At [33] he went on to find that "there  were  compelling  circumstances
    surrounding the Appellants' case which included the health problems  of
    their father and brother."  The reference to the  appellants'  father's
    health problems related to the fact that he is suffering from dementia.
     In relation to the appellants' brother, the diagnosis in  the  medical
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal was that  he  has  a  perinatal
    brain injury, resulting in various physical disabilities.

14. Before turning to Judge Aujla's consideration of s.117B, I set out  the
    further findings.  With reference to the applicable  policy,  which  he
    set out at [36] of the determination,  he  concluded  that  there  were
    "exceptional circumstances", bearing in mind the  intended  purpose  of
    the policy was to keep families together and if the appellants were not
    permitted to enter the UK they would be separated  from  their  parents
    and siblings.

15. At [41] he concluded that the  appellants  were  young  females  living
    alone, albeit with  each  other  and  that  they  had  no  other  close
    relatives or members of the family in Nepal.  He  concluded  that  they
    were wholly dependent financially and emotionally on their parents  and
    were in his view to be regarded as 'stranded siblings'.

16. Crucially for the purposes of the appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  Judge
    Aujla stated at [35] as follows:

         "I  have  finally  considered  whether  or  not  the  decision  was
         proportionate.  However, had it not been for section  117B  of  the
         2002 Act, primary legislation which came into force on 28 July 2014
         and had  effect  retrospectively,  I  would  have  found  that  the
         interference in the circumstances was  disproportionate.   However,
         section 117B(3) states that it was  in  the  public  interest  that
         persons who seek to enter or remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  were
         financially independent because such persons were not a  burden  on
         taxpayers and were better able to integrate into  society.   It  is
         clear that the Appellants would not be financially  independent  if
         they were allowed to enter  the  United  Kingdom  since  they  were
         already financially dependent on their father.   Their  father  was
         himself not financially independent either because, in addition  to
         his army pension which was his entitlement, he was  in  receipt  of
         public funds in the form of housing benefit,  council  tax  benefit
         and disability living allowance.  The disability living  allowance,
         although an entitlement, was meant specifically for  the  sponsor's
         own care.  The Appellants' mother was not  working  either.   Their
         brother  was  disabled  who  was  also  in  receipt  of   financial
         assistance  from  the  state  and  social  care.   Therefore,   the
         Appellants would not be financially independent on arrival  in  the
         United Kingdom.  Taking into account the fact that  the  Appellants
         would not be financially independent on arrival, I  find  that  the
         interference with their Article 8 rights was proportionate as being
         in the public interest as defined in section 117B."

17. Again in [37] he repeated that had it not been for s.117B of  the  2002
    Act he would have allowed the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

    My conclusions

18. In the light of the concession on  behalf  of  the  respondent  at  the
    hearing before me to the effect that Judge Aujla erred in law in  terms
    of his consideration of s.117B, I announced that I was  satisfied  that
    there was an error of law in his decision which required  the  decision
    to be set aside.  Put simply, the error of law is his  conclusion  that
    s.117B prevented him from allowing the appeal under Article 8 and  that
    but for that statutory provision the appeal  would  have  been  allowed
    under Article 8.

19. Notwithstanding what is said in the respondent's 'Rule 24' response  in
    terms of Judge Aujla's conclusion in relation to the applicable policy,
    on the basis of what I was told at the  hearing  it  appears  that  the
    respondent gave effect to Judge Aujla's conclusion  that  the  decision
    was not in accordance with the law, by reconsidering  the  applications
    under the policy, albeit again dismissing them.  There was no appeal by
    the respondent against Judge Aujla's decision to allow  the  appeal  as
    being not in accordance with the law. All this puts  into  context  the
    matters advanced in the Rule 24 response.

20. However, in reality I do not need to resolve the issues raised  in  the
    Rule 24 response as to whether Judge Aujla's conclusion in relation  to
    the policy was on the facts a sustainable conclusion. This is  because,
    apart from the fact that the respondent  gave  effect  to  the  judge's
    decision by reconsidering the application, before making his assessment
    of the policy Judge Aujla had already concluded that but for s.117B  he
    would have allowed the appeal under Article 8.  Mr Tarlow accepted that
    the appeal before Judge Aujla "could have" been allowed under Article 8
    and he fairly pointed out that at [33] of the determination Judge Aujla
    had found that Article 8 was engaged.   Those  observations  aside,  Mr
    Tarlow simply adopted what was said at page 3 of the  ECO's  notice  of
    decision.

21. As regards that aspect of the respondent's  decision,  it  rejects  the
    assertion that there is family life  between  the  appellants  and  the
    sponsor, refers to general Article 8 considerations, and suggests  that
    the decision is a proportionate one.  However, it is  to  be  borne  in
    mind that Judge Aujla found unequivocally that the appellants  do  have
    family life with their parents as well as their brother in the UK.

22. It is as well now to set out the provisions of ss.117A-B which state as
    follows:

                               "PART 5A


         ARTICLE 8 OF THE ECHR: PUBLIC INTEREST CONSIDERATIONS


         117A Application of this Part

         (1) This Part applies where a court  or  tribunal  is  required  to
         determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-
          (a) breaches a person's right to respect for private  and  family
          life under Article 8, and
          (b) as a result would be unlawful under section 6  of  the  Human
          Rights Act 1998.
         (2) In considering the  public  interest  question,  the  court  or
         tribunal must (in particular) have regard-
          (a) in all cases, to the considerations listed in  section  117B,
          and
          (b) in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals,  to
          the considerations listed in section 117C.
         (3) In subsection (2), "the public  interest  question"  means  the
         question of whether  an  interference  with  a  person's  right  to
         respect for private and family  life  is  justified  under  Article
         8(2).



         117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
         cases

         (1) The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in  the
         public interest.
         (2) It is  in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-
          (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
          (b) are better able to integrate into society.
         (3) It is  in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
         financially independent, because such persons-
          (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
          (b) are better able to integrate into society.
         (4) Little weight should be given to-
          (a) a private life, or
          (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,
         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.
         (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established  by
         a person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
         precarious.
         (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-
         (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship
         with a qualifying child, and
         (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave  the
         United Kingdom."

23. In one sense the resolution of this appeal involves nothing  more  than
    the simple task of giving effect to  Judge  Aujla's  findings  and  his
    assessment of Article  8,  of  course  not  replicating  the  error  in
    relation to the impact of ss.117A-B.

24. It is to be noted that it has not been  suggested  that  Judge  Aujla's
    specific conclusions in  terms  of  whether  the  appellants  would  be
    financially independent on arrival in the UK are findings that  he  was
    not entitled to come to.  Although  Mr  Henderson  suggested  that  the
    appellants would be able to work when they arrived in the UK, there was
    little if any evidence in that respect before the First-tier  Tribunal.
    More to the point, it does not seem to  me  that  there  was  any  such
    evidence in existence at the date of the ECO's decision.

25. Before me there was an application under Rule 15(2A)  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 to adduce  further  evidence,  as
    set out under cover of a letter dated 23 February 2015.  This  evidence
    consisted of witness statements from the appellants'  father  and  from
    each of the appellants.  Mr Tarlow did not raise any objection  to  the
    admission of that new evidence, and although I did not give a ruling on
    it at the  hearing,  I  have  decided  that  that  evidence  should  be
    admitted, given the necessity of re-making the decision.

26. The further evidence in the witness statements, including the table  of
    monthly income and  expenditure  of  the  sponsor,  assuming  all  that
    evidence is evidence of the circumstances obtaining at the date of  the
    decision, does not establish financial independence on the part of  the
    appellants; on the contrary.  The evidence reinforces  the  conclusions
    of Judge Aujla on that point.

27. However, as I am required to do  by  statute,  I  have  regard  to  the
    matters set out in s.117B, but that is all I  am  required  to  do,  to
    "have regard" to those matters.

28. Furthermore, it does seem  to  me  that  there  is  merit  in  what  is
    submitted on behalf of the appellants to the effect  that  s.117B  does
    not displace,  dilute,  or  undermine  the  conclusions  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in Ghising at [60] as follows:

         "But, if the Respondent is relying only upon  the  public  interest
         described by the Court of Appeal at paragraph 41  of  Gurung,  then
         the weight to be given to  the  historic  injustice  will  normally
         require a decision in the Appellant's favour."

    The reference to Gurung is the decision in  Gurung  and  others  [2013]
    EWCA Civ 8.

29. It does seem to me that in this appeal it is only the legitimate aim of
    immigration control which  the  respondent  relies  on.   There  is  no
    suggestion that there are other (adverse) factors  at  play  militating
    against a grant of entry clearance.

30. It is to be  remembered  that  financial  independence  is  simply  one
    manifestation of the legitimate aim contained within Article 8  of  the
    ECHR.  Article 8(2) provides that in relation to the right  to  respect
    for private and family life:

         "There shall be no interference by  a  public  authority  with  the
         exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with the law
         and is necessary in  a  democratic  society  in  the  interests  of
         national security, public safety or the economic well being of  the
         country,  for  the  prevention  of  disorder  or  crime,  for   the
         protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the rights
         and freedoms of others." [My emphasis].

31. The maintenance of effective immigration control is an  aspect  of  the
    economic well being  of  the  country  and  in  relation  to  which  an
    individual's financial circumstances are relevant.

32. Accordingly, it is apparent that s.117B does not  have  the  effect  of
    displacing the jurisprudence on  historic  injustice  in  terms  of  it
    normally resulting in a decision in an appellant's favour, other things
    being equal.  The considerations to which I have referred were in  play
    in terms of "the countervailing public interest in the maintaining of a
    firm immigration policy" (Gurung at [41]).

33. As to whether or not the appellants are able to speak English,  I  note
    what is said in the further witness statements  about  their  education
    being in English, although again it is not clear whether that  was  the
    situation as at the date of the decision.  In any event, I  cannot  see
    that this is a factor  which,  standing  in  isolation,  or  indeed  in
    conjunction with the financial independence issue, could  outweigh  the
    potency of the argument in favour of these appellants in terms  of  the
    historic injustice.

34. Furthermore, as I have already indicated, the matters set out in s.117B
    are matters that a court or  Tribunal  is  ("in  particular")  to  have
    regard to.  They do not mandate an adverse decision where a  person  is
    not financially independent or is not able to speak English.

35.  In  those  circumstances,  there  does  not  seem  to  me  to  be  any
    incompatibility between s.117B and the ECHR but the  distinct  argument
    in the grounds on this issue does not require detailed consideration.

36. In the light of my conclusions, I re-make the decision by allowing  the
    appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.

    Decision

37. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set
    aside and the decision re-made, allowing the appeals under Article 8 of
    the ECHR








Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            07/05/15



