
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/14746/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21st December 2015                |On 14th January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     SC
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, BEIJING
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Gaisford, Counsel instructed by AKL Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant, a citizen of China born on 27  July
    2005, against the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Rose  (Judge
    Rose) promulgated on 4th June 2015. The Appellant's appeal was  against
    the Respondent's decision of 4th November 2014 refusing entry clearance
    under Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules. The application  for  entry
    clearance was made on 5th September 2014.

 2. The Respondent's grounds  of  refusal  were  twofold:  first  that  the
    Appellant had failed to produce a TB certificate as required;  secondly
    that the United Kingdom-based sponsor, the Appellant's mother, did  not
    have sole responsibility for her upbringing.

 3. Judge Rose concluded that the Appellant was required to  produce  a  TB
    certificate and went on to find that no such certificate  had  in  fact
    been provided as at the date  of  decision  (paragraphs  12-14  of  his
    decision). As a consequence,  it  was  said  by  Judge  Rose  that  the
    Appellant was unable to satisfy paragraph A39 of the Rules and sections
    EC-C.1.1(c) and S-EC.1.6 of Appendix FM.

 4. In respect of the sole responsibility issue, Judge Rose  found  in  the
    Appellant's favour (paragraphs 17-21).  The  judge  then  went  on  and
    considered Article 8 outside of the Rules and concluded that in all the
    circumstances the Appellant's rights  under  that  provision  were  not
    breached by reason of  the  Respondent's  refusal  of  entry  clearance
    (paragraphs 22-33).

The grounds and grant of permission

 5. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Simpson on 18 September 2015.

 6. The grounds are based effectively on a single issue, namely that  there
    existed as at the date of decision a policy of the Respondent, a policy
    that was before Judge Rose but one that  had  not  been  considered  by
    either the Respondent or in turn the judge.  That policy was said to be
    relevant to the Appellant's case because it stated in terms  that  only
    applicants aged eleven years or above who were seeking to come  to  the
    United Kingdom for longer than  six  months  needed  to  provide  a  TB
    certificate. It is said in the grounds that this policy was  applicable
    to the Appellant's case, given that she was at  the  date  of  decision
    only nine years old. The grounds also  argue  that  the  terms  of  the
    policy  represented  a  reasonable  excuse  for   not   providing   the
    certificate at the time of the application and decision. Finally, it is
    said that a certificate was eventually provided to the ECM on review of
    the initial refusal of entry clearance.

The hearing before me

 7. I first asked Mr Clarke to make submissions. He relied on the  decision
    of the Supreme Court in Alvi [2012] UKSC  33.  He  submitted  that  the
    Rules  took  precedence  over  policy  and  therefore  the  Appellant's
    arguments were bound to fail in this case.  In respect of the Appellant
    obtaining a TB certificate after the decision was made, Section 85A  of
    the 2002 Act precluded its admissibility.

 8. Having already read the relevant papers in this case and having  regard
    to Mr Clarke's submissions I deemed it  unnecessary  to  call  upon  Mr
    Gaisford for submissions.





Decision on error of law

 9. In my view there is a clear material error of law in  the  decision  of
    Judge Rose, namely a failure to consider what was clearly an applicable
    policy in existence at all relevant times.

10. The wording of the policy document, the relevant  version  of  which  I
    find was before the judge (81 of the Appellant's bundle) and one  which
    still exists to date, is clear: it is only those aged eleven  years  or
    above who are required to obtain the relevant TB certificate.

11. I reject Mr Clarke's submission that in effect  the  Rules  render  any
    policy redundant in a case such as this. It is  well-established  by  a
    long line of decisions that policies can run in parallel to  the  Rules
    and, where an applicable policy exists at the relevant point  in  time,
    this must be addressed by the decision-maker and in turn by a judge  on
    appeal, who may in certain circumstances then allow an  appeal  on  the
    limited basis that the  decision  under  appeal  is  not  otherwise  in
    accordance with the law (see for example, Abdi [1995] EWCA Civ  27,  AG
    and others (Policies; executive discretions; Tribunal's powers)  Kosovo
    [2007] UKAIT 00082, and Ukus (discretion: when reviewable) [2012]  UKUT
    00307(IAC)).

12. In this case the Respondent entirely failed to apply her  mind  to  the
    applicable policy. Unfortunately, so did Judge Rose. This  failure  was
    obviously material to the appeal.

13. In light of this error, there is no  need  for  me  to  deal  with  the
    alternative errors alleged in the grounds.

14. For the reasons outlined above, I set aside the decision of Judge Rose.
    There has been no challenge from the Respondent as regards the  judge's
    finding on sole responsibility, and I expressly preserve  that  finding
    for the purposes of my remake decision.

Disposal

15. Both representatives were agreed  that  I  could  remake  the  decision
    myself on the evidence before me. This I now proceed to do.

16. I find that the relevant policy to which I have  already  referred  was
    indeed in existence as at the date of the  Respondent's  decision.  The
    Respondent clearly did not apply her mind to the policy at all, as  she
    was bound to do.  It follows therefore that the decision  under  appeal
    was not otherwise in accordance with the law.

17. I therefore allow the Appellant's appeal on this limited basis, and  as
    a consequence the  application  made  on  5th  September  2014  remains
    outstanding before the Respondent awaiting a lawful decision.

18. In making a new decision the Respondent will of course have to bear  in
    mind the terms of her own  policy  and  the  particular  facts  of  the
    Appellant's case. There is a preserved finding  that  the  sponsor  had
    sole responsibility for the Appellant's upbringing and there has  never
    been any issue with the financial requirements of Appendix FM.

19. It will also no doubt be borne in mind that the Appellant  is  a  young
    child who is currently  separated  from  [her]  mother  (who  has  been
    granted settlement in  the  United  Kingdom),  and  the  Respondent  is
    strongly urged to make a fresh decision as quickly as possible.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I re-make the decision by allowing the appeal to  the  limited  extent  that
the refusal of entry clearance was not  otherwise  in  accordance  with  the
law, and the Appellant's application therefore  remains  outstanding  before
the Respondent awaiting a lawful decision.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 13 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  whole  fee
award. The Respondent entirely failed to have any regard to its  own  policy
in this case, a policy that was clearly applicable to the  application  made
by the Appellant. The appeal before me has succeeded on this basis.


Signed   Date: 13 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
