
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Numbers:
OA/14735/2014

                                                  OA/14737/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 10th March 2016                       |On 30th March 2016                  |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                       Entry Clearance Officer - ACCRA
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                  ALPHA SULAYMAN CONTEH (FIRST respondent)
                     ABDOULIE CONTEH (SECOND respondent)
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Harrison. Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondents    Mr V Jagadesham of Counsel instructed by Sabz
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Entry Clearance Officer (the ECO) appeals  against  a  decision  of
    Judge Siddiqi of the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated  on  6th
    July 2015.

 2. The Respondents before the Upper Tribunal were  the  Appellants  before
    the FtT and I will refer to them as the claimants.

 3. The claimants are Gambian citizens and are brothers born  4th  December
    1996 and 23rd October 1999 respectively.

 4. The claimants applied for entry clearance as the children of  a  person
    settled in the United Kingdom, that person being their mother  Ida  Dem
    Conteh (the Sponsor).

 5. The applications were refused on 15th October  2014.   In  relation  to
    both  claimants  the  applications  were  refused  with  reference   to
    paragraph 297(i)(e) and (f), the ECO not accepting that the Sponsor had
    had  sole  responsibility  for  the  claimants'  upbringing,  and   not
    accepting that there  were  serious  and  compelling  family  or  other
    considerations which made exclusion of the claimants  undesirable,  and
    not accepting that suitable arrangements had been made for their care.

 6. In relation to the second claimant the  application  was  also  refused
    with reference to paragraph 320(3) and (7A), the ECO not accepting that
    the second claimant had produced a valid  national  passport  with  his
    application, and contending that false representations had been made in
    his application.

 7. The claimants' appeals were heard together by the FtT on 27th May 2015.
     Oral evidence was given by the Sponsor and her husband, the stepfather
    of the claimants.  The FtT found both witnesses  to  be  credible,  and
    were satisfied that the Sponsor had had  sole  responsibility  for  the
    upbringing of the claimants, and therefore did not go  on  to  consider
    paragraph 297(i)(f).

 8. In relation to paragraph  320(3)  and  (7A)  the  FtT  found  that  the
    evidence did not indicate that the second claimant had not submitted  a
    valid passport, and did not consider that any dishonesty had been  used
    in the application, and therefore the appeals were  allowed  under  the
    Immigration Rules.

 9. The ECO applied  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Permission to appeal was initially refused but  a  renewed  application
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic in the following terms;

         "The Respondent criticises the fact that the judge  relied  largely
         on oral evidence to allow the appeal.  It is argued that there  was
         no documentary evidence on core issues such as sole  responsibility
         and the medical  conditions  of  the  Appellants'  grandparents  in
         Gambia.  It is also pointed out that there were  unresolved  issues
         of paternity with respect to the second Appellant".

10. Following the grant of  permission  the  claimants  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.  In very  brief  summary,  it  was  contended  that  the  grounds
    disclosed no error of law, but amounted to disagreements with  findings
    that had been properly made by the FtT.

11. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal to decide whether the FtT decision  contained
    an error of law such that it should be set aside.



Oral Submissions

12. Mr Harrison relied upon the grounds contained  within  the  application
    for permission to appeal and had no oral submissions to make.

13. Mr Jagadesham relied upon the written response.  In very brief summary,
    Mr Jagadesham's point was that the grounds disclosed no error  of  law,
    and amounted to a disagreement with findings  made  by  the  FtT.   The
    grounds related to the evaluation of evidence by the FtT, and the Upper
    Tribunal should not lightly interfere with that.

14. Mr Jagadesham submitted that the fourth paragraph of  the  grounds  was
    completely irrelevant, in which it was  contended  that  there  was  no
    documentary evidence to confirm that the Appellants had lawfully  taken
    the surname of their stepfather, but in any event there was evidence at
    pages 79-80 of the claimants' bundle.  I was  asked  to  conclude  that
    paragraph 5 of the grounds made no sense,  and  to  conclude  that  the
    decision of the FtT disclosed no  material  error  of  law  and  should
    stand.

15. Mr Harrison did not wish to respond.

My Conclusions and Reasons

16. I do not find any error of  law  disclosed  by  the  grounds  contained
    within the application for permission to appeal.  The  grounds  contend
    that the FtT failed to give reasons or adequate reasons for findings on
    material matters.  The duty to give reasons is summarised in Budhathoki
    (reasons for decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC), the head note of which
    I set out below;

         It is generally unnecessary and unhelpful for  First-tier  Tribunal
         judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised in a case.  This
         leads to judgments becoming overly long and confused and is  not  a
         proportionate  approach  to  deciding  cases.   It   is,   however,
         necessary for judges to identify and resolve key conflicts  in  the
         evidence and explain in clear and brief  terms  their  reasons,  so
         that the parties can understand why they have won or lost.


17. In my view the FtT complied with the duty set out above.

18. It is unusual to find a decision dealing with sole responsibility, with
    no reference to TD (paragraph 297(i)(e): "sole  responsibility")  Yemen
    [2006] UKAIT 00049, but the lack of reference to that case  is  not  an
    error, as it is not contended that the FtT applied incorrect principles
    of law.

19. In my view there are some errors in the FtT decision but they  are  not
    material and are not relied upon in the grounds.  In paragraph  17  the
    FtT found  that  documents  could  not  be  considered,  because  those
    documents may not have been provided to the ECO and  ECM.   That  would
    not preclude the FtT considering  the  documents  if  they  related  to
    circumstances appertaining at the date of refusal of  entry  clearance.
    This however is  not  material,  because  these  documents  could  have
    assisted the claimants in their appeal, and their appeal was allowed in
    any event.

20. The FtT in paragraph 5 stated that the burden  of  proof  lies  on  the
    claimants which is correct so far as paragraph 297  is  concerned,  but
    not correct so far as paragraph 320 is concerned, when the burden is on
    the ECO.  This however is not material, as the FtT found in  favour  of
    the claimants in respect of paragraph 320, even though it is not  clear
    that it was realised that the burden of proof was on the ECO.

21. The FtT set out the claimants' case, and the ECO's  case,  and  I  find
    considered the evidence in the round.

22. The FtT found both witnesses who gave oral  evidence  to  be  credible.
    The FtT gave reasons for reaching that  conclusion  and  accepting  the
    evidence that had been given.  It is not the case that an appeal cannot
    be allowed in the absence of documentary evidence.

23. The FtT applied the correct legal  principles  to  the  evidence.   The
    grounds are a series of disagreements with findings made.  The FtT,  in
    my view  was  entitled  to  find  that  both  claimants  satisfied  the
    requirements of paragraph 297(i)(e) and therefore  did  not  go  on  to
    consider (f).  The FtT was entitled to find that the second  claimant's
    appeal should not fail by reason  of  paragraph  320(3)  or  (7A),  and
    sustainable reasons were given for the conclusions that were made.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law such that the decision must be set aside.  I do  not
set aside the decision, and the appeal of the ECO is dismissed.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made by the FtT.  There has been no  request  for
anonymity made to the Upper Tribunal, and no anonymity order is made.


Signed                              Date         11th March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Because the decision of the FtT stands, so does the decision to make a  full
fee award.


Signed                              Date         11th March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
