
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/14461/2013
                                                               OA/14462/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|                                                |                           |
|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 10th April 2015                              |On 22nd May 2015           |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE

                                   Between

                              Ms Shenglan Chen
                               Ms Wanying Chen
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                  The Entry Clearance Officer Beijing China
                        (No ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr  H Kannagra Counsel instructed by Anglo Chinese Law
Firm Ltd
For the Respondent: Ms Savage Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants, Ms Shenglan Chen date of birth 12th of January 1997 and
    Ms Wanying Chen date of birth the 24 August 1999 are citizens of China.
    Having considered all the circumstances including the  fact  that  both
    appellants are minors, I do  not  consider  it  necessary  to  make  an
    anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellants against the determination of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Ross promulgated on  7  August  2014,  whereby  the
    judge dismissed the Appellants' appeal against the decisions of the ECO
    dated 13th June 2013 [see below]. The decisions  by  the  ECO  were  to
    refuse the Appellants entry clearance to the United  Kingdom  as  minor
    child dependants of a person present and settled in the United  Kingdom
    under paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules.

 3. By decision made on the 3rd February 2015 leave to appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal was granted. Thus the matter appears before me to determine in
    the first instance whether there is an error of  law  in  the  original
    decision.

 4. The sole issue dealt with in substance by the  judge  was  whether  the
    sponsor had sole responsibility for the Appellants. All  of  the  other
    requirements of the rules under  paragraph  297  appear  to  have  been
    accepted as satisfied.  The  decision/explanatory  statement  [decision
    letter] had raised the  general  grounds  of  refusal  under  paragraph
    320(7A).

 5. The date on the decision letters by the ECO is 13th  January  2013.  At
    the outset of the hearing before me it was accepted that  the  decision
    letters by the ECO should have  been  dated  13th  June  2013.  It  was
    accepted that the date on the decision letters was not correct.

 6. That of itself may not have undermined the  Judge's  decision.  However
    much of the analysis in paragraphs 10 to 16 of the  decision  indicates
    that documents were being obtained and had  been  produced  to  counter
    issues raised in the decision letter and problems in the  case  arising
    from an interview with  the  paternal  grandmother  of  the  Appellants
    conducted in May  2013.  The  Judge  comments  on  the  fact  that  the
    documents have been obtained months after the decision and in  response
    to issues raised in the interview or in the explanatory statement. That
    clearly is not the case given the correct chronology. The  letters  and
    documents pre-date the interview and the decision letter.

 7. However here were other issues with  regard  to  this  appeal  and  the
    bundle before the Tribunal. In the decision at  paragraph  5  there  is
    reference to the fact that " At the outset of the  hearing  Counsel  on
    behalf of the  Respondent  had  conceded  that  no  evidence  had  been
    produced that a false representation had been made already or  a  false
    document produced, in the form of a document verification report."

 8. An examination of the list of  documents  accompanying  the  ECO's  and
    ECM's decision indicates that there was a document verification report.
    The Appellant's representative accepted that he  had  a  copy  of  that
    document. The representative for the Respondent produced a further copy
    of that DVR. Either that document was not  in  the  bundle  before  the
    Judge or the Judge failed to take account of the document.

 9. As is evident from paragraph 10 of the decision the judge in  substance
    based much of  his  adverse  credibility  findings  on  the  fact  that
    evidence had been produced in response to the  decision  letters  bound
    after the interview with the paternal grandmother to counter  what  the
    paternal grandmother had said.

10. It appears to me that through no fault of the judge there is  an  error
    of fact which infects the whole of the findings of  fact  made  by  the
    judge such that it constitutes an error of law.

11. There were other issues with regard to the documentation  available  to
    the judge. The proper course appears to me is for the appeal is  to  be
    allowed to the limited extent that these cases are remitted back to the
    First-tier Tribunal for a hearing afresh. At that  hearing  given  that
    there is a document verification report  it  is  appropriate  that  all
    issues be determined afresh and that there be none of the  findings  of
    fact should be preserved.

12.  Accordingly  there  is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the  original
    determination and I remit these matters back to the First-tier Tribunal
    for hearing afresh on all issues.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure



