
[pic]
IAC-TH-LW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/14508/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 February 2016                           |On 21 March 2016              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     M C
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Claire, Counsel for Bernard Chill & Axtell
Solicitors,
     Southampton

DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of  State,  however
    for convenience I shall now refer to the parties as  they  were  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of South Africa born on 30 July  1950.   She
    appealed against the Respondent's decision of 2 October  2014  refusing
    to grant her  entry  clearance  to  the  United  Kingdom  as  an  adult
    dependent relative of her two sons who  live  in  the  United  Kingdom,
    being [JsP] and [JeP].  Her appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal Suffield-Thompson on 25 August 2015.  She allowed  the  appeal
    under Article 8 of ECHR in a decision promulgated on 27th August  2015.



 3. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Colyer on 31 December 2015.
     The permission refers to the grounds which state that the  judge  made
    several misdirections in law  in  her  assessment  of  Article  8.  The
    Appellant was 64 years old when the application was  made  and  so  was
    unable to fulfil the entry clearance requirements as an adult dependent
    relative and her circumstances were that she did not  require  personal
    care and was not wholly or mainly dependent on her sons in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The permission states that that being the case there were  no
    good arguable reasons for considering Article 8 outside the  Rules  and
    the judge's assessment on  the  Appellant's  removal  from  the  United
    Kingdom is disproportionate as she is currently in the  United  Kingdom
    on a visit visa.  The permission  states  that  the  decision  appealed
    against was not a removal decision so the points put forward about  her
    closeness  to  her  sons  in  the  United  Kingdom  are  not   relevant
    considerations. What the judge should have looked at was the  situation
    at the date of the decision when it was found that the Appellant  could
    not meet the terms of the Rules.  The permission goes on to state  that
    the Article 8 consideration should have been based  on  whether  family
    life could continue to be enjoyed by visits as it is at the moment  and
    the judge should not have made assessments under Section 117 of part 5A
    of the Nationality, Immigration &  Asylum  Act  2002  as  there  is  no
    removal decision.

 4. There is no Rule 24 response.

The Hearing

 5. The Presenting Officer submitted that the judge approached this  appeal
    as if it was a removal case, but it is not, it is a  refusal  of  entry
    clearance.  He submitted that there are serious errors in the  decision
    because of this approach.

 6. He submitted that it is not relevant whether this Appellant is close to
    her sons in the United Kingdom.  She is presently in the United Kingdom
    as a visitor and her visit visa has expired.   He  submitted  that  the
    judge should have considered the situation under the Rules at the  date
    of the application and if necessary under Article 8.

 7. The Presenting Officer  submitted  that  the  judge  accepts  that  the
    Appellant's  application  cannot  satisfy  the  requirements   of   the
    Immigration Rules (Paragraph 23).   He  submitted  that  there  are  no
    exceptional or compelling circumstances in  this  case.   He  submitted
    that the judge bases her findings on the fact  that  the  Appellant  is
    living with one of her sons in the United Kingdom as a  member  of  his
    household but the Appellant had not even been staying there for a  year
    so based on this application, this cannot be considered.  He  submitted
    that this part of the judge's decision is fundamentally flawed  and  is
    unsustainable.

 8. The Presenting Officer submitted that  the  judge  failed  to  look  at
    Article 8 through the prism of the Rules.  If the  judge  is  going  to
    consider the appeal outside the Rules she still has to  refer  back  to
    them as the starting point.   He  submitted  that  the  judge  has  not
    explained why she finds that this case is compelling or exceptional.

 9. The Presenting Officer submitted that for the judge to allow the appeal
    she would have to consider the impact of the success of the Appellant's
    application on effective immigration control and public interest.

10. He submitted that there are material  errors  of  law  in  the  judge's
    decision.

11. Counsel for  the  Appellant  submitted  that  the  Respondent  has  not
    specified  what  misdirections  the  judge  has  made  in  law  in  her
    assessment  of  Article  8.   He   submitted   that   the   Appellant's
    representative accepted that the application cannot succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules and the grounds are merely a  disagreement  with  the
    decision making process.

12. Counsel submitted that at paragraph 23 of the decision the judge states
    that the Appellant has been living  with  her  son  for  one  year  and
    Counsel submitted that he accepts that that is not the case.   She  has
    been staying there for less than a year, but he submitted that that  is
    not the only reason why the judge reached her decision.

13. I was referred to paragraph 35 of the decision and  the  oral  evidence
    given by the Appellant's two sons.  I was referred to the  very  strong
    bond that the Appellant has with her sons.  The  judge  refers  to  the
    sons both being in the army and the Appellant  being  emotionally  very
    dependent on them.

14. At paragraph 39 of the decision the judge refers to Sections 117A to  B
    and the maintenance of effective  immigration  control.   He  submitted
    that a proper balancing exercise has been carried out and there  is  no
    misdirection of law.  The judge has found that this Appellant's  family
    life outweighs what is required by Section 117B.

15. Counsel then submitted that Section 117 was  not  referred  to  by  the
    Presenting Officer in his oral submissions.  He submitted that  Section
    117B refers to every immigration decision, not just a removal decision.
     He submitted that the judge recognises that public interest has to  be
    taken into account and she has referred to the case  of  Razgar  [2004]
    UKHL 27 in connection with the balancing exercise.  He  submitted  that
    the judge has applied the law, the correct statute and the correct case
    law.  He submitted that the judge has discretion.  He pointed out  that
    the Respondent did not attend the hearing  and  submitted  that  it  is
    clear from the decision that the judge finds that  the  rights  of  the
    Appellant outweigh public interest.

16. The Presenting Officer referred me  to  paragraph  41  onwards  of  the
    decision in which the judge states that the Respondent's  decision  was
    unlawful.  At paragraph 44 she refers to the case of Singh [2015]  EWCA
    Civ 74 and the approach  to  be  taken  by  judges  when  making  their
    decisions.  He submitted that the judge should have considered  whether
    the  immigration  decision  was  a  justified  interference  with   the
    Appellant's right to family and/or private life and that the provisions
    of the Rules or other relevant statements of policy may again  re-enter
    the debate, but this time as part of  the  proportionality  assessment.
    The judge should be asking whether the interference is a  proportionate
    means of achieving the legitimate aim in question and whether there  is
    a fair balance as to the competing interest.

17. Counsel submitted that the judge found that the Respondent did not make
    a fair assessment and so her decision was unlawful. He  submitted  that
    the judge applied the law equitably and came to a  conclusion  that  is
    supported by the evidence which was before her.

18. Counsel submitted that there are compelling circumstances in this  case
    and the appeal should be allowed.

19. The Presenting Officer submitted that  there  is  a  problem  with  the
    judge's findings as they are based on an  error  and  this  has  to  be
    addressed.  The relevant date is  the  date  of  the  application.   He
    submitted that at  the  time  of  the  application  the  Appellant  was
    visiting her family members, not living with  them  as  part  of  their
    family.  He submitted, therefore, that the judge's  assessment  of  her
    family  life  is  undermined  and  in  fact  her  whole  assessment  is
    undermined and Section 117B is not  relevant.   He  submitted  that  an
    assessment cannot be sustainable when  there  has  been  a  fundamental
    misunderstanding of the law.

20.  The  Presenting  Officer  submitted  that  if  the  judge  found   the
    Respondent's decision to be unlawful she should have referred the  case
    back to the Secretary of State, but she did not do that.  He  submitted
    that no  assessment  was  made  as  at  the  date  of  application  and
    compelling circumstances were not considered based on the situation  at
    that time.

21. The Presenting Officer submitted that the provisions in the Immigration
    Rules relating to people who require care are clear and  the  Appellant
    does not meet the terms of the Rules.

22. The Presenting Officer submitted that there is nothing  exceptional  or
    compelling in this claim and that the judge's assessment is flawed.

23. Counsel submitted that it is not fair to say that the judge focused  on
    matters post-decision.  I was referred to paragraph 31 of the  decision
    in which the Appellant's evidence about her finances are narrated.   At
    paragraph 32 the judge deals with the Appellant's problems if  she  has
    to return to South Africa as a single white female  living  alone.   He
    submitted that there are clear concerns about the Appellant's safety.

24. At paragraph 34 of  the  decision  the  judge  assessed  the  part  the
    Appellant plays in her sons' lives in the United Kingdom.  He submitted
    that all matters have  been  taken  into  account  and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision should stand.

Decision

25. The Appellant  applied  for  entry  clearance  as  an  adult  dependent
    relative under Appendix FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The  refusal
    letter dated 2 October 2014 explains that the terms of the Rules cannot
    be satisfied and states that there are no exceptional circumstances for
    the claim to be considered under Article 8 of ECHR.

26.  The  Appellant's  representative  accepts  that  the  terms   of   the
    Immigration Rules cannot be satisfied.

27. The Appellant is in the United Kingdom on a visit visa.  This  has  now
    expired. Her main residence is her   brother's house in South Africa in
    which she lives rent free.

28. In paragraph 20 of the decision the judge states that the terms of  the
    Immigration Rules cannot be satisfied.  The  Appellant  does  not  need
    daily care or long-term personal care for everyday tasks.  At the  date
    of application she was only 64 years old.

29. The judge has approached this case as a removal  case.   It  is  not  a
    removal case.  The Appellant has been refused entry  clearance  to  the
    United Kingdom.  Because of the way the judge has  approached  matters,
    there are errors in her decision.

30. The judge had to consider the situation at the date of the application.
     At paragraph 23 the judge states that the Appellant  has  been  living
    with one of her sons for a year, which is  not  the  case.   She  is  a
    visitor.  The judge has considered her bond  with  her  sons  but  this
    cannot be considered as it is not a removal case.  This is an error  by
    the judge.

31. The judge should have considered the application under Article 8 within
    the Rules.  The Appellant is here on a visit visa and the judge  should
    have decided if by not granting her entry clearance, this would  result
    in an interference with her  family  and  private  life  sufficient  to
    engage Article 8. The judge should then have considered proportionality
    and whether the Appellant's relationship with her sons  could  continue
    by means of visits as at present. At the date of application there were
    no exceptional circumstances.

32. It is clear from the wording of the decision that the judge's  findings
    are based on an error.   There  is  no  removal  decision.   The  judge
    erroneously stated that the Respondent's decision was unlawful but  she
    did not refer it back to the Secretary of  State  for  reconsideration.
    There are material errors of law in the decision.

Notice of Decision

33. There are material errors of law in the First-tier Tribunal's  decision
    promulgated on 27 August 2015.  This decision must be set aside.

34. No findings of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  can  stand.   Under  Section
    12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and Practice Statement 7.2 the  nature  and
    extent of judicial fact-finding necessary for the decision to be remade
    is such that it is appropriate to remit  the  case  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.   The  member(s)  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   chosen   to
    reconsider the case are not to include Judge Suffield-Thompson.

35. Anonymity is directed



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray

