
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/14001/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10th December, 2013                        |On 29th January 2014         |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley



                                   Between

                                 LIPY BEGUM

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Timson of Counsel, instructed by Maya Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh, who was born on  12th  April,
    1994, and is now 19 years of  age.   On  20th  March,  2012,  she  made
    application to the respondent for entry clearance for settlement  under
    paragraph 297 of Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules, HC 395,  as
    amended ("the Immigration Rules").  The Entry Clearance Officer refused
    the appellant's application under  both  paragraph  297  and  paragraph
    320(7A), on 1st July, 2012.  The appellant appealed  that  decision  to
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge and her appeal was  heard  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge De Haney on  23rd  July  2013.   In  his  determination,
    promulgated on 9th August, 2013, Immigration Judge De Haney allowed the
    appellant's appeal.

2.   The respondent, dissatisfied with the decision, challenged the  judge's
    determination and was granted permission to appeal by Designated  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal J M Lewis.

3.   On 3rd October, 2013, I heard submissions from the representatives  and
    set aside Immigration Judge  Delaney's  determination.  A  copy  of  my
    reasons  for  that  finding  are  set  out  in  the  appendix  to  this
    determination.

4.   At the hearing before me I explained that I had no up to  date  bundle.
    The Presenting Officer told me that he had received a bundle, but  only
    by facsimile on the morning  of  the  hearing.   Counsel  gave  me  his
    bundle.

5.   Counsel explained that the appellant's mother has difficulty in  giving
    evidence.  He advised me that it was accepted that the appeal could not
    succeed under the Immigration Rules and that reliance was placed on the
    appellant's Article 8 ECHR rights.   He  explained  that  it  was  also
    accepted that the appellant's Article 8 appeal could not succeed  under
    the Immigration Rules, which were not applicable.

Oral Evidence from the Sponsor

6.   I heard oral evidence from Shufia Besgum. She and the interpreter  both
    confirmed to me that they understood each  other.   She  confirmed  her
    full name and address. The sponsor told me that she  was  feeling  well
    enough to give evidence.

Evidence-in-Chief

7.   In answer to questions put to her by  Counsel,  the  sponsor  confirmed
    that she recalled making a statement  which  had  been  signed  on  6th
    December, 2013.   She was shown page 10 of the statement and  confirmed
    that her signature appeared on the bottom of it.   She  also  confirmed
    that it was read to her in a  language  she  understood  and  that  its
    contents were true and accurate.

Cross-examination

8.   The sponsor confirmed that the appellant, her daughter, lives with  her
    paternal grandfather who is very elderly.  The witness told me that  no
    other family members lived with them.  She told me that there  were  no
    other family members living close by.  In answer to  further  questions
    put to her by the Presenting Officer, the witness  confirmed  that  she
    has one sister living in Bangladesh but all her other siblings live  in
    the United Kingdom.  The sister  living  in  Bangladesh  lives  in  her
    parents' home. She is older than the witness and lives in Polidaw which
    is quite  far  away  from  where  the  appellant  lives.   The  witness
    explained that if one were to set  off  in  the  morning  it  could  be
    reached by car in the evening.

9.   It was pointed out  to  the  witness  by  Mr  Harrison  that  when  the
    appellant's application was considered a verification report  had  been
    undertaken.  Neighbours had told the person responsible  for  compiling
    the report that the appellant had two uncles living nearby.

10.  The witness said that she had already mentioned that uncles live  close
    by.  Mr Harrison pointed out that she  had  not  mentioned  that.   The
    witness explained that the uncles were terrorists and  they  abuse  the
    appellant.  Asked what she meant, she said  that  one  of  the  uncles,
    Babul, is a terrorist.  She was asked why she had not mentioned this in
    her statement.  She said that she had mentioned it before when she came
    to court.  She mentioned that these uncles abuse the appellant and they
    swear at her and  they  throw  things  at  the  house.   They  are  the
    appellant's father's brothers.  They do not live with  the  appellant's
    grandmother.  The witness explained that she has no other  children  in
    Bangladesh.  She then told me that she  has  four  children  living  in
    Bangladesh and they all live with their grandmother.

11.  When asked questions the witness replied on occasions that she did  not
    know and that questions would have to be asked of her husband.  When it
    was pointed out to her that she was present to give evidence she gave a
    reply.  I was concerned that she was not feeling well but she  insisted
    that she was well enough to continue. She confirmed that she understood
    the interpreter.

12   There was no re-examination.

Oral Evidence of Mr Afiz Ali

13.  The witness and the interpreter both  confirmed  that  they  understood
    each other and the witness confirmed his full names and address.

Evidence in Chief

14.  The witness was referred by Mr Timson to page  5  of  the  bundle.   He
    recalled making a statement on 6th December, 2013  and  identified  his
    signature at the foot of page 5.  He confirmed that  he  had  told  the
    truth in the statement and that it was read back to him in Bangladeshi.
      He agreed with Counsel that he had been granted  residence  from  4th
    August, 2013.





Cross-examination

15.  The witness told me that he entered the United Kingdom in 2005  with  a
    visit visa and at the end of his visit he overstayed.  The  first  time
    he attempted to make his stay legal  was  in  2009.   His  wife  Shufia
    Begum, the sponsor, came to the United Kingdom  in  2009.   She  had  a
    right of abode to the United  Kingdom  as  her  father  was  a  British
    citizen.  She persuaded the witness to regularise his stay.  He  agreed
    with Mr Harrison that between 2005, and the  arrival  of  his  wife  in
    2009, he did nothing to regularise his stay.  He told me that  in  2009
    he worked in a factory.  Before 2009 he did not work  at  all.  Friends
    and relatives in the United Kingdom  looked  after  him  and  fed  him.
    During those four years he was not in a position to support his  family
    in Bangladesh, but he kept in regular contact with them  on  the  phone
    and by facsimile.  While he lived with friends and  family,  they  gave
    him pocket money which he used to contact his family.   Now  he  has  a
    job.  When he came to the United Kingdom he had �500 which  he  brought
    with him.  He currently works in a laundry  and  started  work  at  his
    present job on 10th June, 2013.

Questions put by me in order to clarify the Witness's Evidence

16.  I asked the witness several questions in order to clarify  evidence  he
    had given. He told  me  that  between  2005  and  2009  his  family  in
    Bangladesh survived because when he left Bangladesh  he  left  11  lakh
    with a business partner.  There is still 5 lakh of that money  left  in
    Bangladesh.  The witness used to telephone his wife every week.

Re-examination

17.  The witness explained in response to questions put by  Mr  Timson  that
    he left money in Bangladesh because he had  been  a  businessman.   The
    money was left with a business partner and his wife and  children  were
    supported by this money.  While the witness was in the  United  Kingdom
    decisions about his daughter were taken jointly by him and his wife.

Questions put by me in order to clarify the Witness's Evidence

18.  The witness confirmed that he had four children  living  in  Bangladesh
    and that they all lived together.  The appellant is the second  oldest.
    There was no further re-examination.

Paragraph 301 of the Immigration Rules

19.  I clarified the position of paragraph  301  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    with Counsel.  Counsel told me that paragraph 301 was  not  applicable.
    The appellant's father's appeal was granted by a  First  Tier  Tribunal
    Judge in  March  2012,  but  he  was  not  actually  granted  leave  in
    accordance with that decision until 4th August 2013.  This  appellant's
    application was dated 1st July, 2012.


20.  Mr Timson thought it was fair to warn Mr Harrison before  he  made  his
    submissions, that he would be relying on the fact that there had been a
    lengthy delay in granting the appellant's father  leave  following  his
    successful appeal in March 2012, and if leave had been granted within a
    reasonable time following the hearing of his appeal, then the appellant
    would have been eligible for admission  to  the  United  Kingdom  under
    paragraph 301 when her application was considered on 1st July, 2012.  I
    was grateful to Mr Timson for making this clear.

Submissions

21.  Mr Harrison relied on the  refusal  and  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    Manager's report.  In his view the sponsor and  her  husband  had  been
    less than candid.  It has been difficult to obtain  the  true  position
    with regard to the appellant's circumstances,  not  least  to  identify
    with whom she is actually living.  It  now  appears,  contrary  to  the
    evidence of the sponsor, that she is living with her siblings,  one  of
    whom is her eldest sister. Other relatives  live  locally.   Money  was
    clearly left in Bangladesh by the appellant's father when  he  came  to
    the United Kingdom and overstayed in 2005.  The appellant's mother  has
    a right of abode in the United Kingdom and entered in  2009  when  they
    chose to  leave  all  their  children  in  Bangladesh.   They  had  not
    concerned themselves with their family life;  they  were  content  that
    they maintained contact with the appellant by  telephone.   The  family
    lived the way they did entirely by choice, but now they want  something
    else.  Family life, as it existed, is not affected by the  respondent's
    decision and given the false claims that had been  made  it  is  not  a
    decision which is disproportionate.

22.  Mr  Timson  reminded  me  that  the  appeal  had  been  refused   under
    paragraph 320 of the Immigration Rules and drew my attention to page 58
    of the appellant's bundle which was a discharge certificate  confirming
    that an 86 year old, Aklasun Nessa, wife of Mantaz Ali, was admitted to
     hospital on 20th June, 2012.  I pointed out to Counsel that  according
    to the certificate she had pain and swelling in the  left  mid  "thigh"
    and that the clinical diagnosis  was  "fracture  of  the  LT  shaft  of
    femur".  He explained that nonetheless the appellant's grandmother  was
    clearly in hospital at the time of the village visit and there  was  no
    evidence, therefore, of any deception. The visit  had  taken  place  on
    24th June, four days before the grandmother's discharge.

23.  Dealing first with the evidence  of  the  appellant's  mother,  Counsel
    suggested that allowance must be made for the  fact  that  she  suffers
    from confusion.  All she has ever done has been to try and support  the
    appellant.  Her husband has confirmed that he arranged for money to  be
    available for the appellant and his wife to live on when he came to the
    United Kingdom.   Both  he  and  his  wife  had  given  straightforward
    evidence and his wife had sole responsibility.

24.  Additionally, the delay on the part of the respondent in  granting  the
    appellant's father leave once his appeal had been  granted  means  that
    paragraph 301 of the Immigration Rules was not considered by the  Entry
    Clearance  Officer.    Discretionary  leave  was  not  granted  to  the
    appellant's father until over a year after his appeal was allowed.

25.  Mr Timson confirmed that those instructed on behalf  of  the  appellant
    did not send a copy of the determination for her father  to  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer, before the Entry Clearance  Officer's  decision  was
    made.  Mr Timson urged me to allow the appeal on human rights  grounds.
    In doing so I must consider the family life of all family members.  The
    appellant's siblings have  all  now  applied  to  come  to  the  United
    Kingdom.  Mr Timson confirmed that there was  no  evidence  before  the
    Entry Clearance Officer which might have  caused  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer to realise that the appellant's father had been  successful  in
    his appeal.

26.  I reserved my decision.

Consideration of the Appeal

27.  Paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules provides as follows:

         "Requirements for indefinite leave to enter the United  Kingdom  as
         the child of a parent, parents or a relative present and settled or
         being admitted for settlement in the United Kingdom

         297. The requirements to be met  by  a  person  seeking  indefinite
             leave to enter the United Kingdom as the child  of  a  parent,
             parents or a relative present and settled  or  being  admitted
             for settlement in the United Kingdom are that he:

             (i)  is seeking leave to enter to accompany or join a  parent,
             parents or a relative in one of the following circumstances:

                  (a)  both parents are present and settled  in  the  United
             Kingdom; or

                  (b)  both parents are being admitted on the same  occasion
             for settlement; or

                  (c)  one parent is  present  and  settled  in  the  United
                      Kingdom and the other is being admitted on  the  same
                      occasion for settlement; or

                  (d)  one parent is  present  and  settled  in  the  United
                      Kingdom or being admitted on the  same  occasion  for
                      settlement and the other parent is dead; or

                  (e)  one parent is  present  and  settled  in  the  United
                      Kingdom or being admitted on the  same  occasion  for
                      settlement and has had sole  responsibility  for  the
                      child's upbringing; or

                  (f)  one parent or a relative is present  and  settled  in
                      the United Kingdom or  being  admitted  on  the  same
                      occasion for settlement and  there  are  serious  and
                      compelling family or other considerations which  make
                      exclusion  of  the  child  undesirable  and  suitable
                      arrangements have been made for the child's care; and



             (ii)     is under the age of 18; and

             (iii)    is not leading an independent life, is unmarried  and
                  is not a civil partner, and has not formed an  independent
                  family unit; and

             (iv)     can, and will,  be  accommodated  adequately  by  the
                  parent, parents or relative the child is seeking  to  join
                  without recourse to public funds  in  accommodation  which
                  the parent, parents or relative the child  is  seeking  to
                  join, own or occupy exclusively; and

             (v)  can, and will, be maintained adequately  by  the  parent,
                  parents, or relative the child is seeking to join, without
                  recourse to public funds; and

             (vi)     holds a valid  United  Kingdom  entry  clearance  for
                  entry in this capacity; and

             (vii)    does not fall for refusal under the  general  grounds
                  for refusal."


28.  Paragraph 320(7A) provides as follows

           "(7A)  where  false  representations  have  been  made  or  false
             documents or information have been submitted (whether  or  not
             material to  the  application,  and  whether  or  not  to  the
             applicant's  knowledge),  or  material  facts  have  not  been
             disclosed, in relation to  the  application  or  in  order  to
             obtain documents from the Secretary of State or a third  party
             required in support of the application."
29.  In relation to paragraph 271, the burden of proof is on the  appellant.
     In respect of paragraph 320(7A) the burden changes; the burden  is  on
    the respondent to prove that false representations have  been  made  or
    false documents or false information have been  submitted  (whether  or
    not material to the application, and whether or not to the  appellant's
    knowledge, or material factors have not been disclosed, in relation  to
    the application or in order to obtain documents from the  Secretary  of
    State or a third party requiring support of the application).

30.  Dealing first with the refusal under paragraph 320(7A), it is clear  to
    me that the appellant's grandmother was actually in hospital in  Sylhet
    at the time of the visit to her home.  She had a fracture of  her  left
    femur, having been admitted to hospital on 20th June, 2012.  The  Entry
    Clearance Officer  refused  the  application  under  paragraph  320(7A)
    became there was no evidence following the visit to  the  grandmother's
    house that she had broken a limb and her neighbours had no knowledge of
    her breaking her limb.  The fact of the matter is that she had broken a
    limb and was in hospital at the time.  To that extent, I find that  the
    decision of the Entry Clearance Officer to refuse the application under
    paragraph  320(7A)  was  not  in  accordance  with  the  law  and   the
    Immigration Rules and I allow the appellant's appeal.

31.  I now turn my attention to paragraph 297 of the Rules and before  doing
    so it is necessary to make some findings of fact.

32.  I have made what I believe to be due allowance for  the  fact  that  in
    giving evidence to me the sponsor was anxious and found it difficult to
    give evidence through an interpreter, however, I did  not  find  Shufia
    Begum to be  credible  witnesses.   Having  seen  and  heard  her  give
    evidence, I believe that she would say anything if she thought it would
    help the appellant's appeal, whether it was true or not.

33.  In her witness statement, the witness says that all  her  siblings  are
    settled in the United Kingdom.  She contradicted that when giving  oral
    evidence to me and told me that one of her sisters is still  living  in
    Bangladesh in Polieaw.  I believe that the  reason  she  did  not  make
    reference to this sister in her statement was because she  was  seeking
    to persuade the Tribunal that all her  relatives  were  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

34.  In paragraph 7 of her statement, she refers to the appellant  as  being
    her dependant.  However, according to  Mr  Afiz  Ali,  the  appellant's
    father, when he left Bangladesh and came to the United Kingdom he  left
    funds available with his partner for the maintenance of  his  wife  and
    his children, including the appellant.  He  told  me  that  there  were
    still 5 lakhs left in Bangladesh.  I believe this is another example of
    the  appellant  seeking  to  portray  a  situation   which   bears   no
    relationship to the truth.

35.  In paragraph 8 of her statement Shufia Begum refers to the  appellant's
    grandmother being ill and unable to look after her children.  She  says
    that she is at least 90 years of age.  In actual fact  the  grandmother
    is 86 and it is clear beyond doubt that the appellant has uncles living
    in the same village.  According to the visit report the appellant lives
    in a recently built "structured" house with her sisters and brother and
    with her uncles living nearby.  The report says  that  the  appellant's
    two uncles live nearby.  According to the witness, the  grandmother  is
    ill and poorly and unable to look after the appellant and her siblings,
    but one  of  the  appellant's  siblings  is  actually  older  than  the
    appellant and it is  clear  that  there  are  two  of  the  appellant's
    father's brothers living in the same village.  I believe that this  was
    a further example  of  the  witness's  inability  to  give  honest  and
    credible  evidence.    According  to  paragraph  13  of  the  witness's
    statement, she  has  been  the  principal  financial  sponsor  and  the
    appellant is under her financial care and direct responsibility.   This
    evidence is directly contradicted by her husband who says that not only
    did he leave the sum of  11  lakh  with  a  business  pattern  for  the
    maintenance of his children and his wife but there  is  still  5  lakhs
    left in Bangladesh.  He also indicated that while he was in the  United
    Kingdom decisions about his daughter had been taken jointly by him  and
    his wife.

36.  Counsel asked me to note that the witness suffered from depression.  He
    did not draw my attention to any medical evidence, but I have noted the
    letter at page 21 of the appellant's bundle from her GP which  suggests
    that she suffers from anxiety, depression and palpitations.  The doctor
    says that she takes regular medication but gives no  indication  as  to
    what this medication is.   The  witness  appears  to  be  receiving  no
    treatment  other  than  unidentified  medication   for   her   anxiety,
    depression and palpitations.

37.  I have made what I believe to be due allowance for  the  fact  that  in
    giving evidence to me the sponsor was anxious and found it difficult to
    give evidence through an interpreter.  However, even having  made  such
    allowance I find that she is not a witness of truth.   I  believe  that
    she is quite willing to say anything which she believes will  help  her
    daughter  gain  entry  to  the  United  Kingdom.  I  believe  that  she
    deliberately  invented  a  story  about   her   brothers-in-law   being
    terrorists and abusing the appellant and I believe that had it not been
    pointed out by the Home Office Presenting Officer  that  the  appellant
    has two uncles living in the same village, the sponsor would  not  have
    mentioned these relatives at all.

38.  I am prepared to accept that Mr Afiz Ali  is  a  credible  witness.   I
    believe that he was telling me the truth when he said that he had  left
    funds with a business partner for the maintenance of his wife  and  his
    family, including the appellant, when he came to the United Kingdom  in
    2005 and that 5 lakhs still remained available for use by his  children
    including the appellant.  I believe that he did not at any  time  after
    he came to the United Kingdom abdicate responsibility for his daughter.
     He told me that he kept in regular contact with his  family  and  that
    while he was in the United Kingdom decisions about  his  daughter  were
    taken jointly by him and his wife. I believe that that is the truth  of
    the matter.

39.  Mr Afiz Ali made no mention at all of his brothers being terrorists  or
    having assaulted the  appellant.   I  do  not  believe  that  they  are
    terrorists or that they have assaulted the appellant.  I  believe  that
    if they were terrorists or if they had behaved in any  way  harmful  to
    the appellant that he would have told me.

40.  In considering I bear in mind that reliance  was  placed  on  paragraph
    297(1)(e).  I am satisfied on the evidence before me that at  the  date
    of the Entry Clearance Officer's decision the  appellant's  mother  was
    present and settled in the United Kingdom.   However,  I  am  satisfied
    that she did not have sole responsibility for the  child's  upbringing;
    the appellant's father could not have given  clearer  evidence  on  the
    point.  After he came to the United Kingdom  all  decisions  concerning
    his daughter were taken jointly by him and his wife.

41.  Neither can the appellant  succeed  under  paragraph  297(1)(f).    The
    appellant lives with her siblings and  with  her  elderly  grandmother.
    According to the  visit  report,  the  house  they  live  in  has  been
    reenlist built.  The appellant's two uncles live  nearby  in  the  same
    village.

42.  On consideration of all the evidence placed before me, I find  that  as
    at the date of the Entry Clearance Officer's  decision  there  were  no
    serious and compelling family or other considerations  which  made  the
    exclusion of the appellant undesirable.

43.  I find that the appellant's mother, the sponsor, was, at  the  date  of
    the entry clearance application, present  and  settled  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The appellant's father was in the  United  Kingdom.   He  had
    overstayed his visit visa in 2005.  The  appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 297 as at the date  of  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer's decision.  Her immigration appeal is dismissed.

44.  I turn now to the appellant's Article 8 appeal and I am  most  grateful
    to Counsel for his indication earlier in the hearing  that  I  was  not
    concerned with the appellant's legibility  under  the  Rules  to  claim
    asylum, since she could not meet the requirements.

Article 8

The Law

45.  Article 8 of the  European  Convention  for  the  Protection  of  Human
    Rights and Fundamental Freedoms provides for  respect  for  a  person's
    private and family life, their home and correspondence.  The  appellant
    has to show that the subject matter of the Article 8 subsists and  that
    the decision of the respondent will interfere with it.  If he does  so,
    it is for the respondent to show that the  decision  is  in  accordance
    with the law, that it is one of the  legitimate  purposes  set  out  in
    Article 8(2) in this case for the economic well-being of  the  country,
    for the prevention of disorder or crime and for the protection  of  the
    rights and freedoms of others, and that it is necessary in a democratic
    society, which means that it must be proportionate.

46.  At paragraph 17 of Razgar v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2004] UKHL 27, Lord Bingham of Cornhill said this:
         "17.  In considering whether  a  challenge  to  the  Secretary  of
             State's decision to remove a person  must  clearly  fail,  the
             reviewing court must, as it  seems  to  me,  consider  how  an
             appeal would be likely to fare before an adjudicator,  as  the
             tribunal responsible for deciding the appeal if there were  an
             appeal. This means that the reviewing court  must  ask  itself
             essentially the questions which would have to be  answered  by
             an adjudicator.  In  a  case  where  removal  is  resisted  in
             reliance on article 8, these questions are likely to be:
             (1)      Will the proposed removal be  an  interference  by  a
                  public authority with the  exercise  of  the  applicant's
                  right to respect for his private or (as the case may  be)
                  family life?
             (2)      If so, will such interference  have  consequences  of
                  such gravity as potentially to engage  the  operation  of
                  article 8?
             (3)      If so, is such interference in  accordance  with  the
                  law?
             (4)      If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic
                  society in the interests  of  national  security,  public
                  safety or the economic well-being of the country, for the
                  prevention of disorder or crime, for  the  protection  of
                  health or morals, or for the protection of the rights and
                  freedoms of others?
             (5)      If so, is such interference proportionate to the
                  legitimate public end sought to be achieved?"

47.  I am satisfied that the appellant does enjoy a  family  life  with  her
    parents and I believe that the respondent's decision does amount to  an
    interference with that  family  life,  because  it  prevents  her  from
    enjoying it fully with her parents as she did before her parents  chose
    to come to the  United  Kingdom.  I  find  that  the  interference  has
    consequences of such gravity as potentially to engage the operation  of
    Article 8 which, as Sedley  LJ  reminded  us  in  paragraph  28  of  AG
    (Eritrea) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007] EWCA  Civ
    801, does not have a particularly high threshold.

48.  The interference is in accordance with the law and is  necessary  in  a
    democratic society for the economic wellbeing of the country,  for  the
    prevention of disorder or crime and for the protection  of  the  rights
    and freedoms of others. The question I have to consider is  whether  or
    not such interference  is  proportionate.   I  must  bear  in  mind  in
    considering the appellant's Article 8 appeal is the  fact  that  it  is
    necessary to look at the family as a whole.

49.  Dealing first with the point made by Counsel concerning  paragraph  301
    of the Immigration Rules, I note that the appellant's  father's  appeal
    was granted by  a  First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge  in  March  2011.   The
    appellant's application was dated 20th March 2012.  I do not  know  the
    date on which the appellant's father became aware that his  appeal  was
    successful, but I do think it significant that at no time following the
    promulgated of the determination in  his  appeal  did  the  appellant's
    solicitors notify the Entry Clearance Officer that her father had  been
    successful in his appeal and that she should now  be  considered  under
    paragraph 301.

50.  Instead, the application was pursued on the basis that the  appellant's
    mother was present and settled in the United Kingdom and had  had  sole
    responsibility for the child's upbringing, or that there  were  serious
    and compelling family or other considerations which make  exclusion  of
    the appellant undesirable and suitable arrangements had been  made  for
    her care.  The truth of the matter was that the appellant's mother  did
    not have sole responsibility for the child's upbringing and there  were
    no compelling family or other consideration which made the exclusion of
    the child undesirable.

51.  It is surprising and of particular concern that it took  the  Secretary
    of State from March 2011  to  August  2003  to  implement  the  judge's
    decision to allow the appellant's fathers appeal.

52.  I can quite understand why there would  be  some  delay  following  the
    successful appeal and I do not believe that a delay  of  a  few  months
    would, necessarily,  be  unreasonable;  I  think  it  would  have  been
    unrealistic to expect the Secretary of State to have acted within three
    months.  The  fact  that  the  appellant  might  have  qualified  under
    paragraph 301 of the Immigration Rules is something that  I  take  into
    account, but I have to bear in mind that no one saw fit to  notify  the
    Entry Clearance Officer that the appellant's father's appeal  had  been
    allowed.  The Entry Clearance Officer would not have been sent  a  copy
    of the father's determination.  I bear in  mind  that  the  appellant's
    mother was entitled to a right of abode in the United Kingdom; her  own
    father  was  a  British  subject.   The  appellant's  father,  however,
    deliberately overstayed after the end of his visit visa. He  chose  not
    to return to Bangladesh.  The situation the appellant now finds herself
    in is one very largely of her parents' own making.   She  could   never
    have succeeded in her application under paragraph 297 and did not  make
    an application under paragraph 301. It is doubtful whether, as  at  the
    date of the decision, the respondent  could   properly  and  reasonably
    have  been   expected  to   have   granted   the   appellant's   father
    discretionary leave following his successful appeal and when I consider
    all these factors in the round I have concluded that  the  respondent's
    decision is entirely proportionate.

53.  The appellant's human rights appeal is dismissed.

Summary

    The appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer under Paragraph 320(7A) is allowed.


    The appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer under Paragraph 297 is dismissed.

    The appellant's human rights appeal under Article 8 European Convention
    for  the  Protection  of  Human  Rights  and  Fundamental  Freedoms  is
    dismissed.

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

















                    The Appendix above referred to [pic]

                                    [pic]
