
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/14039/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 21st February 2014                         |On 16th May 2014             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                                YAKOB MATEWOS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - CAIRO
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms Soltani of Iris Law Firm.
For the Respondent: Mrs Rackstraw - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

     1. On 26th January 2012 the  Appellant's  application  for  settlement
        under the refugee family  reunion  provisions  of  the  Immigration
        Rules was lodged.  He wishes to join his spouse and sponsor  Senait
        Solomon, an Eritrea national born on 1st January 1976, who has been
        recognised as a refugee in the United Kingdom.  The application was
        refused by an Entry Clearance Officer (ECO)  in  a  decision  dated
        28th May 2012 as the authenticity of the marriage  certificate  was
        doubted.  As a result it was not accepted as evidence of a marriage
        that took place in 1992 and that in the absence  of  that  document
        there was no satisfactory evidence that the Appellant is  the  pre-
        flight spouse of his sponsor.


     2. The ECO noted that when interviewed in connection with  her  asylum
        claim in 2008 the sponsor stated she was married to a man with  the
        name of Yakob Matewos, the same name as the Appellant states he  is
        known by, although the ECO also asserted that he had  not  provided
        satisfactory evidence of his identity  by  way  of  a  passport  or
        national identity card, bar a handwritten identity card  apparently
        issued by the UNHCR.   The ECO stated that such cards  have  little
        evidential value as they are issued without  background  checks  or
        supporting  documents.   The  ECO  also  noted  that  the  Eritrean
        authorities in Sudan have recently confirmed that they are  willing
        to issue identity documents to any  Eritrean  national  present  in
        Sudan regardless of their  legal  status.  The  ECO  questions  the
        failure to provide a passport or identity card and the  Appellant's
        motive in not doing so.  As the ECO was not satisfied the Appellant
        is the pre-flight spouse of a person recognised as a refugee it was
        not accepted he met the requirements of paragraph 352A (i) and (ii)
        of the Immigration Rules.


     3. The  appeal  against  the  refusal  was  considered  by  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge Holmes who, in a determination promulgated  on  15th
        July 2013, dismissed the appeal.  Permission to appeal was  granted
        by Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Murray on 6th August  2013.
        On 30th September  2013  Judge  Aitken,  Deputy  Chamber  President
        (HESC) who was due to hear the initial hearing, noted that an issue
        had arisen relating to the minimum age at which  an  individual  in
        Eritrea   was   permitted   to   marry   which   required   further
        investigation.  That hearing was adjourned and  a  further  hearing
        listed on 18th December 2013 before Upper Tribunal Judge McKee.


     4. Having considered the evidence and submissions  Judge  McKee  found
        that Judge Holmes had erred in law such that the determination  had
        to be set aside on the basis of a misunderstanding of the  evidence
        in a way that was material to the outcome of the  appeal.   It  was
        not possible for Judge McKee to remake the  decision  as  time  had
        only been allowed to  deal  with  the  issue  identified  by  Judge
        Aitken.  This issue had been resolved by an  addendum  report  from
        Gunter Schroder who  explained  that  one  can  lawfully  marry  in
        Eritrea at the age of 16, with the consent of  one's  parents,  and
        that such consent was  likely  to  have  been  forthcoming  in  the
        present case.


     5. Judge McKee made  it  clear  that  as  the  parties  had  not  been
        expecting to deal with the remaking of  the  decision  it  was  not
        feasible to proceed  to  do  so  and  the  matter  was  accordingly
        adjourned  to  the  hearing  that  came  before  me  following  the
        retirement of Judge McKee.  The document produced  by  Judge  McKee
        following the  hearing  in  December  does,  however,  contain  two
        errors.   The  first  of  which  is  that  it  is  described  as  a
        'determination  and  reasons'  whereas  it  is  a  decision  on   a
        preliminary issue and, secondly, after the heading "decision" Judge
        McKee has stated that the appeal is allowed.


     6. This was raised as a preliminary issue at the start of the  hearing
        and it accepted by all parties that this was not the  intention  of
        Judge McKee. I find the reference to the appeal being allowed is an
        error and that such a purported finding has to be set aside  as  it
        could not have been properly made without the evidence being  heard
        and   the   parties   being   given   the   opportunity   to   make
        representations.


     7. Mrs Rackstraw confirmed that no document  verification  report  has
        been provided by the ECO, despite reference the same in e-mails.



Background


     8. In his application the Appellant states that he  was  born  on  1st
        January 1975 in Eritrea.  He currently lives in  Sudan  and  claims
        that his spouse, who he names as Senait Solomon, was  born  on  1st
        January 1976. He provides her address in the United Kingdom.


     9. He states he is unemployed and is supported by money transfers from
        his wife in the United Kingdom. He entered Sudan in July 2011 where
        he was granted refugee status.


    10. The Appellant claims he and his sponsor grew up together and  first
        met as children in Eritrea. They married on 7th January 1992 and he
        says he last saw his sponsor in August 2011 when she  travelled  to
        Sudan to visit him.  They maintain contact by her visiting him  and
        via telephone calls.


    11. The Appellant states it is an arranged marriage although he and the
        sponsor are not related outside marriage. He states his sponsor has
        children and that  they  have  lived  as  man  and  wife  following
        marriage in 1992, prior to the sponsor leaving Eritrea.   They have
        two children who were living  with  the  maternal  grandparents  in
        Eritrea who financially support them. The children were born in May
        1993 and June 1995.


    12. The sponsor is currently unemployed and in  receipt  of  jobseekers
        allowance. She came to the United Kingdom in 2008.


    13. In the sponsor's screening interview, dated 14th November 2008  and
        forming part of the evidence in her asylum claim, she was asked her
        marital status.  She provides the name Yakob Matewos as that of her
        husband and states they married in 1992 although at  that  time  of
        the interview she had not seen her husband since he was  imprisoned
        in 2006.  The sponsor confirmed details of two children who are  in
        Eritrea and who are being looked after by family and  provides  the
        same dates of birth for the children as the Appellant  did  in  his
        application form.


    14. The Appellant has also provided a copy of a document described as a
        refugee card issued by the Republic of the Sudan  Commissioner  for
        Refugees Office (CRO).  The card is in the name  of  Yakob  Matewos
        Melake born in 1975, of Eritrean nationality, his place of work and
        residence is described as 'freelance' and Elshagarab (2) Camp.






Discussion



    15. The sponsor gave detailed oral evidence and I have  considered  all
        the available material with the required degree of  care,  that  of
        anxious scrutiny.


    16. Both the sponsor and Appellant name  their  respective  spouses  as
        having the same name as the other. The sponsor has been  consistent
        in her evidence that her husband has the same name as the Appellant
        and visa versa.


    17. An issue arose at the hearing in that the Appellant's refugee  card
        has a fuller name of Yakob Matewos Melake. The evidence before  the
        Tribunal is that the inclusion of Melake is a family name  and  not
        part of the name used on a day to day basis.  Habesha names,  which
        include Eritreans and Ethiopians, appear to  be  constructed  in  a
        fashion similar to other ethic groups such as found in some  Arabic
        and other conventions.  In this  convention  there  are  no  family
        names and a person is known through their lineage with a given name
        followed by a father's given name and a grandfather's given name.


    18. In light of the above I do not find a reference to the full name in
        the refugee card yet a reference to the Appellant  by  omission  of
        the  grandfather's  name  in  the  marriage   certificate   to   be
        determinative of this appeal.


    19. Judge McKee accepted that it is plausible  that  the  parties  were
        able to marry, notwithstanding  their  ages  at  the  date  of  the
        marriage, leaving the need to consider the ECO's concerns regarding
        the validity of the marriage certificate. The  ECO  stated  in  the
        refusal notice:


          I have cause to doubt the authenticity of  this  certificate.  The
   certificate consists         of a piece of card with photographs  of  the
   bride and groom attached with             staples.  The  certificate  has
   been completed by hand using a bic.   I  have  noted       the  following
   inconsistencies with the certificate:


         . Both of the applicant and sponsor's photos would  indicate  that
           neither has aged physically in the past 20 years.  At  the  time
           of the wedding the applicant would have been 17 years  old,  and
           his sponsor 16 years old. Both photos would appear to depict the
           applicant and sponsor in recent years during adulthood.
         . The photos are stamped with an authenticating wet ink stamp. The
           stamp covering the applicant's  photo  is  misaligned  with  the
           stamp on the certificate. In addition the portion of  the  stamp
           covering the applicant's photo is a different colour  and  lacks
           the detail  of  the  remaining  portion  of  the  stamp  on  the
           certificate.
         . Sight of the reverse of the applicant's photo indicates that the
           photo was printed on photo paper produced by "Centuria Digital".
           The brand name of  photo  paper  is  not  in  keeping  with  the
           apparent age of the photograph.


    20. The Appellant relies upon a  report  prepared  by  Gunter  Schroder
        whose expertise is not challenged before this Tribunal. The  report
        is to be found at pages three to  six  of  the  Appellant's  appeal
        bundle and is dated 30th June 2013. The first part  of  the  report
        deals with marriage and registration of marriage in Eritrea and the
        second section an  assessment  of  the  validity  of  the  marriage
        certificate. In relation to the certificate, Gunter Schroder  notes
        that even now there  is  no  standardised  format  for  a  marriage
        certificate issued by the Eritrean Orthodox Tewahdo Church which is
        prescribed and issued by its head office  in  Asmara  and  used  by
        local churches. As before 2001 each local church or  parish  issued
        its own format although  after  2001  certain  standardisation  has
        occurred with a  standardised  version  of  the  Orthodox  marriage
        certificate which has only very minor variations  at  local  level,
        which is now used in many parishes [A's bundle, p 18-19, para  51].
        The  report  contains  scanned  copies  of  marriage   certificates
        including on page 22 the disputed certificate.


    21. Gunter Schroder, in his assessment  of  the  disputed  certificate,
        writes:


              60. The document format conforms to the common format more and
                  more used since 2001 by local churches of the  ErOTC  (see
   specimen B                   above).


              61. As common with such marriage certificates issued in  rural
   areas, it is                 filled out only in Tigrinnic.


              62. The use of the proper name only and not also the  father's
   name for                the three best men serving as witnesses  is  also
   typical of marriage                   certificates from a rural setting.


              63. The interruption of the church seals stamped  on  the  two
   photos                       clearly is due to the fact that  because  of
   the photos being stapled                  rather than glued on that there
   was not an even surface for stamping.                  I have seen  other
   genuine church marriage certificates  where  the                   photos
   were  stapled  to  the  format  and   as   a   consequence   the   stamps
   of  the  seal  were  interrupted  and  the  two  parts  might   even   be
     misaligned. Examined under magnifications it is  clear  that  for  each
          photo the upper part found on the photos ties in  with  the  lower
   part                on the document as such.


              64. The use of  the  correct  secular  (region/subregion)  and
   church                           (diocese/sub      diocese      (parish))
   administrative units.  This confirms                that  it  was  issued
   long   after   the   original   marriage    took    place.     In    this
   regard it is similar  to  specimen  D  shown  above.   At  the  time  the
     marriage was  contracted  these  units  did  not  exist.  As  discussed
          above  they  came  only  into  existence  after  the  governmental
          administrative restructuring of Eritrea decreed  in  1996.  In  my
              experience forged documents frequently are spotted because  of
   the                 use of wrong, i.e.  outdated  secular  and/or  church
   administrative                   units.


              65. Serejeka is one of three rural subregions  (districts)  of
   Central Region                   (Zone).   Deki  Petros  is  one  of  the
   villages of this district. According to                 consulted  locals
   from   this   area   living   at   Frankfurt   there    is    a    church
   named Kidane Mehret in this village.


    22. It is the  expert  opinion  of  Gunter  Schroder,  based  upon  his
        professional experience and an assessment of the certificate,  that
        he has no reason whatsoever to doubt that the submitted document is
        genuine [A's bundle page 24,  para  66].  He  states  the  document
        proves that a valid religious marriage was contracted  which  under
        the applicable Eritrean legislation is a valid  marriage  also  for
        the secular authorities.


    23. It is clear that the detail contained in the  expert  report  based
        upon information relating to Eritrean issued marriage certificates,
        and the fact that it is common for them to be issued sometimes many
        years after the marriage had actually  taken  place  using  formats
        and/or pictures from the time of issuance and not  those  from  the
        time of marriage, was not available to the ECO or not considered by
        him. The expert also challenges the assertion  the  stamps  on  the
        photographs are misaligned claiming that  they  actually  tie  into
        each other.


    24. In relation to the reference by the ECO to the issuance of Eritrean
        identity documents by the Eritrean  diplomatic  mission  in  Sudan,
        this is stated to be "faulty" by Gunter Schroder  who  states  that
        the issuance of such documents is to tie in with (a) the payment of
        the 2% National Tax and (b) the signing of the  document  in  which
        the applicant admits that he/she has committed crimes  against  the
        Eritrean nation for which this person  will  be  held  accountable,
        were he/she to return to Eritrea and that understandably not  every
        refugee is willing to sign such a document.


    25. In relation to the  situation  of  Eritrean  refugees  arriving  in
        neighbouring countries and  registering  with  the  UNHCR  and  the
        respective refugee agency for the host country,  it  is  said  that
        often they do not carry identification documents although before  a
        UNHCR registration or ID card  is  issued  to  them  they  use  are
        usually carefully screened by  both  the  UNHCR  and  the  National
        refugee agency.


    26. Having considered the  weight  of  evidence  provided  and  in  the
        absence of a document verification report supporting the  assertion
        made by the ECO, I find the Appellant has discharged the burden  of
        proof upon him to the required standard to prove that the  marriage
        certificate is valid.


    27. I am satisfied that as a result it is been proved that  a  marriage
        took place between the sponsor and an individual with the same name
        as the Appellant prior to her leaving  Eritrea  and  that  this  is
        therefore a pre-flight marriage.


    28. In relation to the assertion that whilst having the same  name  the
        Appellant is not in fact the person the  sponsor  married;  I  find
        having considered the evidence in the round including that  arising
        from the sponsor's own asylum claim, the  oral  evidence,  and  the
        documentary  evidence  made  available,  that  the  Appellant   has
        discharged the burden of proof upon him to the required standard of
        proof that he is the person the sponsor married and  therefore  her
        pre-flight spouse. Accordingly I am satisfied that at the  date  of
        decision the Appellant was able to meet  the  requirements  of  the
        relevant immigration rule and allow the appeal on that basis.

Decision

    29. The First-tier Tribunal Judge was found to have materially erred in
        law and his decision set aside. I remake the decision  as  follows.
        This appeal is allowed.


   Anonymity.


    30. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005. I make no such order.


   Fee Award.


   Note: this is not part of the determination.
    31. In the light of my decision to re-make the decision in  the  appeal
        by allowing it, I have considered whether to make a fee award (rule
        23A (costs) of the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)
        Rules 2005 and  section  12(4)(a)  of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and
        Enforcement Act 2007).          I have  had  regard  to  the  Joint
        Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in  Immigration  Appeals
        (December 2011). I make a whole fee award.


          Reasons:     The Appellant has succeeded on appeal. The refusal by
   the ECO                 does not appear to have been based upon  relevant
   country                       information  regarding   the   format   and
   practices relating to Eritrean                marriage  certificates  and
   factual inaccuracies.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
Dated the 16th May 2014
