
[pic]
IAC-HW-AM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/14479/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14th March 2016                            |On 14th April 2016            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                        mrs amarbai kanji naran halai
                         (ANONYMITY order NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NAIROBI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E. Waheed, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr E. Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

1.   The Appellant is a citizen  of  India  born  on  15th  May  1945.   She
    appeals against a decision of Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  James
    sitting at Birmingham on 11th August 2015 who dismissed the Appellant's
    appeal against a decision of the Respondent  dated  15th  August  2014.
    That decision was to refuse the Appellant entry clearance to the United
    Kingdom as an adult dependant relative pursuant to Section E-ECDR.2  of
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.  The Appellant wished to join her
    daughter Ms Kirtiben Kirankumar Patel ("the Sponsor").

2.   Section E-ECDR sets out the  requirements  for  eligibility  for  entry
    clearance as an adult dependent relative.  The applicant must be (inter
    alia) the parent of a person who is in the United Kingdom.   E-ECDR.2.4
    provides that the applicant  must  as  a  result  of  age,  illness  or
    disability require long term personal care to perform  everyday  tasks.
    E-ECDR.2.5 provides that the applicant must be  unable  even  with  the
    practical and financial help of the  Sponsor  to  obtain  the  required
    level of care in the country where they are living because either it is
    not available and there is no person in that country who can reasonably
    provide it or it is not affordable. The burden of proof of establishing
    this rests upon the Appellant and the standard of proof  is  the  usual
    civil standard of balance of probabilities.

3.   The Appellant's case was that she  was  living  on  her  own  in  Kenya
    following the death of her husband who had been shot and killed  during
    a robbery in April 2014.  The Appellant had no family living in  Kenya.
    Her daughter Ms Halai had been caring for the Appellant  in  Kenya  but
    needed to return to the United Kingdom.  The Appellant  was  unable  to
    look after herself because she could not speak, read or  write  English
    and she needed somebody to give her the correct medication.

4.   The Respondent refused the application stating  that  if  there  was  a
    requirement for long term medical care it  should  be  demonstrated  by
    evidence  from  a  doctor  that  the  Appellant's  physical  or  mental
    condition meant  that  she  could  not  perform  everyday  tasks.   The
    Appellant had not met that requirement.  The Appellant was  obliged  to
    provide evidence that even with the practical and financial help of the
    Sponsor in the UK she was unable to obtain the required level  of  care
    in Kenya.  A letter had  been  produced  to  the  Respondent  from  the
    Eldoret Hospital in Kenya stating that the  Appellant  had  high  blood
    pressure and had  been  receiving  counselling  for  the  loss  of  her
    husband.  That letter did not state that the Appellant  was  unable  to
    look after herself or that care was unavailable for her.  The Appellant
    was in sufficient funds to hire an individual  to  look  after  her  if
    necessary.  The application was refused under Section EC-DR.1.1(d).

5.   The Appellant appealed that decision stating  that  she  was  suffering
    from a mental disorder following the  circumstances  of  her  husband's
    death.  Her condition was so debilitating that her functional abilities
    were severely impaired.  There was a close  family  relationship  which
    meant that the family visited and cared for  her  but  this  could  not
    continue indefinitely as  her  daughter  had  responsibilities  in  the
    United  Kingdom.   Hired  help  was  not  an  option  in  view  of  the
    Appellant's fragile mental state.  The decision breached Article 8.

The Decision At First Instance

6.   At paragraphs 25 to 30 of his  determination  the  Judge  set  out  his
    findings and conclusions.  He had  no  doubt  that  the  Appellant  had
    suffered a dreadful experience when she witnessed the  killing  of  her
    husband but in order to succeed under the Rules the  Appellant  had  to
    demonstrate that she required long term care to perform everyday tasks.
     The evidence appeared to show that the Appellant was able  to  perform
    everyday tasks.  The Appellant might not have  always  eaten  breakfast
    but family members contacted the Appellant every day and sometimes more
    than once per day and  this  ensured  that  the  Appellant  was  eating
    properly and had taken her  medication.   The  Appellant  was  able  to
    maintain her medication regime without the  need  for  these  telephone
    calls.   Living  alone  was  increasing  the  Appellant's  sadness  and
    loneliness which in turn increased the risk  of  deterioration  in  her
    condition and being suicidal but there was no assessment of  that  risk
    to establish whether it was approximate or  remote.   If  there  was  a
    deterioration the Appellant could make another application.  There  was
    no medical or psychiatric evidence to support the  assertion  that  the
    Appellant would be unable to accept a non-family member into her house.
     Any care that the Appellant  might  require  (if  she  was  unable  to
    undertake everyday tasks) could be provided in Kenya.

7.   At paragraph 30 the Judge dealt with Article 8 writing:

         "Finally the Appellant has submitted that there are compelling  and
         compassionate reasons for  granting  her  leave  to  enter  the  UK
         outside the Rules.  I have no doubt that the Appellant has suffered
         an awful experience but I am not satisfied on the  evidence  before
         me that there is a basis to grant leave to enter the United Kingdom
         outside the Rules".

    He dismissed the appeal.

The Onward Appeal

8.   The Appellant appealed against this decision  arguing  that  the  Judge
    had failed to make a finding under Article 8.  This disruption  to  the
    family life of  the  Appellant's  family  in  the  United  Kingdom  was
    significant and disproportionate to  any  legitimate  aim.   Compelling
    circumstances  existed.   There  was  no  specialised   psychotherapist
    dealing with the trauma suffered by the Appellant.  At paragraph 13 the
    grounds stated "The Judge errs when stating that there is  no  evidence
    to show appropriate care was not available to the Appellant in  Kenya".
    I pause to note here that the grounds appear to have taken the  Judge's
    remarks out of context.  At paragraph 29 the Judge was referring to the
    Appellant's ability to perform everyday tasks saying in effect that  if
    she could not undertake such tasks  any  care  she  required  could  be
    provided in Kenya.  The Judge was not referring there  specifically  to
    psychotherapy.  Further the grounds argued that it was the evidence  of
    the Sponsor that there  were  days  that  the  Appellant  did  not  eat
    properly.  That I would note  at  this  stage  appears  to  be  a  mere
    disagreement  with  the  Judge's  findings  at  paragraph  26  of   the
    determination. Further it was argued that on the basis of  the  Judge's
    findings the Appellant did satisfy the provisions of Appendix FM of the
    Immigration Rules she could not perform day-to-day tasks.

9.   The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Nicholson on 2nd February 2016.  In  granting
    permission to appeal he wrote:

         "Since the Rules regulating entry of dependent  relatives  are  not
         necessarily a complete code it is arguable that in  simply  stating
         in one sentence that there was no basis to grant leave outside  the
         UK the Judge failed properly to consider Article 8 outside  of  the
         Rules.  Permission is granted on this ground".

10.  The Judge did not refuse permission  on  the  remaining  grounds  which
    addressed the provisions of the Immigration Rules but commented that it
    was difficult to see how the letter from the  Eldoret  Hospital  showed
    that the Appellant could not receive the care required.  Although  that
    letter stated that there  was  no  specialist  psychotherapist  in  the
    hospital dealing  with  trauma  the  letter  also  confirmed  that  the
    Appellant was currently  undergoing  supportive  psychotherapy  from  a
    psychiatrist. The letter indicated that she simply needed  to  continue
    with her medication and psychotherapy.

11.  The Respondent replied to the grant of permission by letter  dated  5th
    February 2016.  The Respondent accepted that the Judge's  reference  to
    compelling reasons in paragraph  30  was  brief  but  that  was  not  a
    material error of law.  The family members returned to  Kenya  to  care
    for the Appellant out of choice.  The burden was on  the  Appellant  to
    provide the required evidence to satisfy Immigration  Rules  for  entry
    clearance as an adult dependent relative.  It was open to the Judge  to
    find that the Appellant was still able to perform everyday tasks.   The
    Appellant had not presented evidence which showed she could be  granted
    entry clearance outside the Rules.

The Hearing Before Me

12.  At the hearing before me the Appellant's solicitor submitted  that  the
    main point in the appeal was the brief treatment of Article  8  outside
    the Rules.  There was a lack of reasoning in the Judge's decision.  The
    Appellant's problems had been described in  the  evidence  put  to  the
    Judge and that the family could not travel to  Kenya  anymore  to  look
    after the Appellant.  Article 8 should have  been  considered  in  more
    detail.  The Appellant was dependent on the Sponsor and her  daughters.
    The whole family was affected by the situation.  There was a strain  on
    the Sponsor and her sisters.  It was difficult to see  what  the  Judge
    made of the evidence on that  particular  point.   The  Judge  had  not
    considered the compelling circumstances of the  case.   The  First-tier
    should have considered family life as a whole.

13.  In reply the Presenting Officer submitted that  the  Immigration  Rules
    set out a high test.  The Judge had considered the requirements of  the
    Rules and dismissed the appeal on that  basis.   For  the  test  to  be
    applied in leave to enter cases one had to look at SS (Congo) (cited by
    the Judge).  Article 8 was also a high test in leave  to  enter  cases.
    The Judge concluded that there were no compelling factors in this case.

14.  Finally in reply the Appellant's solicitor stated that  the  First-tier
    had not taken into account the effect on the family.  The proper course
    was to find an error of law and to remit the matter back to the  First-
    tier to be decided again for a proper assessment  of  Article  8.   One
    could not simply look at the Appellant in isolation.



Findings

15.  To succeed  within  the  Rules  as  an  adult  dependent  relative  the
    Appellant had to prove that she  needed  help  with  ordinary  everyday
    tasks.  The Judge for the detailed  reasons  he  gave  found  that  the
    Appellant could not establish that and he dismissed  the  appeal  under
    the Rules.  Although the grounds of onward appeal sought to argue  with
    the Judge's conclusions on this point, those arguments  were  in  truth
    nothing more than a disagreement with the  result.   Whilst  permission
    was not refused on those grounds, it was clear even from the  grant  of
    permission to appeal  that  there  were  severe  difficulties  for  the
    Appellant to make out a case under the Rules.

16.  At the hearing before me there was little  if  any  argument  that  the
    Judge was wrong in law to dismiss the  appeal  under  the  Rules.   The
    appeal instead concentrated on whether the Judge had  adequately  dealt
    with the Article 8 claim outside the Rules.  As Judge Nicholson pointed
    out the relevant section of Appendix FM in this case is not a  complete
    code and in appropriate cases an appeal  can  be  allowed  outside  the
    Immigration Rules where an Appellant, as  here,  has  not  demonstrated
    that she can bring herself within the Rules.

17.  There are however a number of difficulties for the  Appellant  in  this
    case in showing that she should succeed outside the Rules.   The  first
    is that she has to show some compelling circumstances to  succeed.   It
    is clear from reading the  determination  as  a  whole  as  opposed  to
    isolating paragraph 30 that the Judge did not consider that there  were
    compelling  circumstances  because  this  Appellant  could  look  after
    herself.  The Judge was entitled to take the view  that  the  Rules  in
    this case provided fully  for  Article  8  considerations.   Since  the
    Appellant could not identify any compelling circumstances there was  no
    reason for the Judge to proceed to  consider  the  matter  outside  the
    Rules in view of his finding  that  compelling  circumstances  did  not
    exist.  What the Appellant would have to show was that the gap  between
    her situation and the requirements of  the  Rules  was  such  that  the
    appeal should be allowed outside the Rules.  It was  evident  from  the
    Judge's findings particularly that the Appellant did not need help with
    everyday tasks but that as and when she did need help such  help  could
    be provided that there was no significant gap in this case. Whilst  the
    Judge's treatment of Article 8 was  brief  as  the  Respondent  herself
    acknowledged, the facts as  found  by  the  Judge  were  such  that  no
    compelling reasons could be established.

18.  The second argument the Appellant makes under Article  8  is  that  not
    only is there a disproportionate impact on the Appellant's private  and
    family life but there is also a disproportionate impact on the lives of
    her daughters who are in touch with the Appellant  and  who  visit  her
    from time-to-time. It is argued that the Judge did not deal  with  that
    aspect at all.

19.  There are two difficulties with this second  argument.   The  first  is
    that at paragraph 23 the Judge records the submission made to him  that
    "The  continued  travelling  of  family  members  to  Kenya  is  not  a
    reasonable option". He was aware of the case  being  put  to  him.  The
    Judge's response to that submission at paragraph 29 was that an outside
    person could be called in  to  assist  the  Appellant  with  day-to-day
    living.   The  Judge  specifically  rejected  the  argument  that   the
    Appellant would be unable to accept such a person.  That being so it is
    to the grant of permission a  matter  of  choice  for  the  Appellant's
    relatives to provide  the  care  they  do  for  the  Appellant  as  the
    Respondent pointed out in her reply.  Whether  there  are  or  are  not
    difficulties for them  in  providing  such  care  is  irrelevant.   The
    Judge's clear finding was that outside help could be  provided  to  the
    Appellant. Thus whether the  Appellant's  family  continue  with  their
    arrangements or desist is a matter for them but is not a  matter  which
    engages Article 8.

20.  Such difficulties  as  the  Appellant's  daughters  experience  in  the
    present care arrangements could  be  alleviated  by  arranging  for  an
    outside party to take over the care  of  the  Appellant  as  the  Judge
    found.  If the Judge had found that it was impossible for  anyone  else
    to care for the Appellant then the issue may  have  had  to  have  been
    considered by the Judge in more detail.  Since that was not his finding
    it is difficult to see why the Judge should have gone  on  to  consider
    something which was irrelevant to the case.  I do not  find  there  was
    any error of law in the Judge's decision and I dismiss the  Appellant's
    onward appeal.

Notice Of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I uphold the decision to dismiss the Appellant's appeal.

Appellant's appeal dismissed.

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 7th day of April 2016

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeal has been dismissed there can be no fee award.

Signed this 7th day of April 2016

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft
