
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/14798/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham|Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 27th April 2017                    |On 11th May 2017                      |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     SQ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss E Rutherford of Counsel instructed by Rotherham
                    & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appealed against a decision of Judge Ford of the
    First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 16th October 2015.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    FtT and I will refer to him as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant is a national of Ghana born [ ] 1973.  He had appealed  to
    the FtT against a decision dated 18th July 2013 to refuse to  revoke  a
    deportation order.

 4. The deportation order was made on 10th February 2009, and the  Claimant
    was deported on  19th  February  2009,  under  the  Facilitated  Return
    Scheme.

 5. The deportation order was made following the Claimant  being  convicted
    by pleading guilty to two counts of  possessing/using  false  documents
    for which on 1st February 2008 he was  sentenced  to  eighteen  months'
    imprisonment.  The sentencing judge noted that the Claimant was in  the
    United Kingdom illegally, and had worked illegally, and had used on two
    separate occasions two different  documents,  and  concluded  that  the
    Claimant had tried to set up a bogus identity.

 6. The FtT allowed the Claimant's appeal.  The FtT noted that the Claimant
    is married to a British citizen who has a son from a previous marriage,
    born in the UK on [ ] 2008.  The Claimant married his wife in Ghana  on
    28th October 2010.  They have a daughter born in the United Kingdom  on
    [ ] 2013.

 7. The FtT found that if the deportation order was not revoked,  it  would
    not be unduly harsh for the Claimant's  wife  and  daughter  to  either
    relocate to Ghana or remain in the United Kingdom without the Claimant.
     However, the FtT found that it would be unduly  harsh  to  expect  the
    Claimant's stepson (although he is not the biological father,  the  FtT
    found that there is a genuine and subsisting parental relationship)  to
    relocate to Ghana or remain in the United Kingdom without the Claimant.
     The Claimant's appeal was therefore allowed pursuant to Article  8  of
    the 1950 European Convention on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention).

 8. The Secretary of State applied  for,  and  was  granted  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal by Designated  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Manuell.

Error of Law

 9. At a hearing on 5th December 2016 I heard submissions from both parties
    regarding error of law.  In  brief  summary,  the  Secretary  of  State
    contended that the FtT had erred by failing to give  due  consideration
    to the public interest in the deportation of foreign criminals, and the
    maintenance  of  deportation  orders  which  had  been  made,  and  had
    materially erred in considering whether the consequences of refusing to
    revoke the deportation order would be unduly harsh.

10. On behalf of the Claimant  it  was  contended  that  the  FtT  had  not
    materially erred in law, and had taken into account the serious  nature
    of the Claimant's offences, had made reference to the appropriate  case
    law, and was entitled to take into account that there was  no  evidence
    of previous convictions or further offending.  It  was  contended  that
    the FtT was entitled to find that the best interests  of  the  children
    would be served by being with both parents.

11. Full details of the application for permission to appeal, the grant  of
    permission, the submissions made by both parties,  and  my  conclusions
    are set out in my decision dated 7th December 2016, promulgated on 19th
    December 2016.  I set out below paragraphs 18-23 which are  my  reasons
    for finding an error of law and setting aside the decision of the FtT;

         "18. Guidance has now been given by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  MM
             (Uganda) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2016]
             EWCA Civ 450, on the meaning of 'unduly harsh' in the  context
             of section 117C of  the  2002  Act.   This  guidance  was  not
             published when the FtT decision was made.  The Court of Appeal
             confirmed that the Tribunal should  have  regard  to  all  the
             circumstances when considering whether deportation  is  unduly
             harsh,  and  these  circumstances  included   the   Claimant's
             immigration and criminal history.  The Tribunal  must  realise
             that there is a public interest  in  the  removal  of  foreign
             criminals, and there is a need for a proportionate  assessment
             of any interference with Article 8 rights.  The  more  serious
             the offence committed by a foreign criminal,  the  greater  is
             the public interest in deportation of that criminal.

         19.  The FtT found that the effect of maintaining  the  deportation
             order would not be unduly harsh in relation to the  Claimant's
             wife or daughter but would be unduly harsh in relation to  his
             stepson.

         20.  In my view the FtT erred in failing to adequately explain, how
             the effect of  maintaining  the  deportation  order  would  be
             unduly harsh  in  relation  to  the  Claimant's  stepson.   At
             paragraph 52 the FtT comments that the stepson is showing that
             he is feeling the absence of his father  and  wants  to  share
             life experiences with him, and his friends are curious  as  to
             why his father appears to be always absent.   I  do  not  find
             that  this  alone,  or  taken  in   combination   with   other
             circumstances, amounts to unduly harsh circumstances.

         21.  The FtT at paragraph 53 notes that the stepson is  doing  well
             at school.   At  paragraph  55  the  FtT  notes  that  if  the
             deportation order runs its normal course, it will last  for  a
             further four years and by that time the stepson  would  be  11
             years of age.  The FtT  notes  that  the  Claimant  will  have
             missed out on his primary school years, but again, in my view,
             fails to explain how given the public  interest  in  deporting
             foreign criminals, this amounts to unduly harsh circumstances.
              There is an element of speculation in paragraph 55  when  the
             FtT anticipates that problems would be caused for the stepson,
             if the Claimant arrived in the household for  the  first  time
             when the Claimant is 11 years of age, the FtT finds that  this
             is an age when "children start  to  push  boundaries  and  the
             relationship would not be on a solid foundation."   I  do  not
             find that this conclusion is based upon  independent  reliable
             evidence.

         22.  The Claimant was deported from the  United  Kingdom  when  his
             stepson was approximately 5 months old.  The relationship  and
             bond between the Claimant and  his  stepson  has  been  formed
             while they have been living in different  countries,  and  the
             FtT has not, in my view, adequately explained why it would not
             be proportionate, taking into account the weight that must  be
             attached to the public interest, to maintain the status quo.

         23.  I conclude that the FtT  erred  in  consideration  of  'unduly
             harsh' and public interest."

12. The hearing was adjourned for the decision to be re-made by  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  I noted that the FtT conclusion that the  Claimant  and  his
    stepson have a father/son relationship was  not  challenged,  and  that
    finding was therefore preserved.  Also preserved was the finding by the
    FtT that the effect of refusing to revoke the deportation  order  would
    not be unduly harsh in relation to the Claimant's wife and daughter.

Re-making the Decision - Upper Tribunal Hearing 27th April 2017

Preliminary Issues

13. I ascertained that the Tribunal had  received  all  documentation  upon
    which the parties intended to rely, and that each party had served  the
    other with any documentation upon which reliance was to be placed.  The
    Tribunal had received the following documentation;

           . Home Office bundle with Annexes A-H.

           . Claimant's bundle comprising 61 pages.

           . Claimant's bundle comprising 15 pages.

           . Claimant's skeleton argument.

           . Claimant's wife's employer letter dated 8th November 2016.

14. The Tribunal was provided with a  bundle  prepared  on  behalf  of  the
    Claimant for a previous hearing on 7th April 2014 which  comprised  the
    Claimant's wife's statement dated  24th  February  2014  together  with
    photographs.

15. Mr Mills submitted case law, NE-A (Nigeria) [2017]  EWCA  Civ  239,  VM
    (Jamaica) [2017] EWCA Civ 255, Assad [2017] EWCA Civ 10,  IT  (Jamaica)
    [2016] EWCA Civ 932, and YM (Uganda) [2014] EWCA Civ 1292.

16. Miss Rutherford indicated that the Claimant's wife (DA) would be giving
    oral evidence and there were no other witnesses.

17. Both representatives indicated that they  were  ready  to  proceed  and
    there was no application for an adjournment.

Oral Evidence

18. DA gave her evidence, adopting her witness  statements  dated  7th  May
    2013, 24th February 2014, and 28th April 2015.  She was  questioned  by
    both representatives.  I have recorded all questions and answers in  my
    Record of Proceedings and it is not necessary to reiterate them in full
    here.  If relevant, I will refer to the oral evidence when I set out my
    conclusions and reasons.

19. In brief summary, DA indicated that she has now qualified as  a  nurse,
    having  completed  her  degree.   She  works  as  a  nurse  within   an
    haemodialysis unit.  A letter from her employer indicates  that  as  at
    8th November 2016 her annual basic salary is �22,458.

20. DA has brought up both children singlehandedly.  She has managed to  do
    this  initially  while  undertaking  a  degree,  and  thereafter  while
    maintaining full-time employment, which involves shift work.  This  has
    been extremely difficult.

21. Regular contact is maintained with the Claimant via modern  methods  of
    communication.  There have also been visits to Ghana,  the  last  visit
    being in July 2016 for a period of five weeks.   The  Claimant  had  to
    take some unpaid leave to stay for that length of time and would not be
    able to repeat a visit of that length.

22. The Claimant stated  that  the  children  miss  their  father,  and  in
    particular her son is finding it very difficult without his father.

23. DA stated that although in the past she had indicated  that  she  would
    consider moving to Ghana she has now decided that  this  would  be  too
    disruptive, and her son has indicated that he enjoys  school  and  does
    not wish to leave this country.  Both children are British  as  is  DA,
    although initially she was a Ghanaian citizen.

24. DA stated in her oral evidence that at the last  parents'  consultation
    at school, her son's teacher had asked if there was  a  problem  as  he
    seemed withdrawn.

25. When cross-examined, DA indicated that there was no evidence  from  her
    son's school more recent than July 2015.

The Secretary of State's Submissions

26. In brief, Mr Mills submitted that the FtT had found that it  would  not
    be unduly harsh in relation to DA or her daughter, if  the  deportation
    order remained in force.  Therefore the issue was whether it  would  be
    unduly harsh in relation to the Claimant's stepson.   I  was  asked  to
    find, taking into account all the circumstances, that it would  not  be
    unduly harsh for the stepson to join the Claimant  in  Ghana,  together
    with his mother and sister, but if the family preferred  to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom, it would not be unduly harsh  for  the  stepson  to
    remain  here  without  the  Claimant.   The  deportation  order   would
    generally be in force for a period of ten years from the  date  it  was
    made, that  being  10th  February  2009,  and  evidence  had  not  been
    submitted to show that the effect on the Claimant's  stepson  would  be
    unduly harsh taking into account the  deportation  order  would  be  in
    force for just less than another two years.

27. Mr Mills submitted that the unduly harsh test was a high threshold, and
    the Claimant would need to show a  material  change  of  circumstances,
    rather than simply rely upon the passage of time.

28. I was asked to note the lack of any independent evidence to  show  that
    the stepson had suffered adversely because of the  Claimant's  absence.
    Mr Mills submitted that the evidence indicated that because of the high
    level of care provided by DA, there were no such  adverse  consequences
    for the stepson.  Therefore the appeal must fail.

The Claimant's Submissions

29.  Miss  Rutherford  relied  upon  her   skeleton   argument   which   is
    comprehensive.  In brief, Miss Rutherford submitted in oral submissions
    that it would be unduly harsh for the stepson to relocate to Ghana.  He
    is a British citizen and has grown up in this country.  He  is  settled
    in school and has friends and there is evidence  that  he  is  involved
    with the church.  Although he has visited Ghana,  he  has  never  lived
    there.  Because of his age and length of residence in the UK he is in a
    very different position to his sister.

30. While agreeing that the unduly harsh test represents a high  threshold,
    Miss Rutherford submitted that the Tribunal  must  balance  the  public
    interest against the effect of maintaining the deportation order on the
    family.

31. I was asked to accept DA's evidence that a teacher  had  remarked  upon
    her son being withdrawn, and DA's evidence that her son was missing his
    father, and wanted to be able to carry out activities with  his  father
    just as his friends did with their fathers.

32. While the offences committed by the Claimant were  serious,  they  were
    not of the most utmost seriousness, and there was no evidence  that  he
    had re-offended.

33. Miss Rutherford submitted that to maintain the deportation order  would
    be unduly harsh.  If that was not accepted, I was asked  to  find  that
    there are compelling circumstances for allowing the appeal outside  the
    Immigration Rules, because DA had studied and been  trained  at  public
    expense in this country, and if she decided that she must  relocate  to
    Ghana, this would not be in the public interest, as the public  in  the
    UK would not have the  benefit  of  her  skills  as  a  nurse.   I  was
    therefore asked to allow the appeal.

My Conclusions and Reasons

34. I have taken into account all the evidence placed before me, and  taken
    into account the submissions made by both representatives.

35. I set out the facts which are not in dispute.  The Claimant entered the
    United Kingdom as a visitor and overstayed without leave.  He committed
    criminal offences  which  resulted  in  him  receiving  a  sentence  of
    eighteen months'  imprisonment.   He  satisfied  the  definition  of  a
    foreign criminal.

36. He was made the subject of a  deportation  order  dated  10th  February
    2009.  He applied under the Facilitated Return Scheme, and returned  to
    Ghana on 19th February 2009.

37. The Claimant and DA married in Ghana on 28th October 2010.   DA  has  a
    son  from  a  previous  relationship,  who  has  no  contact  with  his
    biological father.   He  was  born  on  26th  September  2008,  and  is
    therefore now 8 years of age.  The Claimant and DA have a daughter born
    on 17th April 2013.  DA was originally a Ghanaian citizen but is now  a
    naturalised British citizen.  Both children are  British  citizens  and
    were born in this country and have always lived here although they have
    visited Ghana.

38. The Claimant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with DA and  the
    children.

39. I now set out the preserved findings made by the FtT.   It  is  in  the
    best interests of the children to grow up  with  both  parents  in  the
    United Kingdom.

40. The Claimant and his stepson have a father/son  relationship,  and  the
    stepson has no contact with his  biological  father.   He  regards  the
    Claimant as his father.

41. It would not be unduly harsh in relation to DA and  her  daughter,  for
    the deportation order to remain in force.

42. I set out below the relevant Immigration Rules;

         '390.    An application for revocation of a deportation order  will
                be  considered  in  the  light  of  all  the   circumstances
                including the following:

                (i)    the grounds on which the order was made;

                (ii)   any representations made in support of revocation;

                (iii)   the  interests  of  the  community,  including   the
                    maintenance of an effective immigration control;

                (iv)    the  interests  of  the  applicant,  including   any
                    compassionate circumstances.

         390A.    Where paragraph 398 applies the Secretary  of  State  will
                consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies  and,  if  it
                does not, it will only be in exceptional circumstances  that
                the public interest in  maintaining  the  deportation  order
                will be outweighed by other factors.

         391.     In the case of a person who has  been  deported  following
                conviction for a criminal offence,  the  continuation  of  a
                deportation order against that person  will  be  the  proper
                course;

                (a)    in the case of a conviction for an offence for  which
                    the person was sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
                    less than four years,  unless  ten  years  have  elapsed
                    since the making of the deportation order  when,  if  an
                    application for revocation  is  received,  consideration
                    will be given on a case by case  basis  to  whether  the
                    deportation order should be maintained, or

                (b)    in the case of a conviction for an offence for  which
                    the person was sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
                    at least four years, at any time,

                Unless, in either case, the continuation would  be  contrary
                to  the  Human  Rights  Convention  or  the  Convention  and
                Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees,  or  there  are
                other exceptional circumstances that mean  the  continuation
                is outweighed by compelling factors.

         398.     Where a person claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
                contrary to the UK's obligations  under  Article  8  of  the
                Human Rights Convention, and

                (b)     the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                    conducive to the public good and in the public  interest
                    because they have been convicted of an offence for which
                    they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
                    less than four years but at least twelve months;

                the Secretary of State in assessing that claim will consider
                whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it  does  not,
                the public interest in deportation will only  be  outweighed
                by  other  factors   where   there   are   very   compelling
                circumstances over and above those described  in  paragraphs
                399 and 399A.

         399.     This paragraph  applies  where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
                applies if -

                (a)    the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                    relationship with a child under the age of 18 years  who
                    is in the UK, and

                    (i)    the child is a British citizen; or

                    (ii)   the child has lived in the UK continuously for at
                        least the seven  years  immediately  preceding  the
                        date of the immigration  decision;  and  in  either
                        case

                        (a)    it would be unduly harsh for  the  child  to
                             live in the country to which the person  is  to
                             be deported; and

                        (b)    it would be unduly harsh for  the  child  to
                             remain in the UK without the person who  is  to
                             be deported.'

43. Paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules is not relevant in this case.

44. I set out below section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002;

         '117C    (1)      The deportation of foreign criminals  is  in  the
                public interest.

             (2)  The more serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
                  criminal,  the  greater  is   the   public   interest   in
                  deportation of the criminal.

             (3)  In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not  been
                  sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  four  years  or
                  more, the public interest requires C's deportation  unless
                  Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.

             (4)  Exception 1 applies where -

                  (a)  C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom
                      for most of C's life,

                  (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                      Kingdom, and

                  (c)  there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  C's
                      integration into the country to which C  is  proposed
                      to be deported.

             (5)  Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and  subsisting
                  relationship with a qualifying partner, or a  genuine  and
                  subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying  child,
                  and the effect of C's deportation on the partner or  child
                  would be unduly harsh.

             (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been  sentenced
                  to a period of imprisonment of at least  four  years,  the
                  public interest requires deportation unless there are very
                  compelling circumstances, over and above  those  described
                  in Exceptions 1 and 2.

             (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6)  are  to  be
                  taken  into  account  where  a  court   or   Tribunal   is
                  considering a decision to deport a foreign  criminal  only
                  to the extent that the reason for  the  decision  was  the
                  offence or  offences  for  which  the  criminal  has  been
                  convicted.'

45. In this appeal Exception 1 is not relied upon.

46. It is common ground that the Claimant satisfies  the  definition  of  a
    foreign criminal, and his stepson is a qualifying child because he is a
    British citizen under the age of 18.

47. I set out below paragraph 55 of IT (Jamaica);

         "55. Subsections (1) and (2) of section 117C together make manifest
             the strength of the public interest.   In  order  to  displace
             that public interest,  the  harshness  brought  about  by  the
             continuation of the deportation order must be undue,  i.e.  it
             must be sufficient to outweigh that  strong  public  interest.
             Inevitably, therefore, there will have to be  very  compelling
             reasons.  That conclusion is consistent with  the  MF  Nigeria
             and ZP India  even  though  those  authorities  are  based  on
             different Immigration Rules and statutory provisions."

48. I set out below in part paragraph 59 of IT (Jamaica);

             "As Underhill LJ held in ZP India, the starting point must  be
             that the assessment of what was in the public interest at  the
             date on which the deportation order was made cannot be of  any
             less weight at the later stage when revocation is sought."

49. In considering whether maintaining  the  deportation  order  is  unduly
    harsh upon the Claimant's stepson, I must take  into  account  all  the
    circumstances,  including  the  Claimant's  offending  and  the  public
    interest.

50. I accept that the stepson is missing the Claimant.  I  do  not  however
    find that there is independent evidence to indicate that the separation
    from the Claimant is having an adverse effect upon him.   There  is  no
    evidence from his  school  to  this  effect,  and  there  is  no  other
    independent evidence, such as a social worker's report.  DA appears  to
    be coping very well in bringing the children up on her own, although  I
    fully accept and appreciate how difficult this is.

51. I firstly have to consider whether it would be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    stepson to relocate to Ghana.  The burden of proof is on the  Claimant.
    The standard is a balance of probability.  There is a  high  threshold.
    I do not find that the burden has been discharged  in  the  absence  of
    independent evidence.

52. I accept DA's evidence that her son does not wish to live in Ghana.  He
    has stated that he is happy at school and doing well and I accept that.
     I take into account that he is a British citizen born in this country.
     There would however be no language difficulties if he moved, with  his
    mother and younger sister,  to  Ghana,  and  thankfully  there  are  no
    relevant medical issues.  He would leave behind his friends,  and  this
    may be disruptive and upsetting.   That  however  does  not  amount  to
    relocation meeting the high threshold test of being unduly harsh.

53. I do not find it would be unduly harsh for the stepson to remain in the
    United Kingdom with his mother and sister, without the Claimant for  at
    least the next two years.  The stepson was very young when the Claimant
    was deported, and their relationship  has  developed  while  living  in
    different countries.  It is of course natural that a son would want his
    father to be present, and I fully accept  that  the  Claimant  and  his
    stepson miss each other.  I do not however find that evidence has  been
    produced to prove that continued separation with the stepson  remaining
    in the United Kingdom, would be unduly harsh.

54. I therefore find that this appeal  cannot  succeed  with  reference  to
    paragraph 399(a) or section 117C(5) of the 2002 Act.

55. I have considered the submission made by Miss Rutherford that there are
    compelling circumstances outside  the  Immigration  Rules  which  would
    justify allowing the appeal with reference to Article 8.  I  am  afraid
    that I cannot accept that submission.  The fact that DA may  choose  to
    relocate to Ghana, and therefore her abilities as a nurse would be lost
    to the general public in this country, does not in my  view  amount  to
    compelling circumstances which would justify allowing this appeal.   In
    any event, the evidence given by DA indicated that she would  not  take
    such a course of action.

56. I have taken into account the guidance in Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC 60 and
    in particular paragraph 50  which  is  set  out  in  Miss  Rutherford's
    skeleton argument and which I set out below in part;

         "The critical issue for the Tribunal  will  generally  be  whether,
         giving due weight to the strength of the  public  interest  in  the
         deportation of the offender in the case before it,  the  Article  8
         claim is sufficiently strong to outweigh it.  In  general,  only  a
         claim which is very strong indeed - very compelling, as it was  put
         in MF (Nigeria), will succeed."

57. Although the above refers to deportation, in my view the same principle
    applies to an application to revoke a deportation order,  and  for  the
    reasons given above, I do not find that the enforced separation between
    the  Claimant  and  his  stepson  outweighs  the  public  interest   in
    maintaining a deportation order.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and  was
set aside.

I substitute a fresh decision.  The Claimant's appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

An anonymity  order  was  made  by  the  FtT  because  the  appeal  involved
considering the interests of two minor children.  I maintain  the  anonymity
order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008.  Unless and until a court or Tribunal directs otherwise, the  Claimant
is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall identify him  or
any member of his family.  Failure  to  comply  with  this  direction  could
amount to a contempt of court.


Signed                              Date         3rd May 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The Claimant's appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.


Signed                              Date         3rd May 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
