
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/14754/2013
     OA/14755/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17 October 2014                            |On 21 October 2014           |
|Extempore judgment                            |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                             Miss Cheena Dhenga
                            Miss Bibasana Dhenga

                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior HOPO
For the Respondent:    Mr R Jesurum, counsel, instructed by Howe & Co
Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is the appeal of the Entry Clearance Officer against the decision
      of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeals of Miss Cheena  Dhenga
      and her sister, Miss Bibasana Dhenga against the decision of  the  ECO
      to refuse entry clearance to settle in the UK as  dependent  daughters
      of their father, an ex-Ghurka soldier.  The decision is dated 27  June
      2013.  The appeal was heard by the First-tier Tribunal on 7 June  2014
      and allowed on human rights grounds.  It was accepted by  their  legal
      representative before the First-tier Tribunal that they did  not  meet
      the requirements of the Rules.


   2.   The ECO sought permission to appeal on the grounds that  the  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge had not considered the guidance in Gulshan, namely
      that if there are arguably good grounds for granting leave  to  remain
      outside the Immigration Rules and thus whether  it  is  necessary  for
      Article 8 purposes to go on to consider whether there  are  compelling
      circumstances  not  sufficiently  recognised  under  the  Rules.   The
      grounds seeking permission also state that the Immigration Judge  made
      no findings in  this  regard  and  simply  proceeded  to  undertake  a
      freestanding Article 8 assessment.  The grounds submitted that without
      making  findings  as  to  arguably   good   grounds   and   compelling
      circumstances not sufficiently recognised under the  Rules  the  judge
      cannot undertake a freestanding Article 8 assessment.

   2. Permission to appeal was granted  but  that  itself  appears  to  have
      included an error of law because  the  reference  in  there  does  not
      actually reflect the grounds upon which the ECO was seeking permission
      to appeal.  Be that as it may, in paragraph 12 of the judgment of  the
      First-tier Tribunal, the judge clearly found that there  were  matters
      specific to the claimant's circumstances which were not fully  covered
      by the Rules.  In paragraphs 12 and 13 of her  judgment  she  set  out
      clearly and plainly all the matters that she took into  account.   She
      accepted that the sponsor would have applied to settle in the UK  upon
      discharge from the army had he been permitted to do so.  Had  he  done
      so the claimants would  have  been  minors  and  admitted  with  their
      parents.  She points out that this is not a case  where  the  ECO  has
      pointed to matters over and above the public interest in maintaining a
      firm immigration policy and the grounds seeking permission  to  appeal
      do not indicate in what way or whether matters were incorrectly  taken
      into account or not  taken  into  account  when  the  judge  made  her
      findings.


   3. Accordingly I am satisfied that there  is  no  error  of  law  in  the
      findings and conclusions of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Kamara's
      determination and the appeal of the ECO is dismissed.

   4. The appeal against the refusal to entry clearance remains as allowed.



Signed                                  Date 20th October 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker

