
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/14272/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 November 2015                   |On 6 November 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - TIRANA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     H D
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    None


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This matter comes before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Griffith ("the FTTJ") promulgated on 29  July  2015,  in
    which she allowed the respondent's (hereinafter  called  the  claimant)
    appeal against the refusal of his application for entry clearance as  a
    spouse under the Immigration  Rules  and  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.

 2. Given my references in this decision to  the  sponsor's  fertility  and
    medical conditions, an anonymity order is appropriate.

Background

 3. The claimant is the  husband  of  the  sponsor  who  is  British.   The
    claimant's application for entry clearance was refused by the appellant
    (hereinafter called the Entry  Clearance  Officer  (ECO))  for  various
    reasons including the fact  that  the  claimant  had  not  provided  an
    appropriate English language test certificate; he did not qualify under
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules for entry clearance as  a  spouse.
    Consideration was given to the claimant's Article 8 rights but the  ECO
    considered there were no exceptional circumstances.

 4. The FTTJ dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules  because  the
    claimant had not provided a test certificate  but  she  allowed  it  on
    human rights grounds. The ECO was granted permission to appeal to  this
    Tribunal because it was  arguable  the  FTTJ  had  failed  to  consider
    s117B(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002,  there
    being no mention in her decision of the  fact  that  the  claimant  had
    entered the UK without leave; it was also arguable that  the  FTTJ  had
    placed too much weight on the claimant's ability to speak  English  and
    his financial position rather  than  considering  these  points  to  be
    neutral. Thus the matter comes before me.

The Hearing

 5. The claimant was not represented at the hearing before me. I  explained
    the proceedings to the sponsor, who attended the hearing. She confirmed
    that she understood and I endeavoured to ensure that she addressed  the
    relevant issues during the course  of  the  hearing.  She  participated
    fully in the hearing.

 6. Following the oral submissions of Mr Kotas, for the ECO, and  those  of
    the sponsor, I indicated that I would find there had  been  a  material
    error of law in relation to the FTTJ's decision  on  the  human  rights
    claim.  With the agreement of the parties I heard the oral evidence  of
    the sponsor and she was cross-examined by Mr Kotas.  At the end of  the
    hearing I heard the oral submissions of Mr Kotas and the sponsor on the
    human rights claim.  I summarised my understanding of  the  appellant's
    case and the sponsor confirmed that this was correct.

Submissions on Error of Law

 7. Mr Kotas, for the  ECO,  submitted  that  the  FTTJ  had  given  little
    consideration to the public interest factors listed in s117B, the  most
    glaring omission being s117B(4) namely that  little  weight  should  be
    given to private life or a relationship with a qualifying partner  that
    has been established while the person was in the UK unlawfully, as  was
    the case here.  This was, he submitted a fundamental flaw in the FTTJ's
    reasoning and rendered the decision unsound.  He also  submitted  that,
    following AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC), the claimant could
    not obtain a right to entry clearance merely because he spoke  English.
    He submitted that  the  FTTJ  had  not  expressly  indicated  that  the
    claimant's English language skills  should  be  treated  as  a  neutral
    factor.   More  importantly,  he  said  that  there  was   no   express
    recognition of immigration control as a public interest  consideration.
    He submitted that the FTTJ had applied the wrong test; her approach  to
    proportionality was flawed.

 8. The sponsor made no specific comments  on  Mr  Kotas'  submissions  but
    indicated  she  had  understood  them.  Implicitly,  she  opposed   the
    submissions that there was an error of law.

Discussion

 9. The sponsor told me the claimant acknowledged he had failed to  provide
    an appropriate English language test  certificate  in  support  of  his
    application (albeit he believed, at the time, that he had done so). The
    decision of the FTTJ to dismiss the appeal under the Immigration  Rules
    must therefore stand. There is no error of law in that regard.

10. It was appropriate for the FTTJ to go on  to  consider  the  appeal  in
    accordance with the Article 8 jurisprudence.

11. The FTTJ noted that the claimant failed to meet only  one  criteria  in
    the  Immigration  Rules,  namely  to  provide  an  appropriate  English
    language test certificate. She found that the claimant  spoke  English.
    In paragraph 19 of her decision, she considered she  was  "entitled  to
    take into account as weighing in the [claimant's] favour his ability to
    comply with all other requirements of the  relevant  Rules".  She  also
    took into account, whilst noting the medical evidence  was  thin,  that
    the sponsor's IVF treatment had reached a  stage  where  it  could  not
    proceed further in the absence of the claimant.  Whilst the FTTJ refers
    in paragraph 21 to sections 117A and B, at no stage  in  her  reasoning
    does she refer to the criteria in s117B(4) which are as follows:

         "(4) Little weight should be given to -

          a) a private life, or

          b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully."

    The absence of consideration of this section is  a  material  error  of
    law: the FTTJ gave considerable weight to the couple's relationship and
    particularly their intention to engage in  IVF  treatment  to  start  a
    family.  Had she not done so, the outcome of the appeal might have been
    different. Whilst the FTTJ refers  to  "Section117A"  in  passing,  she
    fails to take  into  account  in  her  assessment  the  maintenance  of
    effective immigration control. This failure is a material error of law.
     For these reasons, the FTTJ's assessment of the proportionality of the
    interference with the claimant's protected rights is flawed.

12. I therefore set aside the decision of the  FTTJ  on  the  human  rights
    claim. I now remake that decision and bear in mind the evidence  before
    the FTTJ and the oral evidence of the sponsor before  me.  I  make  the
    following findings in that regard.

13. The claimant entered the UK unlawfully  and  has  never  had  leave  to
    remain here. He embarked on his relationship with the sponsor  in  that
    knowledge and being aware that he could be removed  at  any  time.  The
    sponsor told me she knew from the outset of their relationship that  he
    had no immigration status in the UK;  she  encouraged  him  to  rectify
    this. Whilst it is to the claimant's credit that, having  been  refused
    leave to remain by the Secretary of State,  he  returned  to  his  home
    country to  make  an  application  for  entry  clearance,  nonetheless,
    s117B(4) requires me to give little weight to  the  claimant's  private
    life in the UK or to his relationship with the sponsor, albeit  she  is
    British and resides here.

14. I take into  account  that,  apart  from  his  failure  to  provide  an
    appropriate  English  language  test  certificate,  the  appellant  has
    demonstrated that he fulfils the criteria in Appendix FM for the  grant
    of entry clearance. I also note that he communicates  in  English  with
    his  wife  and  find  he  would  be  able  to  provide  an  appropriate
    certificate in a short period of time. The sponsor told  me  that  they
    had not thought  to  make  another  application  with  the  appropriate
    certificate, rather than pursuing an appeal.

15. There is no evidence that the claimant has worked in the UK or that  he
    was financially  independent  when  he  was  here.  However,  there  is
    evidence that work would be available for  him  on  his  arrival.   The
    sponsor is working as a  care  manager  and  currently  supporting  the
    claimant in his own country.

16. I bear in mind the sponsor's and claimant's intention  to  undergo  IVF
    treatment but give this little weight, notwithstanding  its  importance
    to them, because the sponsor told me that such treatment  is  available
    in the claimant's home country. Furthermore, I must bear  in  mind  the
    provisions of s117B(4).

17. The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in  the  public
    interest.  The claimant is capable of fulfilling the  criteria  in  the
    Immigration Rules but there is no good reason why he should  circumvent
    those Rules.  I bear in mind that the absence of the claimant from  the
    UK is hampering the sponsor's ability to undergo IVF  immediately,  but
    there is no medical evidence to suggest that  a  further  short  delay,
    whilst the claimant submits  a  fresh  application  with  the  required
    supporting evidence,  would  impact  negatively  on  the  prospects  of
    successful treatment.   I  realise  a  fresh  application  will  entail
    additional expense  for  the  sponsor  and  claimant  but  she  is  now
    supporting him in his home country in any event.

18. Having considered the evidence in the round, I find that the degree  of
    interference with the claimant's  and  sponsor's  protected  Article  8
    rights is  justified  and  proportionate  to  the  public  interest  in
    maintaining effective immigration control.

Decision

19. The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  a
    material error of law, as set out above.

20. I do not set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  to  dismiss
    the appeal under the Immigration Rules. That decision stands.

21. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the appeal
    on human rights grounds and remake it, dismissing the appeal.


Signed      Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Fee Award

The FTTJ did not make a fee award and,  the  appeal  having  been  dismissed
there can be no fee award now.


Signed      Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black

