
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/14808/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 5 May 2015                                 |On 8 May 2015                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - DHAKA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MsT MOMOTA AKTER
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr N Ahmed, Lincoln's Chambers Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Lingam promulgated on 21 January 2015 allowing the appeal of  Ms  Akter
    against a decision of the Entry Clearance Officer dated 16 June 2013 to
    refuse entry clearance to join her husband in the United Kingdom.

2.   Although before me the Entry Clearance Officer is the Appellant and  Ms
    Akter  is  the  Respondent,  for  the  sake  of  consistency  with  the
    proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal I shall hereafter  refer  to
    Ms Akter as the Appellant  and  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  as  the
    Respondent.

3.   The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh, born on 7 January 1991.   An
    application was made for entry clearance as the spouse of Mr Shah Alom,
    which application was refused for the reasons set out in the Notice  of
    Immigration Decision of 16 June 2013.  That refusal was taken  both  in
    respect of the financial requirements of the Immigration Rules and also
    the English language requirements. By the time the  matter  was  before
    the First-tier Tribunal it seems that it was only the financial  aspect
    of the Rules that was a live issue.

4.   The Appellant appealed against the Respondent's  refusal  to  the  IAC.
    The First-tier Tribunal Judge dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal  under
    the Immigration Rules but allowed the appeal under  Article  8  of  the
    ECHR for reasons set out in her Decision.

5.   The Respondent sought permission to appeal which was granted by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Ransley on 2 March 2015.

Consideration: Error of Law

6.   I have little hesitation in concluding  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge erred in law.  It is clear that the Judge determined  the  appeal
    under Article 8 by reference to post-decision circumstances.

7.   The Judge misdirects herself at paragraph 12  of  the  Decision.  Under
    the heading 'Legal Burden and Standard of Proof' the Judge states:

         "The burden of proof is on the appellant: the standard of proof  is
         the civil standard; that is on the balance  of  probabilities.   By
         reason of section  85(4)  of  the  2002  Act  evidence  of  matters
         subsequent to the date of the decision under appeal  may  be  taken
         into account. In regard to  an  Article  8  claim  the  burden  and
         standard of proof is the same on the Appellant as an  appeal  under
         the Immigration Rules."

8.   The Judge was in error in stating that matters subsequent to  the  date
    of the decision under the appeal could be taken  into  account  in  the
    context of an  entry  clearance  case.   The  requirement  pursuant  to
    section 85A(2) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  to
    evaluate matters as of the date of the Respondent's decision to  refuse
    entry  clearance  applies  both  in  respect  of  matters   under   the
    Immigration Rules and matters under the ECHR.  In this context,  whilst
    post-decision evidence is admissible, it is only admissible insofar  as
    it pertains to matters  that  existed  at  the  date  of  the  relevant
    immigration decision.

9.   It is evident that this was a material misdirection in the  context  of
    the Judge's consideration of Article 8 given what the Judge has set out
    at paragraph 24 of her decision.  The Judge plainly takes into  account
    evidence relating to the sponsor's earnings  in  the  most  recent  tax
    year, that is to say the tax year that would have ended in  April  2014
    which was not the relevant tax year for the purposes of the application
    and decision.  It is also  clear  that  the  Judge  in  the  concluding
    sentence  of  paragraph  24  was  having  regard  to  the  more  recent
    circumstances of the sponsor rather than the matters as they  pertained
    at the date of the Respondent's decision.

10.  In those circumstances I find that the decision under Article 8 was  in
    material error of law and must be set aside.

Remaking the Decision

11.  It is necessary therefore to consider whether the decision  in  respect
    of Article 8 can be remade today by the Upper Tribunal or  requires  an
    opportunity to file further evidence or otherwise to be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal.

12.  No further relevant evidence has been filed in this case and I  invited
    Mr Ahmed to sum up the basis upon which any Article  8  case  might  be
    advanced. He indicated that the matters put to the First-tier  Tribunal
    were again relied upon: essentially that the  sponsor  now  could  show
    that his earnings exceeded the threshold required under the Rules.   It
    was also emphasised by Mr Ahmed that the original refusal in respect of
    the financial requirements was essentially a refusal based on a failure
    to submit specified evidence and to that extent the Appellant  had,  as
    it were, only just failed to demonstrate that she met the  requirements
    of the Rules in circumstances where it continues to  be  asserted  that
    the factual situation was that the sponsor did indeed earn  at  a  rate
    that  would  have  satisfied  the  Rules,  even  at  the  date  of  the
    Respondent's decision.

13.  It seems to me that that submission in respect of Article  8  does  not
    require this case to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  or  indeed
    the filing of any further evidence.  Accordingly I remake the  decision
    in respect of Article 8 today.  Neither party  wished  to  advance  any
    submissions that amplified matters beyond their submissions in  respect
    of error of law with regard to the remaking of Article 8.

14.  It is the position of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  advanced  by  Mr
    Melvin today  essentially  that  the  Appellant  has  not  demonstrated
    anything  exceptional  about  her  circumstances  that  would   warrant
    treating her more generously outside the Rules by reference to  Article
    8 of the ECHR or otherwise, and to that extent the decision  under  the
    Rules is itself a matter that strikes the  appropriate  proportionality
    balance.  As I have indicated, the Appellant's case is not put  on  any
    basis other than that she only just failed to meet the requirements  of
    the Rules at the date of the Respondent's decision because of a failure
    to submit specified evidence, and was by the time of the hearing before
    the First-tier Tribunal and is now in a position  to  demonstrate  that
    the requirements of the Rules were, and are, satisfied.

15.  In my Judgement the matter as put by the Appellant does not  constitute
    relevant  compelling  circumstances   that   justifies   a   favourable
    consideration beyond the wording of Appendix FM - an Appendix  that  is
    itself generally Article 8 compliant and designed to give effect to the
    United Kingdom's obligations under Article 8.   It  seems  to  me  that
    where a defective application - that is to say an application defective
    for a failure  to  meet  the  requirements  with  regard  to  specified
    evidence - is made and rejected it is not the proper solution  to  seek
    remedy by pursuing the matter through the  appeal  process  but  rather
    simply to re-apply.  Whilst that may be a more expensive option, it  is
    more than likely a much quicker option; further it is to  be  borne  in
    mind that the option of pursuing a remedy through  the  Tribunal  in  a
    case that it is admitted fails under the Rules is  a  risky  option  in
    that it will only be in  exceptional  circumstances  that  it  will  be
    possible to succeed by reference to Article 8.

16.  Whilst it is  not  doubted  that  a  family  life  exists  between  the
    Appellant and the sponsor by virtue of their marriage, there is nothing
    to suggest that a decision taken in accordance with  the  Rules  was  a
    disproportionate decision in circumstances where nothing exceptional is
    advanced about the nature of the family life that exists  between  this
    husband and wife.

17.  Accordingly in the circumstances I dismiss the appeal under Article 8.

Notice of Decision

18.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal in respect of the  approach  to
    Article 8 was in material error of law, and accordingly the decision is
    set aside in this regard.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    under the Immigration Rules however stands.

19.  I remake the decision under Article  8.  The  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds is dismissed.

20.  Accordingly Ms Akter's appeal is dismissed on all grounds.

21.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.



Signed:       Date: 6 May 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

