
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/14073/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 7th August  2014                             |On 11th August 2014        |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN

                                   Between

                               mr saqib saleem
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer - islamabad
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Seelhoff (A. Seelhoff Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders (Senior Home Office Presenting
                    Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Respondent with regard to a determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Cameron) promulgated on 24th February  2014.  For  the  sake  of
    clarity and continuity I shall continue to refer to the Entry Clearance
    Officer as the Respondent and Mr Saleem as the Appellant.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 14th May 1982.  He  made
    an application for leave to enter the UK as  a  special  visitor  as  a
    prospective  student.  The  application  fell  to  be   decided   under
    paragraphs 245ZX and 245ZZ of the Immigration Rules  and  was  refused.
    The refusal notice clearly indicates that there is a limited  right  of
    appeal in this case. Although not specified in the refusal, the  appeal
    rights are restricted by section 88A of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002.

 3. Notwithstanding it being clearly stated in the refusal that  there  was
    no full right of appeal, the Appellant  nevertheless  appealed  arguing
    that he was able to show that he  did  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Rules.

 4. The determination reveals that it escaped the notice of all present  at
    the First-tier Tribunal hearing that that was the case and  that  there
    was no full right of  appeal.  The  Judge  therefore  listened  to  the
    arguments and concluded that the Appellant met the  Rules  and  allowed
    the appeal.

 5. The Secretary of State points out in her grounds seeking permission  to
    appeal that in entertaining an appeal under the  Rules  as  opposed  to
    limited to human rights grounds or discrimination  grounds,  the  Judge
    made a material error of law.

 6. Mr Seelhoff accepted that it was an error for the  Judge  to  hear  the
    substantive appeal under the Rules when there was  no  such  right.  He
    also accepted there was no evidence before the First-tier Tribunal that
    the  decision  breached  the  Appellant's  Article  8  rights  or   was
    discriminatory. He did seek to argue however that it was  a  breach  of
    Article 6 to refuse an application which  in  fact  met  the  Rules.  I
    disagree. The Appellant can only succeed where there  is  a  restricted
    right of appeal if he can show that the decision is  incompatible  with
    his Convention rights namely his right  to  family  and  private  life.
    Refusing a prospective student entry to the UK cannot  possibly  engage
    Article 8. I therefore find that  this  Appellant  could  not  possibly
    succeed in his appeal on the basis of the restricted grounds  available
    to him. That the decision was "not in accordance with  the  Immigration
    Rules" was not open to him.

 7.  For the reasons I have indicated above  I  find  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal made a material error of law. I set  aside  the  determination
    and I redecide it by dismissing  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
    Entry Clearance Officer's decision.

 8. Accordingly, the Respondent's appeal to the Upper Tribunal  is  allowed
    with the result that the Appellant's appeal against the Entry Clearance
    Officer's decision is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 7th August 2014




Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
