
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                               Appeal Numbers: OA/14344/2013 & OA/14345/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14 October 2014                            |On 7 November 2014           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DRABU CBE


                                   Between

                    MISS SITA GURUNG AND MISS BINA GURUNG
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, NEW DELHI
                                                                  Respondent

                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

Representatives
For the Appellant:     Mr R Mobbs of Counsel instructed by Howe & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Alice Holmes, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The appellants are sisters and are nationals of Nepal, having  been
         born on 19 February 1988 and 8 September  1989  respectively.  They
         were refused entry clearances to join their parents in  the  United
         Kingdom. The applications were refused  on  13  February  2013.  In
         refusing  the  applications  the  respondent  stated  that  he  had
         considered the applications  as  adult  dependent  relatives  under
         Paragraph EC-DR 1.1 of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules as well
         as the Home Secretary's  policy  as  outlined  in  IDI  Chapter  15
         Section 2A 13.2 as amended on 12/03/2010. The respondent  had  also
         gone on to consider but refused the applications under Article 8 of
         the ECHR. It is fair to say that the reasons for the  decisions  in
         respect of both appellants are  fairly  long  but  essentially  the
         same.


      2. Material facts of the appellants are as follows: Their father is Mr
         Gurung Krishna Bahadur, an ex-Gurkha soldier. The sponsor was  born
         in Lamjung, Nepal in 1948. He was granted indefinite leave to enter
         the United Kingdom on 1 July 2009 under the Gurkha Policy as he had
         been a long serving member of the British Gurkha Regiment.  He  had
         served in HM Forces as a Gurkha veteran for over 17 years. He  then
         applied for his wife and minor son for entry clearances in 2010 and
         they were granted indefinite leave to enter  on  5  May  2010.  The
         sponsor and his wife travelled to  the  UK  on  9  June  2010.  The
         sponsor had been previously married but  his  first  wife  who  had
         borne him four children including the appellants and  one  son  and
         one other daughter had died in 2002. The son is married  and  lives
         in Nepal. The  daughter  lives  in  Hong  Kong.  From  his  present
         marriage the sponsor has two children - Passang a daughter born  on
         5  December  2008  and  Kusum  born  in  2010.  Due  to   financial
         circumstances  the  sponsor  was  not  able  to  apply  for   entry
         clearances for the appellants at the same time as his wife and  two
         young children. The appellants live in  Kathmandu  where  they  are
         studying for their degree courses. Their brother Ashok cultivates a
         small piece of land and does not take care of the appellants.


      3. The sponsor and his wife are concerned  for  the  safety  of  their
         daughters - the appellants as    they do not have  anyone  to  look
         after them and their safety causes them worry. The  sponsor  visits
         the  appellants  once  a  year.  The  appellants  are   financially
         dependant on him and are unmarried and unemployed.


      4. The above facts have been accepted by Judge Mailer who heard  their
         appeals against the respondent's decision at  Richmond  on  2  June
         2014.  He  dismissed  the  appeals  for  reasons  set  out  in  the
         determination promulgated on 11 July 2014.


      5. Judge Mailer noted that Ms Patterson  representing  the  appellants
         before him conceded that the appeals could not  succeed  under  the
         Rules but would succeed under the Policy for Gurkhas and Article 8.
         Judge Mailer rejected the arguments advanced by Ms  Patterson  that
         the appellants qualified under the Policy as well as under  Article
         8. The Judge referred to the decision in Ghising and Others  [2013]
         but distinguished it  on  facts  as  in  the  present  appeals  the
         appellants were not in existence as at the date of  their  father's
         discharge in 1983. The Judge concluded that the "evidence does  not
         show that they would have come to the UK with their father but  for
         the injustice that prevented  the  latter  from  settling  here  on
         completion of his military service. They had not been born yet."


      6. On 22 August 2014 the appellants were granted permission to  appeal
         to the Upper Tribunal by Judge Levin, a Judge of the First Tier  as
         in his  view  the  grounds  supporting  the  application  disclosed
         arguable errors of law in the determination.


      7. At the hearing before me, Mr Mobbs of Counsel took me  through  the
         grounds of the application and the determination of  Judge  Mailer.
         He argued that the Judge had erred in  law  in  distinguishing  the
         legal principles set down in the decision of Ghising and had he not
         done so he would have concluded that the appellants  qualified  for
         entry. He submitted that these two appellants had become victims of
         historical injustice that the Home Secretary had cured through  the
         Policy on  Gurkhas.  To  suggest  as  had  Judge  Mailer  that  the
         injustice suffered here  is  "speculative"  is  irrational  as  the
         sponsor's evidence which the Judge  had  not  found  incredible  or
         implausible clearly established that in 1983 he would have  applied
         to come to the UK if he  had  been  permitted  to  do  so  and  the
         appellants would have been in the United Kingdom too.  The  Counsel
         also wanted me to note that the sponsor's employment as well as his
         conduct has been exemplary. Mrs Holmes in response  said  that  the
         determination of Judge Mailer was "detailed" and that "the findings
         that he had made were open to him."


      8. I am in agreement with Mrs  Holmes  in  her  description  of  Judge
         Mailer's determination. It is a  detailed  and  very  well  written
         determination. But that is how far our agreement goes.


      9. In his attempt to distinguish the legal principles that underpinned
         the decision in Ghising, Judge Mailer, with great respect, focussed
         too much on the facts of that case rather than  the  principles  of
         law established by the case. Paragraphs 59 and 60  of  the  Ghising
         decision are very pertinent. In paragraph 59,  the  Upper  Tribunal
         said, "That said,  we  accept  Mr  Jacobs'  submission  that  where
         Article 8 is held to be engaged  and  the  fact  tat  but  for  the
         historic wrong the Appellant would have been settled in the UK long
         ago is established, this will ordinarily determine the  outcome  of
         the proportionality exercise and determine it  in  the  Appellant's
         favour. The explanation for this is to be found, not in any concept
         of new or additional "burdens" but rather,  in  the  weight  to  be
         afforded   to   the   historic   wrong/settlement   issue   in    a
         proportionality balancing exercise. That we consider, is the proper
         interpretation of what the Court of Appeal were  saying  when  they
         referred to the historic  injustice  as  being  such  an  important
         factor to be taken into account in the balancing exercise. What was
         crucial, the Court said.,  was  the  consequence  of  the  historic
         injustice, which was that Gurkhas and BOC's:


                  "were prevented from settling in the UK. That is why  the
             historic injustice is such an important  factor  to  be  taken
             into account in the balancing exercise and why  the  applicant
             dependent child of a Gurkha who is settled in the UK has  such
             a strong claim to have  his  article  8(1)  right  vindicated,
             notwithstanding  the  potency  of  the  countervailing  public
             interest in maintaining of a firm immigration policy." [41]


                  "In  other  words,  the  historic  injustice  will  carry
             significant weight, on the Appellant's side  of  the  balance,
             and is likely to outweigh matters relied on by the Respondent,
             where  these  consist  solely  of  the  public  interest  just
             described."


     10. Where Judge Mailer made a material error  in  law  is  that  having
         found that the facts f this case engaged Article 8 of the ECHR, the
         balance  in  proportionality  exercise  went  in  favour   of   the
         Respondent. The considerations that he allowed to  weigh  heavy  on
         his mind in carrying out the proportionality exercise had little or
         nothing to do with the historic injustice which  would  and  should
         have vindicated their Article 8 rights to respect for family life.


     11. For that reason I set aside the decision  to  dismiss  the  appeals
         made by Judge Mailer and remake the decision.


     12. It is fair to say that facts pertinent to the appeals  are  not  in
         dispute. Bearing in mind  all  the  relevant  facts  and  the  law,
         including the absence of  any  countervailing  factors  except  the
         maintenance of firm immigration  control,  I  have  concluded  that
         these appeals should be allowed because irrespective of  the  adult
         hood of the appellants, Article 8  is  properly  engaged  as  Judge
         Mailer had found  but  unlike  him  I  have  found  that  it  is  a
         disproportionate interference in their family life rights  to  deny
         them entry as dependent daughters of a Gurkha veteran.


     13. Appeals of both appellants are allowed under Article 8 of the ECHR.



K Drabu CBE
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal.
6 November 2014


