
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/14604/2014
     oa/14608/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 September 2016                           |On 16 September 2016          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                               mrs Muzhgan [K]
                                 miss [B K]
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr B Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr D Lemer, instructed by Lawrence Lupin Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are  citizens  of  Afghanistan  and  are  the  wife  and
    daughter from a previous relationship of the sponsor,  Mr  Hedayatullah
    [K],  a  naturalised  British  citizen  born   in   Afghanistan.    The
    application for permission to appeal was made by the Secretary of State
    but nonetheless I shall refer to the parties  as  they  were  described
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. Following a  hearing  on  9  October  2015  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Harrington allowed the appellants' appeals against the decision of  the
    Entry  Clearance  Officer  to  refuse  their  applications  for   entry
    clearance as spouse and dependent child under Appendix FM and  Appendix
    FM-SE of the Immigration Rules regarding the first appellant and  under
    paragraph 297 of  the  Immigration  Rules  in  respect  of  the  second
    appellant.

 3. The application was made on 26th March 2014 and  the  decision  by  the
    Entry Clearance Officer was taken on 13 October 2014.

 4. The background to the appeals is that the sponsor arrived in the United
    Kingdom in August 2001 with his son [R],  the  brother  of  the  second
    appellant, and claimed asylum.  In 2005  the  sponsor  was  removed  to
    Austria as he had been fingerprinted in  Austria  on  his  way  to  the
    United Kingdom and was granted refugee status in Austria.  In 2006  the
    sponsor and his son re-entered the United Kingdom  as  the  spouse  and
    dependent child of Ms [CW] whom the sponsor had met and married in 2003
    whilst in the United Kingdom awaiting a decision on his  asylum  claim.
    In 2010 he was naturalised as a British citizen but his marriage to  Ms
    [W] broke down and they divorced on 22 February  2013.   The  appellant
    had subsequently married the first appellant and she now  applied  with
    her stepchild for entry clearance to the UK.

 5. The Entry Clearance Officer refused the first  appellant's  application
    on the basis that information had not been provided.

 6. Appendix FM SE sets out  the  financial  requirements  to  comply  with
    Appendix FM at FM-SE A1.7 as follows

         "7.  In respect of self-employment in the UK as a partner, as a
         sole trader or in a franchise all of the following must be
         provided:

             (a)  Evidence of the amount of tax payable, paid and unpaid
             for the last full financial year.

             b)   The following documents for the last full financial year,
             or for the last two such years (where those documents show the
             necessary level of gross income as an average of those two
             years):

                  (i)  annual self-assessment tax return to HMRC (a copy or
                  print-out); and

                  (ii) Statement of Account (SA300 or SA302).

             (c)  Proof of registration with HMRC as self-employed if
             available.

             (d)  Each partner's Unique Tax Reference Number (UTR) and/or
             the UTR of the partnership or business.

             (e)  Where the person holds or held a separate business bank
             account(s), bank statements for the same 12-month period as
             the tax return(s).

             (f)  Personal bank statements for the same 12-month period as
             the tax return(s) showing that the income from self-employment
             has been paid into an account in the name of the person or in
             the name of the person and their partner jointly.

             (g)  Evidence of ongoing self-employment through evidence of
             payment of Class 2 National Insurance contributions, or (where
             the person has reached state pension age) through alternative
             evidence (which may include, but is not confined to, evidence
             of ongoing payment of business rates, business-related
             insurance premiums, employer National Insurance contributions
             or franchise payments to the parent company).

             (h)  One of the following documents must also be submitted:

                  (i)  (aa)     If the business is required to produce
                      annual audited accounts, such accounts for the last
                      full financial year; or

                      (bb) If the business is not required to produce
                      annual audited accounts, unaudited accounts for the
                      last full financial year and an accountant's
                      certificate of confirmation, from an accountant who
                      is a member of a UK Recognised Supervisory Body (as
                      defined in the Companies Act 2006) or who is a member
                      of the Institute of Financial Accountants;

                  (ii) A certificate of VAT registration and the VAT return
                  for the last full financial year (a copy or print-out)
                  confirming the VAT registration number, if turnover is in
                  excess of �79,000 or was in excess of the threshold which
                  applied during the last full financial year;

                  (iii)    Evidence to show appropriate planning permission
                  or local planning authority consent is held to operate the
                  type/class of business at the trading address (where this
                  is a local authority requirement); or

                  (iv) A franchise agreement signed by both parties".

 7. The Entry Clearance Officer held that  the  appellant  by  way  of  the
    sponsor had failed to provide the evidence as detailed in (a)  (d)  (e)
    (f) (g) and (h) above and that the bank statements  provided  postdated
    the relevant period required and as such failed to comply with Appendix
    FM-SE and the application was refused under  paragraph  EC-P.1.1(d)  of
    Appendix FM.

 8. The application of the second appellant was refused under paragraph 297
    of the Immigration Rules on the basis that there was no information  at
    all on the application relating to the real mother, Aneesa.  The  Entry
    Clearance Officer was not satisfied as to her whereabouts or  her  role
    in  the  appellant's  upbringing  or   that   the   father   had   sole
    responsibility in her upbringing or education.  The evidence  according
    to the Entry Clearance Officer did not show what role  the  father  had
    played in her life as he had only made two one-month visits in 2011 and
    2013.

 9. The  matter  came  before  Judge  Harrington  who  allowed  the  appeal
    specifically on the basis of the documents submitted by the  appellants
    for their appeal and which  were  considered  by  the  Entry  Clearance
    Manager under review.  She identified at paragraph 31:

         "As Mr Lumb accepted, the specified  documents  required  have  now
         been submitted and are all  within  Section  B  (albeit  that  some
         additional documents are also within Section  A).   Accordingly,  I
         find that the specified documents were all provided at  the  latest
         with the appeal form."

10. That  was  the  subject  of  challenge.   The  judge  stated  that  the
    admissibility of evidence in relation to the decision  was  covered  by
    Section 85A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  which
    distinguished between entry clearance applications where  the  Tribunal
    can only consider "the circumstances appertaining at the  time  of  the
    decision" and points-based system applications (PBS) where, subject  to
    certain limited exceptions, the Tribunal  can  only  consider  evidence
    that was "submitted in support  of  and  at  the  time  of  making  the
    application".

11. The challenge was levied on  the  basis  that  the  refusal  notice  in
    relation to the first appellant was primarily  financial.  It  was  not
    open to the judge to take the view that  the  specified  documents  had
    "now been submitted and are all within section B".  The documents  such
    as the documents relating to the tax year 2012-2013 were not  submitted
    to the Entry Clearance Officer as at the date of decision.

12. As agreed by Mr Lemer at the hearing before me in the  Upper  Tribunal,
    the appellant had not supplied the relevant financial documentation  at
    the date of application.  The judge stated at  paragraph  34  that  "Mr
    Lumb seeks to argue that EC application under Appendix FM-SE  have  the
    same admissibility rules as PBS applications there is  nothing  in  the
    statute to suggest that this interpretation was correct".

13. The fact is, however, that the Immigration Rules themselves specify the
    requirements that the application must fulfil and Appendix  FM-SE  D(a)
    states:

          "(a)    In deciding an  application  in  relation  to  which  this
             Appendix states that specified documents must be provided, the
             Entry Clearance Officer or  Secretary  of  State  ("the  first
             decision  maker")  will  consider  documents  that  have  been
             submitted  with  the  application,  and  will  only   consider
             documents submitted after the application  where  subparagraph
             (b) or (e) applies:

         (b)  If the applicant -

             (i)  Has submitted:

                  (aa) A sequence of documents and some of the documents  in
                      the sequence have been  omitted  (e.g.  if  one  bank
                      statement from a series is missing);

                  (bb) A document in the wrong format  (for  example,  if  a
                      letter is not on letterhead paper as specified);

                  (cc) A document  that  is  a  copy  and  not  an  original
                      document; or

                  (dd)  A  document  which  does  not  contain  all  of  the
                      specified information; or

             (ii) Has not submitted a specified document,

                  The  decision-maker  may  contact  the  applicant  or  his
                  representative in writing or otherwise,  and  request  the
                  document(s)  or  the  correct  version(s).   The  material
                  requested must be received.... at the address specified in
                  the request within a reasonable timescale specified in the
                  request.

         (e)  Where the decision-maker is satisfied that there  is  a  valid
             reason why a specified document(s) cannot  be  supplied,  e.g.
             because it is not issued in a particular country or  has  been
             permanently lost, he or she may  exercise  discretion  not  to
             apply the  requirement  for  the  document(s)  or  to  request
             alternative  or  additional  information  or  document(s)   be
             submitted by the applicant."

14. It is not the case that the  applicant  has  submitted  a  sequence  of
    documents some of which were missing, or the document was in the  wrong
    format, or a copy or original of  document  or  the  document  did  not
    contain all of the specified information.  That was not contended.  Nor
    was it the case that a valid reason was given why a specified  document
    could not be supplied.   The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  identified  as
    indicated above the documentation that should have  been  supplied  and
    was not. I note that the judge did  not  consider  that  the  documents
    referred  to  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Manager  were   accurate   but
    specifically noted at 30(e) that the date that the bank statements were
    stamped by the bank was just before the appeal form which was submitted
    which was consistent with them having been obtained to make the appeal.
     That being the case, it is clear that the  bank  statements  were  not
    submitted with the application and on that basis the application  would
    fail.

15. Albeit that Section 85  provides  that  further  documentation  may  be
    provided  which  pertain  to  the  date  of  the   circumstances,   the
    Immigration Rules themselves  specifically  state,  that  the  relevant
    documentation must be provided in line with the Immigration  Rules  and
    this is confirmed at SS Congo v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 317 [see paragraph
    58].  I am not persuaded as indicted that the  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer made a concession regarding  the  evidence  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, that would appear to  be  the  opposite  of  what  the  judge
    recorded and even if he did, a concession made in error in law  has  no
    effect.

16. In that respect I find that the judge's decision  contains  a  material
    error of law in respect of the first appellant.

17. I turn to consideration of the second appellant.  It would appear  that
    the reasoning to dispute that the second appellant's  sponsor  did  not
    have sole responsibility was that  the  father's  first  wife  and  the
    mother of the second appellant  had  died.   The  judge  carefully  and
    critically considered the death certificate and at [27] referred to  it
    not being an impressive document, noting that it was far from clear  at
    what stage the note stating the cause of  death  was  added,  that  the
    document was not dated and there appeared to be information in  Persian
    which had not been translated and there was no  information  about  the
    identity or qualifications of the translator.  However, the  judge  did
    note at [28]  that  she  could  not  determine  the  matter  solely  by
    considering the document because, for example, documents in Afghanistan
    were not issued with the level or precision shown in the UK and further
    the translator was not very good, and if it was a fake document whether
    it showed true information or whether it was a  fake  document  showing
    false information.

18. Of crucial importance to the judge's findings was her  deliberation  at
    paragraph 29(a) where she accepted that the appellant's second wife who
    had no reason to lie in the proceedings, particularly as they  had  now
    separated, had given evidence to the effect that the second appellant's
    mother had died when she was very young and that was something that the
    sponsor had told her early in  her  friendship  with  him.   The  judge
    stated

         "however the likelihood that the sponsor would have lied to a  then
         friend about something with no immediate relevance, telling  a  lie
         that would be crucial many years later is unlikely".

19. The First-tier Tribunal Judge also identified that the Entry  Clearance
    Officer and the Entry Clearance Manager had not  considered  the  death
    certificate or raised any specific challenge  as  to  its  validity  or
    reliability which suggested that the  difficulties  with  the  document
    were not immediately apparent.

20. The judge also found the sponsor to be a  compelling  witness  and  the
    respondent  did  not  raise  any  matters  particularly  damaging   his
    credibility.

21. I therefore find the reasoning of the judge  with  respect  the  second
    appellant and which is not infected by the  findings  relating  to  the
    first appellant, is sound and the decision in that respect shall stand.



22. Thus the decision in respect of the first appellant is  set  aside  and
    dismissed and in respect of  the  second  appellant  is  maintained  as
    allowed.

23. Appendix FM specifically sets out the  position  of  the  Secretary  of
    State in response to Article 8 and the balance to be struck between the
    public interest and the circumstances of the appellants.  There  is  no
    evidence that all the information has not been taken into account under
    the Immigration Rules save I realise that the appeal has  been  allowed
    in respect of  the  second  appellant  and  not  the  first.    I  have
    considered any compelling circumstances outside the rules  and  applied
    the relevant principles under Razgar  v  SSHD  [2004]  UKHL  27.  I  am
    persuaded that there is family life between the appellant  and  sponsor
    and that there would be  interference  because  of  the  refusal.   The
    decision however is  in  accordance  with  the  law  and  taken  for  a
    legitimate aim which is the maintenance of the rights and freedoms  and
    economic well being of others in the UK.

24. I turn to proportionality and consider the best interests of the  child
    in the event the first appellant's appeal is  not  allowed.  The  child
    will be joining their natural parent and sibling (the  first  appellant
    is the step parent) and has reception facilities in the United  Kingdom
    and I take into account that she will be separated from her step mother
    but no doubt it is in her best interests to join her family in the  UK.
    Her stepmother must, as an  adult,  make  a  further  application.  The
    father in his witness statement was clear at  [13]  that  he  had  sole
    responsibility for his daughter the second  appellant.   I  have  taken
    into account Section 117 of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002 and although  further  information  has  been  supplied,  for  the
    purposes of Article 8 it is an  out  of  country  application  and  the
    relevant date for my decision  is  the  date  of  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer decision.  It was not clear at that date on 15th  October  2014
    that  the  financial  requirements  had  been  complied  and  thus  the
    appellant would be financially independent.  It is open  to  the  first
    appellant on the basis that all the information is now available to her
    to make a further application in line with the  Immigration  Rules.   I
    therefore find the refusal is a proportionate decision  with  reference
    to the first appellant's human rights and I dismiss the appeal  of  the
    first appellant on Article 8 grounds.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal made an error of law and the decision is  set  aside
with respect to the  first  appellant  only.   I  remake  the  decision  and
dismiss the appeal in respect of  the  first  appellant.   The  decision  in
respect of the second appellant will stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        Helen Rimington                    Date 16th September 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal in respect of the first appellant and  therefore
there can be no fee award.


Signed        Helen Rimington                    Date 16th September 2016



