

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
Numbers: OA/14166/2013
                                                          OA/14168/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House
                         Determination Promulgated
On 21st August 2014
                         On 15th September 2014
Prepared 27th August 2014

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between


                               MANISHA GURUNG
                                                             First Appellant
                                     And

                                INDRA GURUNG
                                                            Second Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Anonymity directions not made.
For the Appellant: Mr R Jesurum (Counsel, instructed by Makka Solicitors
Ltd)
For the Respondent: Mr L Tarlow (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Appellants applied to enter the UK for settlement as dependent
   relatives of their father over the age of 18. The applications were
   refused for the reasons given in the Refusal Notices of the 18th of June
   2013. Their appeals were heard together by First-tier Tribunal Judge
   Froom at Hatton Cross on the 30th of May 2014. In a determination
   promulgated on the 6th of June 2014 Judge Froom allowed the appeals. The
   Secretary of State sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal in
   grounds of the 16th of June 2014 with permission being granted by the
   First-tier Tribunal on the 26th of June 2014.

2. The Appellants are both adults and nationals of Nepal. Their father
   served in the British army and left the army in May 1997 before the
   Appellants were born. He came to the UK in 2011 to settle being joined by
   the Appellants' mother shortly afterwards. The Judge found that there was
   family life between the Appellants and their parents and there was both
   financial and emotional dependency and that there was an existing family
   unit. He also found that the Sponsor would have settled in the UK on his
   discharge from the army if that had been possible in 1997. The Judge went
   on to find, relying on both of the Ghishing cases that where it is found
   that article 8 is engaged and but for the historic wrong the Appellant
   would have been settled in the UK that would normally determine the
   proportionality assessment in the Appellant's favour. Accordingly he
   allowed the appeal.

3. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the basis of the
   grounds of the 16th of June 2014. In the grounds it was submitted that
   there was no evidence that the Appellants had suffered the historic
   injustice and that the Judge had failed to provide adequate reasons when
   considering proportionality. Permission was granted on the 26th of June
   2014.

4. The situation of the children of former Ghurka soldiers now living in
   the UK is slightly different from others as there is the issue of the
   historic injustice that prevented Ghurka soldiers from Nepal from
   settling in the UK following their discharge from the army. The main
   cases that consider the position of adult children abroad who may have
   benefitted from the new policy had it applied earlier are Ghishing
   (family life - adults - Ghurka policy) [2012] UKUT 00160 (IAC) and
   Ghishing and others (Ghurkas/BOCs: historic wrong; weight) [2013] UKUT
   00567 (IAC).

5. From Ghishing [2013] it is now the case that where it is found that
   article 8 is engaged and but for the historic wrong the family would have
   settled in the UK that will ordinarily determine the outcome of the
   proportionality exercise in the Appellant's favour if the sole point
   raised by the Secretary of State is the public interest in maintaining
   immigration policy. A bad immigration history and/or criminal behaviour
   could still outweigh the factors on the Appellant's side of the equation.

6. I propose to deal with the matters raised briefly. The grounds amount to
   a disagreement with the findings made. It has not been shown that the
   findings that the Judge made, in particular those at paragraph 28, were
   not open to him on the evidence that he had to consider. Against the
   findings made the Judge was obliged to apply the guidance in the Ghishing
   cases and the Secretary of State cannot point to any negative factors on
   the Appellants' part that would negate the positive findings made on
   their behalf. In short the determination, read properly and as a whole,
   contains no errors of law. The findings made were open to the Judge and
   for the reasons that he gave.

7. At the hearing the Appellants' representative sought a costs order
   against the Secretary of State on the basis that the Secretary of State
   acted unreasonably in bringing the proceedings relying on The Tribunal
   Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, rule 10(3)(d). I am not satisfied
   that this ground is made out. While I had little difficulty in dismissing
   the Secretary of State's appeal the Secretary of State was granted
   permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal and was entitled to take
   encouragement from that. In the circumstances I cannot be satisfied that
   it could properly be said that the Secretary of State had acted
   unreasonably.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.




Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I make no
order.

Fee Award

I make a fee award in the full sum of the fees paid by the Appellants.

Reasons: The Appellants' appeals have been allowed.

Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 11th September 2014


