
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/14006/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 6th October 2016                        |On 7th October 2016            |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                 YUANTING WU
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appelant:  Ms R Peterson, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:     Mr C Timson instructed by AGI solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


      1. In an interlocutory decision promulgated on 7th  June  2016  I  set
         aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and  made  directions
         for the resumed hearing in the following terms:


                         ERROR OF LAW AND DIRECTIONS


               1. Ms Wu, a citizen of China date of birth 2nd  October  1999
                  applied for entry clearance, on 30th  September  2014,  to
                  the UK to join her father (who  has  indefinite  leave  to
                  remain in the UK), her mother (who has discretionary leave
                  to remain in the UK) and her two siblings  (both  of  whom
                  are  British  Citizens).  Her  mother  had  been   granted
                  discretionary leave to remain until 12th October 2014  and
                  this was subsequently extended until 28th November 2017.


               2.  Ms  Wu  applied  for  entry  clearance  on   line.   That
                  application form was as the child of a settled person. The
                  hard copy confirmation of that application  confirmed  the
                  application was as "the child of settled parents  or  with
                  one parent who has limited leave as a  partner  or  parent
                  granted under the Rules in force before 9 July 2012.


               3. Ms Wu's application was refused by an ECO on 30th  October
                  2014. The ECO states


                  "... Your mother's leave was granted in 2012  before  your
                  fathers indefinite leave to remain in  2013.  Your  mother
                  therefore does not hold settlement or limited leave  as  a
                  partner.


                  I am therefore not satisfied that both parents are present
                  and settled in the UK or both parents are  being  admitted
                  on the same occasion  for  settlement  or  one  person  is
                  present and settled in the  UK  and  the  other  is  being
                  admitted on the same occasion for settlement or one parent
                  is present and settled in the UK or being admitted on  the
                  same occasion for settlement and the other parent is dead;
                  or one parent is present and settled in the  UK  or  being
                  admitted on the same occasion for settlement and  has  had
                  sole responsibility ...


                       I therefore refuse your application  under  Paragraph
                  297 (i)(a)(b)(c)(d)(e)(f) of the Immigration Rules."


               4. Ms Wu appealed the decision on the  grounds  the  ECO  had
                  misapplied  the  Immigration  Rules;   that   there   were
                  compassionate grounds the ECO must consider and  the  best
                  interest  of  the  child  (s55  Borders  Citizenship   and
                  Immigration Act 2009) and failed  to  consider  paragraphs
                  301 and 302 of the Immigration Rules. The ECM reviewed the
                  decision of the ECO on receipt of the  grounds  of  appeal
                  and concluded


                  "... The common issues have been considered in relation to
                  Paragraph 297 given that and the  appellant's  mother  has
                  discretionary leave  -  which  is  not  considered  to  be
                  limited leave with a view  to  settlement.  Therefore  the
                  appellant does not meet the requirements of Paragraph 297,
                  301 or 302 ..."


             5.   The SSHD sought and was granted permission to  appeal  on
                  the grounds


                  (i)  It was arguable the judge incorrectly interpreted the
                  phrase "given leave with a  view  to  settlement"  firstly
                  because at the date of the grant of discretionary leave to
                  remain the only factors to be taken into account  are  the
                  situation at that time and not in  contemplation  of  what
                  might be the position at some stage  in  the  future;  and
                  secondly there is  abundant  provision  for  leave  to  be
                  granted under the relevant immigration rules and this is a
                  further reason to  construe  an  application  for  further
                  discretionary  leave  as  not  one   'with   a   view   to
                  settlement'.


                  (ii)  the  judge  incorrectly   relied   upon   unreported
                  decisions of the First-tier Tribunal contrary to  Practice
                  Direction 11;


                  (iii)    given the erroneous approach to  the  Rules,  the
                  findings under Article 8 are flawed.


               6. In so far as ground (ii)  is  concerned  it  appears  that
                  there have been a number of decisions by both  the  First-
                  tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal with  regard  to  the
                  meaning of "given leave with a view to  settlement".  Some
                  conclude that discretionary leave is such a form of  leave
                  and some conclude it is not. Decisions of  the  First-tier
                  Tribunal are neither persuasive nor  binding  upon  either
                  the First-tier Tribunal or the Upper  Tribunal.  Decisions
                  of the Upper Tribunal were not produced in accordance with
                  the Practice Direction. Neither Ms Wu's representative nor
                  the SSHD's representative referred the First-tier Tribunal
                  judge to the case of Acan [2004] EWHC 297 (Admin). Neither
                  party appears to have produced a copy of the discretionary
                  leave policy in force at the  date  of  Ms  Wu's  mother's
                  various applications for leave to  remain,  or  the  terms
                  upon which she was granted discretionary leave  to  remain
                  or the basis upon  which  she  applied  for  discretionary
                  leave to remain.


               7.  The  SSHD's  core  submission  is  that  the   grant   of
                  discretionary leave to remain is not leave granted with  a
                  view to settlement. She submitted that there were  various
                  grants of leave made in accordance  with  the  Immigration
                  Rules which, if the criteria were met, would  fall  to  be
                  described as leave granted with a view to settlement.  She
                  submitted that Ms Wu's mother did not fall within  such  a
                  category - she had not made an application  for  leave  to
                  remain  in  one  of  such  categories  and  the  grant  of
                  discretionary leave was a grant made on the basis  of  the
                  facts at the time of decision; not at  some  time  in  the
                  future. Her submission was that because Ms Wu's  leave  to
                  remain was as discretionary leave,  Ms  Wu  did  not  fall
                  within either paragraph 297 or 301. Extension applications
                  were made and decided on the basis of the  facts  at  that
                  time.


               8. Ms Johnstone referred to the statement by the  judge  that
                  it  was  not  clear  why  the  application  had  not  been
                  considered under Appendix FM as she had no doubt but  that
                  Ms Wu would have succeeded under those provisions:  Ms  Wu
                  did not make an application under Appendix FM - if she had
                  it would have been considered but she had  not  made  that
                  application. This statement by the judge appears to  be  a
                  'throwaway line'. There is no evidence that Ms  Wu  either
                  made such an application or if she had made  it  then  she
                  met the criteria. It has no bearing on the outcome of this
                  appeal save in so far as the judge may have relied upon it
                  in her consideration of Article 8.


               9. In [12] the First-tier Tribunal judge finds that paragraph
                  297 of  the  Immigration  Rules  is  not  the  appropriate
                  Paragraph to consider  the  application  because  Ms  Wu's
                  mother had discretionary leave to remain in the UK both at
                  the date of application and the date of decision.


              10. There has been no cross appeal against that finding, which
                  is plainly correct. Ms Wu's mother was  not  admitted  for
                  settlement which is  the  reference  throughout  paragraph
                  297. She had been granted discretionary  leave  to  remain
                  and whatever the arguments around the phrase "with a  view
                  to settlement" she had certainly  not  been  admitted  for
                  settlement.


              11. First-tier Tribunal Judge Simpson found  that  because  Ms
                  Wu's mother had been granted discretionary leave to remain
                  prior to 9th July 2012, the  transitional  provisions  set
                  out in paragraph A280(f)[1] Immigration Rules apply.  This
                  appears to have been accepted by the ECM who reviewed  the
                  ECO's decision and was not a matter raised by the SSHD  in
                  her  grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal  or  by   Ms
                  Johnstone in submissions.


              12. Having reached  that  conclusion  she  then  proceeded  to
                  consider paragraph 301 of the Immigration Rules. She  took
                  the view that Ms Wu's mother would, absent  countervailing
                  factors, obtain settlement in due course and she  accepted
                  Mr Timson's submission (who had appeared for Ms Wu  before
                  her) that the respondent had failed to address  the  issue
                  whether Ms Wu could succeed under paragraph 301(a) or  why
                  Ms Wu's mother would not get  settlement  when  her  leave
                  expired in 2017. It is not strictly correct that there had
                  been no consideration of Paragraph  301[2].  Although  the
                  ECO decision referred solely to paragraph 297, the ECM  in
                  the review conducted after the lodging of  the  appeal  to
                  the First-tier Tribunal did consider 301 and  302  and  in
                  particular stated that the common issues  under  297,  301
                  and 302 were that Ms Wu's mother had  discretionary  leave
                  to remain and that was not considered to be limited  leave
                  with a view to settlement.


              13. First-tier Tribunal Judge Simpson concluded that  Ms  Wu's
                  mother had been granted limited leave  to  remain  with  a
                  view to settlement and  thereafter  the  judge  considered
                  issue  of  finance  and  accommodation   and   reached   a
                  conclusion that Ms Wu met these requirements.


              14. There is no  statutory  definition  of  'with  a  view  to
                  settlement'. It is plain that it  adds  something  to  the
                  phrase 'limited leave'. Judge Simpson has not engaged with
                  the  terms  of  the  letter  granting   Ms   Wu's   mother
                  discretionary leave to remain;  or  whether  and  to  what
                  extent the application  for  leave  to  remain  should  be
                  expressed in terms of 'with  a  view  to  settlement';  or
                  whether the nature of the period of leave granted  is  the
                  leave that is granted as defined by  the  grantor  and  if
                  this is not for the purposes of settlement then it  cannot
                  be made such by the desire of the grantee  or  because  at
                  some period of time in the  future  a  person  may  become
                  eligible for settlement. She appears  to  have  reached  a
                  decision that there is no  or  little  difference  between
                  leave to remain  and  leave  to  remain  with  a  view  to
                  settlement without any real engagement with the  different
                  places that phrase appears in the Rules and on  the  basis
                  that it seemed to her likely that  Ms  Wu's  mother  would
                  eventually be granted settlement. This is  inadequate  and
                  lacking in rationality.


              15. In so far as Article 8 is concerned the judge has erred in
                  the means by which she concluded that Ms Wu met  paragraph
                  301. The consideration by the judge of Article 8 discloses
                  a lack of understanding of the fundamental matters  to  be
                  considered and is  based  upon  an  erroneously  concluded
                  compliance with the Immigration Rules.


              16. I am satisfied the First-tier Tribunal judge erred in  law
                  and I set aside the decision to be remade.


                          Consequential Directions


               1. The resumed hearing in this matter will be  listed  before
                  me on the first available date after 14th July 2016, for 2
                  hours.
               2.  Oral  evidence  will  not  be  required;  the  First-tier
                  Tribunal heard  and  made  findings  on  the  relationship
                  between Ms Wu and her family which are undisturbed.
               3. The SSHD is directed to file and serve no later than  five
                  days before the date of the resumed hearing an indexed and
                  paginated bundle of documents comprising:
                   a) The discretionary leave policy in force at  the  date
                      of   Ms   Wu's   mother's   first   application   for
                      discretionary leave, at the date of  first  grant  of
                      discretionary  leave,   at   the   date   of   second
                      application   for   discretionary   leave   and   the
                      subsequent grant.
                   b)  A  copy  of  Ms  Wu's  mother's   applications   for
                      discretionary leave with any covering letters.
                   c) Copies of the grants of discretionary leave to remain
                      to Ms Wu's mother.
               4. Ms Wu has leave to file and serve no later than five  days
                  before the date of the  resumed  hearing  such  additional
                  evidence as she may wish to rely upon, if so advised.
               5. Both parties are directed to file and serve no later  than
                  five days before  the  date  of  the  resumed  hearing  an
                  indexed and paginated bundle of documents that were before
                  the First-tier Tribunal that continue to be relied upon.
               6. Both parties are to file and serve,  no  later  than  five
                  days before the resumed hearing, skeleton arguments,  with
                  caselaw relied upon, addressing the phrase 'limited  leave
                  with a view to settlement' and 'limited leave'.


      2.  Unfortunately,  the  SSHD  did  not,   for   various   operational
         difficulties, comply with directions but both  parties  during  the
         course of the day investigated and obtained a copy  of  the  policy
         under which Ms Wu's mother had been granted leave to remain in  the
         UK. I am grateful to them for the efforts they put in  which  meant
         that this appeal did not have to be adjourned.


      3. On the basis of that policy, in force at the  date  upon  which  Ms
         Wu's mother was granted  discretionary  leave  to  remain  on  11th
         October 2011, the respondent accepted that  she  had  been  granted
         discretionary leave to remain with a  view  to  settlement.   As  a
         consequence, the respondent accepted that Ms Wu  succeeded  in  her
         appeal under the Immigration Rules and  that  on  receipt  of  this
         decision, the file would be reviewed to enable entry  clearance  to
         be issued.

    Conclusions:


    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.


    I set aside the decision and remake the decision.


    I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing Ms Wu's appeal against
    the refusal of entry clearance.



[pic]
                                    Date 6th October 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
-----------------------
[1] A280 The following provisions of Part 8 apply in the manner and
circumstances specified:
....
 (f) Paragraphs 301-303F continue to apply to applications made under this
route on or after 9 July 2012, and are not subject to any additional
requirement listed in (b) above, by a child of a person to whom those
paragraphs relate who has been granted limited leave to enter or remain or
an extension of stay following an application made before 9 July 2012,
[2] 301. The requirements to be met by a person seeking limited leave to
enter or remain in the United Kingdom with a view to settlement as the
child of a parent or parents given limited leave to enter or remain in the
United Kingdom with a view to settlement are that he:
(i) is seeking leave to enter to accompany or join or remain with a parent
or parents in one of the following circumstances:
(a) one parent is present and settled in the United Kingdom or being
admitted on the same occasion for settlement and the other parent is being
or has been given limited leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
with a view to settlement; or
 ...


