

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/14125/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Laganside Courts                   |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 20th August 2013                         |On : 10th September 2013     |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge McKee


                                   Between

                          korrina nell buenaventura

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       Entry Clearance Officer, Manila

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Neilson Buenaventura, the sponsor
For the Respondent:    Mrs Margaret O'Brien of the Specialist Appeals Team


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   In May last year an application was made  for  Miss  Buenaventura,  who
    was then 16 years old, to join her father, Neilson  Buenaventura  ('the
    sponsor'), for settlement in the United  Kingdom.   He  and  his  wife,
    Honorata, had been granted indefinite leave to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom in January 2012, after the latter had completed five  years  of
    work permit employment.  Honorata is not Korrina's mother, but a letter
    from her birth-mother, Roselle Navarro, dated 8th June 2012, gave  full
    consent and blessing to Korrina joining her father and 'step-mother' in
    Northern Ireland.  That letter  was  the  principal  reason  why  entry
    clearance was refused on 26th June 2012, under paragraph  297(i)(e)  of
    the Immigration Rules.  It was taken  to  be  evidence  that  Korrina's
    mother was still involved in  making  decisions  about  her  daughter's
    life, such that her father could not be said to  have  been  exercising
    'sole responsibility' for her upbringing.  That is not, I have to  say,
    the only inference which can be drawn  from  the  fact  that  Korrina's
    mother was informed about the plan to bring her  daughter  to  Northern
    Ireland.   It  is  perfectly  possible  for  a  parent  to  leave   the
    responsibility of bringing  up  her  child  to  someone  else,  without
    severing all contact with the child, and without losing all interest in
    how the child is faring.  That  Miss  Navarro  should  have  written  a
    letter supporting the plan does not mean that she helped to devise  the
    plan, or that her expression of agreement  with  it  is  tantamount  to
    taking the decision.

2.    The ECO also complained that there was no  evidence  of  whom  Korrina
    had been living with since her  father  left  the  Philippines,  so  in
    completing the notice of appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  Neilson
    Buenaventura explained that while he  was  working  as  a  seaman  Miss
    Navarro, who was then his wife, got into a  relationship  with  someone
    else, and started a family with him.  She agreed to give  full  custody
    of Korrina to Neilson, as attested by a  sworn  statement,  since  when
    Korrina  had  been  looked  after  by  her  aunt,  Aurora  Buenaventura
    Fuentecilla, Neilson's sister.

3.   If one looks carefully though the documents submitted  to  the  British
    Embassy in Manila, one comes across the following documents. The  sworn
    statement refreed to in the notice of appeal was subscribed by  Roselle
    Navarro at Pasig in 2003, to the effect that "I am waiving  my  custody
    of our daughter to my husband Neilson Y. Buenaventura to take  care  of
    her welfare."  In the same year, at Caloocan, Neilson swore a statement
    to  the  effect  that  he,  being  an  Overseas  Contract  Worker,  was
    entrusting the day-to-day care  of  his  daughter  to  his  father  and
    sister, who lived at the same address.  On 17th July 2012 Aurora  swore
    a statement confirming that she  had  been  looking  after  Korrina  on
    behalf of her brother since he and his wife separated in 2002.  On  the
    same day, Roselle made  another  statement,  confirming  that  she  had
    previously  given  full  custody  of  her  daughter  to  Neilson,   and
    explaining that she had been contacted in June 2012 by Aurora and asked
    if she would give her "a parental consent as one  of  the  requirements
    needed in the petition of her father."  She was happy to  do  this,  as
    Korrina had been well looked after in the custody of her father for the
    previous ten years.  It was clearly not anticipated  that  giving  this
    consent would be the principal reason for refusing the petition.

4.   The Entry Clearance Manager completed a review of the decision  on  5th
    October 2012.  A huge amount of documentation had  been  provided  with
    the application and then with the notice of appeal,  in  no  particular
    order and without a table of contents.   Neilson  Buenaventura  has,  I
    should say, done all the  work  for  the  application  and  the  appeal
    himself.  With professional  assistance,  the  documentation  would  no
    doubt have been better presented and less voluminous.   Among  all  the
    papers the ECM may not have spotted the statements referred  to  above,
    which may be why she says that "there is no evidence that the appellant
    has not lived with her mother in her  father's  absence  nor  that  her
    mother has not raised and cared for her."  Had her mother  really  been
    unable to bring up the appellant, the ECM goes on to say, it would have
    been "not unreasonable to expect the sponsor to have  sought  to  bring
    the appellant to the UK at the earliest  opportunity."   In  fact,  the
    earliest opportunity only came last year, when the sponsor was  granted
    indefinite leave.

5.   Without the benefit of professional advice, Neilson  made  the  mistake
    of opting for a determination of the appeal 'on the papers'.   That  is
    never a good idea in an appeal against  the  refusal  of  a  settlement
    visa, when credibility is in issue, as it clearly is here.  The sponsor
    denied himself the opportunity of appearing in person  before  a  judge
    and trying to counter the disbelief expressed by the respondent.  As it
    was, the appeal came before Judge Telford in  Birmingham,  who  adopted
    the adverse credibility findings of the ECO and the ECM.  Like them, he
    found that there was "no evidence" that the  appellant  had  not  lived
    with her mother while her father was abroad.  He refers to  the  letter
    from Roselle Navarro, giving permission for her daughter  to  join  her
    father in the UK, as another reason for holding that  the  sponsor  did
    not have sole responsibility.

6.   In seeking leave to appeal further, the sponsor was plainly  unfamiliar
    with the notion of an 'error of law'.  Fortunately for  him,  leave  to
    appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  in  March  2013  by  Judge
    Chambers, who identified for himself a possible error  of  law  in  the
    First-tier determination, namely the Judge  Telford  might  have  given
    insufficient reasons for his  findings.   The  appeal  eventually  came
    before me in Belfast, and  in  the  meantime  strong  support  for  the
    Buenaventuras was  expressed  in  letters  from  Jim  Shannon,  MP  for
    Strangford at the Imperial Parliament, and Jonathan  Bell,  Member  for
    Strangford at the Northern  Ireland  Assembly.   That  attests  to  the
    anxiety of the sponsor to be joined by his daughter  and  to  the  good
    standing that he enjoys in the community, but an error of law  must  be
    identified before the matter can go any further.

7.   I agree with Judge Chambers that there is indeed a material  defect  in
    the First-tier decision, in that relevant evidence appears to have been
    overlooked.  It was wrong to say that there was "no evidence" that  the
    appellant had not been living all the time with her mother, since there
    were sworn statements from her mother, her father and her aunt  to  the
    opposite effect.  It  was  necessary  to  take  those  statements  into
    account, and say why they were not to be believed, if the appeal was to
    be dismissed on credibility grounds.

8.   The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is  therefore  set  aside,
    and the decision on the  appeal  falls  to  be  re-made  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Having had the advantage of seeing and hearing  the  sponsor
    for myself, I have no doubt about his sincerity and about the  accuracy
    of the account given, namely that he and his wife  separated,  that  he
    took custody of their daughter, and that she was thereafter  cared  for
    by his sister, with funds provided by him and the  major  decisions  in
    her life taken  by  him.   Scrutiny  of  the  voluminous  documentation
    adduced by the sponsor has been a somewhat daunting task, but  it  does
    confirm that the sponsor, like many Filipinos, was working as a seaman,
    that he sent remittances  to  his  family,  and  that  he  ensured  his
    daughter went to a good Christian school.

9.   In the light of  the  sponsor's  oral  testimony  and  the  documentary
    evidence, I find  it  more  likely  than  not  that  he  has  had  sole
    responsibility for the appellant's upbringing, in the sense required by
    the Immigration Rules, for a considerable time,  and  that  the  appeal
    therefore succeeds.



     DECISION

     The appeal is allowed,  with  a  direction  that  entry  clearance  for
    settlement be granted to the appellant.


Richard McKee
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                          6th September 2013



