
                                    [pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/14053/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 12th September 2016                    |On 23rd November 2016               |
|                                          |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between

                                     AF
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - islamabad
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Draycott of Counsel instructed by Paragon Law
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. As this appeal involves the interests of a young child with significant
    medical problems I make the anonymity direction which  appears  at  the
    end of this decision.

Background

 2. In a renewed application from the  First-tier  Tribunal,  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Archer  gave  permission  to  the  appellant  to  appeal
    against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Place,  in
    which she dismissed the appeal against the decision of  the  respondent
    to refuse entry clearance as a spouse in accordance with the provisions
    of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules and  on  human  rights  grounds
    outside them.

 3. Although permission was granted on all grounds Judge Archer thought  it
    arguable that the First-tier Judge had applied a test  of  "exceptional
    circumstances"  in  considering  the  Article  8  claim   outside   the
    Immigration Rules, when the correct test set out by the Court of Appeal
    in SS (Congo) and Ors [2015] EWCA Civ 387  required  the  existence  of
    compelling circumstances covered by Article 8 such as  to  justify  the
    grant of leave to enter.

 4. On 25th April 2016 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey decided  that  the
    decision of First-tier Judge Place contained  a  material  error  on  a
    point of law and could not stand for the following principal reasons:

         "4.  The judge at D26, 27 and 28 plainly applied the wrong test  of
             requiring exceptional circumstances to show that exclusion was
             disproportionate.  It is clear on any analysis of the case  of
             SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387, promulgated on 23 April  2015,
             that the  judge  was  employing  the  wrong  approach  to  the
             assessment of the appeal.  At the hearing Mr McVeety  properly
             conceded that there  was  nothing  within  the  judge's  short
             decision to suggest that the judge was  doing  anything  other
             than applying the wrong test  to  the  facts.   There  was  no
             challenge to the findings of fact made by the judge.  The only
             after-arising evidence, in contemplation at the date  of  when
             the judge was considering this matter, was a  fuller  analysis
             of whether or not the child H was suffering from some form  of
             autism."

 5. The re-making of the decision in the Upper Tribunal had  been  reserved
    by Judge Davey to himself and was due to be heard on 11th July 2016  at
    the Stoke Hearing Centre.  However, following the making of a  transfer
    order by Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor on 4th July 2016, the matter was
    transferred to a differently constituted Tribunal and so came before me
    on 12th September 2016.

The Hearing and the Appellant's Case

 6. At the commencement of the hearing Mr Draycott and Mr  Harrison  agreed
    that the issue for my determination would be the consideration of human
    rights issues  only  with  specific  reference  to  the  child  of  the
    appellant and sponsor having regard, in particular, to the  psychiatric
    evidence produced with the supplementary bundle sent by  solicitors  on
    8th September 2016.   The  appellant's  original  bundle  of  documents
    submitted for the First-tier Tribunal on 1st May 2015 was  also  relied
    upon.   On  8th  September  2016  representatives  also   submitted   a
    consolidated index of relevant documents to be relied upon in  addition
    to the consultant psychiatrist's report of 29th June  2016  and  a  DWP
    document confirming the disability living allowance paid at the  middle
    rate for the parties' child.

 7. The sponsor adopted the content of her statements which appear  in  the
    bundles.  The first statement was submitted  for  the  purpose  of  the
    application. In summary it indicates that the sponsor and appellant are
    first cousins who first met in Pakistan in 2005  when  the  sponsor,  a
    British citizen, was visiting.  The sponsor had been pressured  into  a
    marriage with a third party which broke  down  almost  immediately  and
    resulted in divorce on 29th April 2008.  By that time the  sponsor  had
    started her relationship with the appellant and, despite a  significant
    age gap, they married on 10th October 2009 when the  appellant  was  18
    years of age.

 8. After about four to six weeks living together in Pakistan, the  sponsor
    returned to UK and supported herself by working in the catering team at
    a local Asda supermarket. She then  returned  to  Pakistan  in  October
    2010, spending about six months there with the appellant.  On return to
    UK on 23rd March 2011 the sponsor discovered that she was pregnant  and
    the child of the marriage was born in UK on  31st  October  2011.   The
    birth was difficult and was achieved by caesarean section.

 9. The sponsor enlisted the help of solicitors to help her with  an  entry
    clearance application for the appellant although the sponsor was  aware
    that they did not meet the financial requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The sponsor thought that the  appellant,  now  working  on  the
    family farm, would be able to do work in  UK  if  he  came.   She  also
    stated that he has a good grasp of English which would assist him.

10. In the latest statement the sponsor indicates  that  she  has  kept  in
    touch with the appellant through WhatsApp keeping him up-to-date  about
    their daughter and sending  pictures  to  him.   At  the  time  of  the
    statement the sponsor had  been  told  that  her  daughter's  difficult
    behaviour at nursery school gave raise to the suspicion that she  might
    be autistic.  Although 3 years of age at the time, her daughter was not
    talking properly and was requiring significant amounts  of  care.   The
    sponsor emphasises that she and her daughter cannot  live  in  Pakistan
    because of her daughter's difficulties,  the  poor  sanitation  in  the
    country and the fact that her daughter also suffers from  eczema.   The
    sponsor  emphasises  that  both  she  and  her  daughter  are   British
    nationals.  She believes that her daughter needs her father in her life
    and emphasises that she is struggling as a single parent to  cope  with
    the additional demands put upon her.

11. At the hearing the sponsor drew my attention to the  DWP  letter  dated
    17th May 2016 granting the middle rate of disability allowance for  her
    daughter because attention was needed  with  bodily  functions  several
    times at short intervals throughout the day.  She stated that her child
    has a restrictive diet and has difficulty in eating  and  also  suffers
    from constipation.  She is very sensitive to sound which limits outside
    trips.  Her child started in the reception class at primary  school  on
    the day of the hearing and had been taken there  by  her  sister.   Her
    daughter still has to wear nappies from time to time. At  her  previous
    nursery school she has not been able  to  follow  the  instructions  of
    teachers.

12. The sponsor also stated that her husband had passed an English language
    test. She stated that she has GCSE qualifications and  has  worked  for
    Asda and hopes she may do so in the future.  The  house  in  which  she
    lives is jointly  owned  by  her  and  her  sister.   However,  if  the
    appellant is allowed entry clearance her sister will go  to  live  with
    her parents who live across the road in the same street.  There  is  no
    mortgage on the property.

13. In cross-examination the sponsor conceded that  the  appellant  has  no
    formal qualifications.  She explained that her  daughter  had  to  move
    from one nursery school to another because of her  problems.   Further,
    her  daughter  was  unhappy  at  the  first  school.   As  to  her  own
    qualifications she said that she had started a course at the University
    of Central Lancashire but had  to  start  work  in  Asda  in  2008  and
    remained with them for two  years.   In  re-examination  she  confirmed
    that, if the appellant were allowed entry clearance,  she  would  start
    working again.



Submissions

14. Mr Harrison confirmed that the respondent relied upon the terms of  the
    refusal  notice.   He  then  referred  me  to  the   content   of   the
    psychiatrist's report, particularly at page 16.  He emphasised that the
    psychiatrist had stated that, although the sponsor would  require  help
    to bring up her daughter, it was too early to predict what  her  future
    development needs would be.  He thought that the report entitled one to
    assume that the sponsor would cope with the situation.   He  considered
    that Article 8 was simply being used as a means to circumvent the Rules
    with which the appellant could not comply.   He  thought  that  it  was
    possible for the child and sponsor to move to Pakistan even if they did
    not have to do so.  The presence of the appellant in UK would simply be
    as a further carer for his child.

15. Mr Draycott relied upon his detailed nineteen page  skeleton  argument.
    The grounds upon which he invites the Tribunal to allow the appeal  are
    summarised in paragraph 31.  He argues that the respondent's refusal to
    allow the appellant to join his wife and child as part of  a  "genuine,
    loving and subsisting marriage" engages the right to family life  under
    Article 8(1) of the ECHR.  In view of the significant  care  needs  and
    delayed  development  caused  by  the  child's  ASD  (autism   spectrum
    disorder), it is plainly in the best interests of the appellant  to  be
    present in  the  United  Kingdom.  He  emphasises  that  the  child  is
    presently entitled to the middle rate of care component  of  disability
    living  allowance,  with  symptoms  and  care  needs  which  have   not
    materially  changed  since  September  2014  at  the  time,  when   the
    appellant's wife was notionally  entitled  to  carer's  allowance  thus
    meeting the policy requirements of E-ECP.3.3.

16. Whilst Mr Draycott  concedes  that  the  appellant  did  not  have  the
    financial resources required by the Immigration Rules at  the  time  of
    application,  he  points  out  that  it  is  common  ground  that   the
    appellant's wife is the joint freeholder of her home which is now worth
    in the region of �85,000 and so is a significant capital resource.   He
    refers to the Upper Tribunal  decision  in  Sanade  (British  children:
    Zambrano; Dereci) [2012] Imm AR 597 UT.  It is not reasonable to expect
    the appellant's wife and his daughter to relocate to Pakistan,  bearing
    in mind their British citizenship and the various medical problems  for
    the child which remain under investigation.

17. The main body of the skeleton  argument  also  emphasises  the  medical
    evidence concerning, amongst other things, the admission to hospital of
    the child who additionally suffers from asthma and the challenge  faced
    by her carers at nursery school who find her behaviour unusual and more
    challenging than the norm.  He draws attention to the provisions of  E-
    ECP.3.3  requiring  receipt  by  an  applicant's  partner  to   carer's
    allowance to which he believes she is eligible.  As to the  application
    of Article 8, he contends that the  respondent's  refusal  to  allow  a
    father to join his wife and child in the  circumstances  of  this  case
    amounts to a "colossal"  or  "a  very  significant  interference"  with
    Article 8 rights, which forces the family either to live separately for
    years or to suspend their plans to live in one  place  or  go  to  live
    where neither of them wishes to live on the basis set out in R (Aguilar
    Quila and Another) v SSHD [2012] 1 AC 621 SC.

18. As to the best interests of the child reference is made to LD  (Article
    8 - best interests  of  child)  Zimbabwe  [2011]  Imm  AR  99  and  the
    respondent's obligations that Section 55 of  the  Borders,  Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009.

Conclusions and Reasons

19. In immigration appeals such as this I bear in mind that the  burden  of
    proof is upon the appellant and the standard of proof is a  balance  of
    probabilities.  As to human rights issues it is for  the  appellant  to
    show that his human  rights  will  be  infringed  by  the  respondent's
    decision  then,  if  the  relevant  Article  permits,  it  is  for  the
    respondent to show that the refusal decision is proportionate.

20. As this is an appeal which depends, principally, upon a claimed  breach
    of Article 8 human rights outside the Immigration Rules, I have  regard
    to the decision of the Court of Appeal in SS  (Congo)  and  Ors  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 387.  Only where a "gap" is identified between the  Rules  and
    Article 8 which takes the appeal outside the class of cases  which  the
    Rules properly provide for and where "compelling  circumstances"  exist
    can leave to enter be appropriate.  The compelling  circumstances  must
    be relevant and weighty and not fully provided for within the Rules.

21. There has been no material contention by Mr Draycott that the appellant
    can come within the provisions of the Immigration Rules although he has
    sought to emphasise that financial provision  for  the  appellant,  his
    wife and their daughter would be adequate particularly having regard to
    the capital available in the house occupied by the wife  and  child  in
    which she has a half share with no encumbrance.  Nevertheless, I am not
    able to consider this to  be  the  "near  miss"  case  identified  from
    paragraph 54 onwards of SS (Congo) where the circumstances might  be  a
    relevant consideration which tips the balance under Article  8  in  the
    favour of the parties.  The appellant is unable to show that  his  wife
    has the income or alternative capital requirements of Appendix FM by  a
    relatively clear margin.  However, this is a case in which I  have  not
    found it difficult to identify that there is a gap in the  Rules  which
    derives from the medical condition of the appellant's young  child  and
    her needs which enables me to consider Article  8  issues  outside  the
    Rules applying the five stage approach  recommended  in  Razgar  [2004]
    UKHL 27. My reasons for that conclusion follow.

22. I refer to the medical evidence in the form of the detailed  report  by
    the consultant  psychiatrist,  Dr  Vinod  Kumar.   This  is  clearly  a
    thoughtful and objective report which, for example,  frankly  concludes
    that any indiscriminate  attachment  and  affection  towards  any  male
    figure by the appellant's child may, at this stage, be more to do  with
    attention seeking and novelty  because  the  child  will  still  remain
    indiscriminate in her attachment to other people.   However  (paragraph
    49) Dr Kumar notes that having a child with neurodevelopmental problems
    such as ASD and ADHD (attention deficit hyperactivity  disorder)  leads
    to significant stress and burden to the family, which is  mainly  borne
    by the parents.  He points out that children such  as  the  appellant's
    child require "a lot more help and supervision both for their behaviour
    and in trying to keep them to task  so  that  they  can  achieve  their
    potential educationally and socially".  Nevertheless, in a case of ASD,
    social development would always  be  difficult  and  would  be  "lagged
    behind".

23. In paragraph 50 of the  report  the  psychiatrist  concludes  that  the
    child's mother would "struggle more as  the  child  grows  and  if  her
    mother had the support of her  husband  she  would  cope  better".   He
    therefore notes that "hence having her father around would be of  great
    benefit to the child and her mother".  The  difficulties  to  which  Dr
    Kumar refers have already been shown to be present whilst the child was
    at nursery school. There are also problems with  incontinence  and  the
    child suffers from asthma.

24. I also have to bear in mind that the child and mother are  British  and
    so have a right to remain in the United Kingdom  to  benefit  from  the
    treatment and supervision available here.  It would not  be  reasonable
    to expect the mother and child to go to Pakistan where, apart from  the
    contention that facilities would be inferior,  the  difficulties  which
    are already faced by the mother would be considerably aggravated by the
    need  to  seek  such  treatment  and  help  as   is   available.    The
    circumstances flowing  from  the  child's  medical  condition  are  not
    specifically recognised in the Immigration Rules.  They are serious and
    weighty considerations which I identify as the compelling circumstances
    required by SS (Congo).

25. Applying the Razgar five stage test,  the  relevant  issue  is  one  of
    proportionality acknowledging that the consequences of  the  legitimate
    refusal are of such gravity as to potentially engage Article 8.  It  is
    clear from the medical evidence and the evidence of the parties that it
    is in the child's best interests to have her father with her to  assist
    the mother with the seriously difficult circumstances of bringing up an
    autistic child who has other medical problems.  The  respondent  argues
    that the care available in  UK  should  be  sufficient  to  render  the
    decision proportionate. I am  unable  to  agree  with  that  contention
    because of the medical evidence to which I have referred which makes it
    clear that the main care burden rests with  the  parents.  The  child's
    best interests are to be with both parents: Azimi - Moayed [2013]  UKUT
    197 (IAC) particularly in the compelling circumstances  of  this  case.
    Although I have regard to the relevant provisions of Section 117  B  of
    the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  particularly  the
    public interest in financial  independence,  I  regard  the  compelling
    circumstances present as overriding  that  interest  in  this  specific
    case.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed on immigration grounds but allowed on  human  rights
grounds.

Anonymity

For the reasons already given I make the following anonymity direction:

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order.  Unless the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
appellant.  This direction applies to, amongst  others,  all  parties.   Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As it was not been possible to conduct a complete and proper  evaluation  of
the circumstances of this appeal until evidence was produced at  the  First-
tier hearing and subsequently,  I  do  not  consider  a  fees  award  to  be
appropriate.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt

