

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/14344/2012



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3 October 2013                             |On 5 December 2013           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      Mr C M G Ockelton, Vice President
                        Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


                                   Between

                                Poh Soon Lim

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                     THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, MANILA

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Duheric, of D. Duheric & Company Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal raises a short but interesting point on the  interpretation
    of guidance given by the Secretary of State to caseworkers in  relation
    to the application of the refusal provisions in paragraph  320  of  the
    Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules, HC395.

 2. The appeal before us is against the determination of Judge Blair of the
    First-tier Tribunal, who dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  the
    decision of the respondent on or about the 7  July  2012  refusing  him
    entry clearance to the United Kingdom  as  a  spouse.   Permission  was
    granted on the basis that it was arguable that the judge failed to take
    into account the guidance, that he failed to take care in the  exercise
    of  his  discretion  and  that  his  decision  under  Article   8   was
    inadequately reasoned.

 3. The appellant's immigration history  came  to  light  when  he  made  a
    previous application for entry clearance as a  spouse  in  2011.   That
    application was refused, and on appeal to the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    McGavin investigated his claims that  he  had  not,  as  was  asserted,
    failed to disclose material facts in relation to  his  application,  or
    previously contrived in a significant way to frustrate  the  intentions
    of the Rules.  Judge McGavin found that before  the  application  under
    examination, he had made four trips to the  United  Kingdom,  in  1995,
    2003, 2007 and 2008; he had overstayed on every occasion; he had worked
    on every occasion without  a  work  permit;  he  had  received  medical
    treatment to which he  was  not  entitled  under  the  National  Health
    Service and for which he had not paid.  He had disclosed only one visit
    on his application form in  answer  to  the  question  "Please  provide
    details of all your trips to the UK over the last ten years".

 4. The appellant had met his wife in Glasgow in 2009.  She has many  years
    of experience in managing a Chinese takeaway: the  appellant  has  many
    years of work as a Chinese chef and  has,  illegally,  worked  in  many
    restaurants in the  United  Kingdom.   The  appellant's  wife  knew  in
    outline about his immigration history.  She asserted that she  did  not
    want to live in Malaysia.   Judge McGavin did  not  accept  that  there
    would be any difficulty in her doing so, bearing in mind  that  she  is
    well educated, able to speak English and Cantonese, and  had  travelled
    regularly to Malaysia in order to visit and in  due  course  marry  the
    appellant.  Despite the fact that she has  British  nationality,  there
    appeared to be no good reason why the couple should not be expected  to
    make their home in Malaysia.    Thus,  Judge  McGavin  found  that  the
    application of the refusal paragraphs  of  the  Immigration  Rules  was
    justified in the appellant's case, and that there was  no  basis  under
    Article 8 for him to be granted entry clearance despite the  provisions
    of the Rules.

 5. There was, so far as we are aware, no  appeal  against  that  decision.
    The present application was made on or about 26 June 2012.  It  is  not
    said on this occasion  that  the  application  fails  to  disclose  any
    material facts.   Nor  is  it  said  that  there  are  any  substantive
    requirements of the rules relating to the admission of spouses (as they
    were at the date of the decision  under  appeal)  which  the  appellant
    failed to meet.  The application was refused solely  on  the  basis  of
    paragraph 320(11).  Before setting out the terms of that paragraph  and
    the relevant guidance, we must set out the reasons for refusal:
          "You have applied for Entry Clearance to join your wife in the UK.
           You married your British wife in Malaysia in February 2011  after
          meeting previously in the UK.


          Whilst I  am  assessing  your  application  on  its  merits,  your
          previous immigration history is wholly relevant here and  must  be
          taken into account, since your circumstances now are  largely  the
          same as previously and your application is for the same purpose.


          Your application for a settlement visa was refused a year  ago  in
          June 2011.  You submitted an appeal but travelled to the UK anyway
          and sought leave to enter as a visitor instead, presumably as  you
          had gained entry as a visitor in  the  past  and  simply  remained
          there without permission to do so.  However, being aware  of  your
          past conduct and refusal of EC, the Immigration Officer on arrival
          correctly refused you entry and removed you back to Malaysia.


          Your appeal against refusal of EC was subsequently dismissed in  a
          determination promulgated four months ago, on 17th February  2012.
          The Immigration Judge (IJ) upheld the refusal under both paragraph
          320(7A) and 320(11) as well as concluding that  the  decision  was
          entirely proportionate under Article 8 of HRA.


          Given this recent ruling, I am satisfied  that  his  findings  are
          pertinent and relevant to this application.

          I am satisfied that your application still  falls  to  be  refused
          under paragraph 320(11) in that you contrived in a significant way
          to frustrate the intentions of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The  IJ
          found, as I do, that your previous conduct constituted aggravating
          factors grave enough to sustain refusal gaining entry each time as
          a visitor on a new passport and remaining in the UK for  a  number
          of years, entering with the  specific  intention  of  working  and
          living there, only leaving briefly to visit Malaysia.   You  never
          once sought to regularise your stay in the UK but brazenly  worked
          illegally and availed yourself of  free  medical  treatment  on  a
          number of occasions, including surgery, which you  have  not  paid
          for to-date and have no intention of paying for.   The  fact  that
          you failed to give full disclosure  in  your  previous  settlement
          application (the IJ upheld refusal also under  paragraph  320(7A))
          and  gained  entry  as  a  visitor  several  times  by   deceiving
          Immigration  Officers  on  arrival   of   your   real   intentions
          demonstrates  a  determined  and  specific  intent   to   deceive.
          Continual  breaches  were   committed   and   knowingly   over   a
          considerable period and on several occasions.  Even after  refusal
          of EC you tried to gain entry again claiming to be a visitor only.
           UKBA guidelines by which  320(11)  should  be  applied  for  your
          aggravating circumstances include actions such as:

    . absconding;
                  . not  complying  with  temporary  admission  /  temporary
                    reporting conditions / bail conditions;
    . not complying with reporting restrictions;
                  . failing to comply with  removal  directions  after  port
                    refusal of leave to enter;
    . failing to comply with removal directions after illegal entry;
                  . previous working in breach on visitor conditions  within
                    short time of arrival in the UK (that  is,  pre-mediated
                    intention to work);
    . previous recourse to NHS treatment when not entitled;
    . previous receipt of benefits (income, housing, child, incapacity or
                                      otherwise) or NASS benefits  when  not
      entitled;
    . using an assumed identity or multiple identities
    . previous use of  a  different  identity  or  multiple  identities  for
      deceptive
                                      reasons;
                  . vexatious attempts to prevent removal from the  UK,  for
                    example, feigning illness;
                  . active attempt to frustrate arrest or  detention  by  UK
                    Border Agency or police;
    . escaping from UK Border Agency detention;
    . switching of nationality;
    . vexatious or frivolous applications

          As you will freely acknowledge, several of the above apply to you.
           I acknowledge that your wife is now pregnant.  However, as the IJ
          stated in his  report,  your  wife  has  travelled  frequently  to
          Malaysia.  English is the administrative language of  the  country
          and she speaks Cantonese, as do you.  You both have experience  in
          catering and there is no reason why you could not seek work there.
           Your wife has stated that she does not wish to live  in  Malaysia
          but her personal choice is simply that and not one  of  necessity;
          this does not mean you should therefore be granted entry clearance
          to reside in the UK  or  that  I  should  be  persuaded  that  any
          previous  refusal   under   paragraph   320(11)   is   no   longer
          proportionate.  I am also satisfied,  as  was  the  IJ,  that  any
          potential breach of Article 8  by  refusing  this  application  is
          proportionate.  There is nothing to  prevent  you  and  your  wife
          pursuing family life in Malaysia.


          I have  therefore  refused  your  application  because  I  am  not
          satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, that you meet  all  of
          the requirements of the relevant Paragraph of the  United  Kingdom
          Immigration Rules."

 6. After the appellant had given notice of appeal against  that  decision,
    his file was reviewed by an  entry  clearance  manager,  who  wrote  as
    follows:

          "The applicant has previously been to the UK as a visitor on  four
          separate occasions, on different passports, and on  each  occasion
          has  overstayed  and  worked  illegally.   He   made   a   similar
          application last year which was  refused  with  the  appeal  being
          dismissed by the Immigration Judge.  The only argument put forward
          in the grounds is that there have been  no  further  breaches  but
          given that the applicant has been denied entry into the UK this is
          hardly surprising.  In addition, I do not accept  that  Article  8
          has been breached as the sponsor is a Malaysian national who could
          easily relocate to Malaysia and settle with the applicant  if  she
          wished to."

 7. At the  date  of  decision  under  appeal,  paragraph  320(11)  of  the
    Immigration Rules was as follows:

          "Grounds on which entry clearance or leave  to  enter  the  United
          Kingdom should normally be refused
          ...
          (11) Where the applicant has previously contrived in a significant
          way to frustrate the intentions of these Rules.   Guidance will be
          published giving examples of circumstances in which  an  applicant
          who has previously overstayed, breached a  condition  attached  to
          his leave, been  an  Illegal  Entrant  or  used  Deception  in  an
          application for entry clearance, leave to enter or remain (whether
          successful or not) is likely to be considered as having  contrived
          in a significant way to frustrate the intentions of these Rules. "

 8. Guidance was indeed published.  The  "examples"  are  set  out  in  the
    notice of decision.  The Guidance also included general remarks, which,
    we observe, were, at the date of the decision, substantially  different
    from the remarks considered by the Tribunal in PS [2010] UKUT440 (IAC).
     The passage of particular relevance is as follows:

          "RFL7.4 Aggravating Circumstances and Appeal Determinations
          Full consideration must be given to an applicant's UK  immigration
          history,  including  any  appeal  determinations,  since   it   is
          aggravating circumstances which have  occurred  after  the  appeal
          determination which should be considered."

 9. The simple submission which Mr Duheric makes in relation  to  paragraph
    320(11) is that there was no occasion to apply it  to  this  appellant.
    There  had  been  no  "aggravating  circumstances"  "after  the  appeal
    determination" of Judge McGavin.  Whatever paragraph  320(11)  and  the
    substantive part of the associated guidance might say, the  wording  at
    RFL7.4 prevented the Entry Clearance Officer and  the  Entry  Clearance
    manager from doing what they did, that is to say in taking into account
    the appellant's immigration history before his previous appeal.

10. Like  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  we  have  no  doubt  that  the
    appellant's submission is to be rejected.

11. First, this is not a case where the Guidance clearly and  unambiguously
    carries the sense proposed by the appellant.  In order for it  to  have
    the meaning proposed, the word "only" would have to be inserted  before
    "aggravating", and the words up to and including "since" would have  to
    be omitted or explained.  The truth of the matter is that there  is  no
    "only", and the opening phrases of the Guidance show why: the reason is
    that "full consideration must be given to an applicant's UK immigration
    history".

12.  Secondly,  the  interpretation  proposed  by   the   appellant   would
    necessarily have an effect not otherwise foreshadowed in the  Rules  or
    the Guidance, that is to say that an appeal, whether successful or not,
    would for all time  prevent  the  Secretary  of  State  from  taking  a
    previous  immigration  history,  however  bad,  into  account  for  the
    purposes of paragraph 320(11).  In other  words,  any  appeal  decision
    would cast a veil of innocence over the darkest immigration crimes.

13. Thirdly, and as  a  consequence,  if  the  Guidance  bore  the  meaning
    proposed by the  appellant,  any  individual  with  a  bad  immigration
    history could remove it from an officer's further consideration by  the
    simple  process  of  obtaining  an  adverse  immigration  decision  and
    appealing against it.  Thus, a  person  clearly  subject  to  paragraph
    320(11) could remove the effect of that  sub-paragraph  by  the  simple
    process of applying, being refused (probably under that sub-paragraph),
    appealing, losing, and applying again.

14. That cannot be right.  If the Guidance clearly and unambiguously led to
    that conclusion we might be compelled to recognise it, but, as we  have
    said, that is not the case here, and we see no good reason to interpret
    the Guidance in a way  which  requires  modification  of  its  wording,
    omission of nearly half the sentence in question,  and  would  lead  to
    absurd results.  Whatever the part of RFL7.4  after  the  word  "sense"
    means, it does not mean that.

15. No alternative meaning has been proposed, and as a result there  is  no
    further basis for  an  argument  that  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's
    decision is bad for failure to take into account  applicable  guidance.
    The first ground of appeal accordingly fails.

16. The second ground of appeal was  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    failed to take proper account of the guidance given in PS.  As we  have
    already noted, the version of paragraph 320(11) considered  in  PS  was
    not that under consideration here, and PS  may  also  be  distinguished
    because that was a case where there had been no consideration at all of
    the relevant paragraph by the  officer  who  made  the  decision  under
    appeal.  In any event,  it  is  perfectly  clear  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge took into  account  relevant  factors  and  in  addition
    appreciated that his task was to consider whether the discretion should
    be exercised differently.  What he said was this:

          "In that regard it was noteworthy there are multiple  breaches  of
          immigration control in this case all of  which  Immigration  Judge
          McGavin and I consider to be serious and only  a  short  time  has
          passed since her decision was  promulgated.   The  respondent  was
          plainly aware that there had been no breaches since the  incidents
          in question but in my view the balance struck  by  the  respondent
          was still open to the respondent  given  that  the  breaches  were
          many, were aggravating and were relatively recent  and  also  only
          relatively recently judicially established by  Judge  McGavin.   I
          could see no basis for my exercising discretion differently."

17. That paragraph discloses no error of law.

18. The third ground  was  that  the  judge  gave  inadequate  reasons  for
    rejecting the claim under Article 8.   In  his  submissions  to  us  Mr
    Duheric attempted to formulate  a  claim  that  s.55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 applied  to  the  present  appeal.
    That section is headed "Duty Regarding the Welfare of Children", and as
    this is an appeal against a  decision  refusing  entry  clearance,  the
    relevant date is the date of the decision.  At that date there  was  no
    relevant child in being: the daughter of the appellant and his wife was
    born on 20 November 2012.  Section 55 imposes no duties in  respect  of
    unborn children.

19. In any event, there was little evidence upon which  a  finding  in  the
    appellant's favour under Article 8 could be made.  It  was  clear  that
    the appellant's wife did  not  want  to  live  with  him  in  Malaysia,
    although she had been prepared to travel there.  There was, however, no
    evidence showing why the appellant's case was one in which, despite his
    immigration history,  it  would  be  disproportionate  to  expect  this
    transnational couple  to  live  in  Malaysia  rather  than  the  United
    Kingdom.  The judge clearly took into account the facts which  were  in
    evidence before him.  His conclusion that he was not persuaded that the
    Entry Clearance Officer's decision was  disproportionate  was,  in  the
    circumstances, virtually inevitable.  The reasons he gave amounted to a
    conclusion that the appellant had not made his case  under  Article  8,
    and, in the circumstances of this case, that was, in our  judgement,  a
    perfectly adequate way of dealing with that issue.

20. For these reasons we conclude that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  no
    error of law.  The appeal to this Tribunal is dismissed.











                                                              C M G OCKELTON

VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                      Date: 18 November 2013

















