
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: oa/14778/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 8 February 2016                   |On 11 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                              miss himani goel
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Not represented
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision promulgated on 24 June  2015  of
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Mathews.    The   decision   refused   the
    appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision dated  13  October
    2014 to refuse entry clearance as a nurse.

 2. The background to this matter is  that  the  appellant  made  an  entry
    clearance application on 13 December 2013 but that  this  was  refused,
    amongst other matters, under paragraph 320(7)A of the Immigration Rules
    as it was found that she had made false representations in  the  course
    of the application. The appellant lodged an appeal but this  was  found
    not to be valid where she did not raise either of the  limited  grounds
    available to her, human rights and race relations.

 3. The appellant then applied again  to  come  to  the  UK  as  a  Tier  2
    (General) Migrant.  That application was refused on 13 October 2014 and
    the reasons given were as follows:

         "You were  refused  entry  clearance  on  13/12/13  based  on  your
         application form, your supporting documents  and  the  contents  of
         your CoS.  The ECO refused your application under 245HB and 320(7)A
          of the Immigration Rules as they were satisfied to a  high  degree
         of certainty that you had made false representations in the  course
         of your application and this rendered your  CoS  invalid.   I  note
         that you  applied  for  administrative  review  and  that  the  ECM
         maintained the decision in full.  You  then  appealed  against  the
         decision and I am conscious that the  Immigration  Judge  dismissed
         your appeal.  With your current application, you state that you got
         mixed up with dates at interview.  I  do  not  accept  this  as  an
         explanation and I  remain  satisfied  that  the  refusal  was  both
         justified and proportionate.  You  made  false  representations  in
         your last application  and  I  am  therefore  satisfied  that  your
         application stands to be refused under  paragraph  320(7B)  of  the
         Immigration Rules.  This in turn means  that  your  application  is
         refused under 245HB(a) of the Immigration Rules."

 4. As in the earlier appeal, the appellant's appeal here is limited by the
    provisions of Section 84(1)(c)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002. She can only appeal on human rights and race relations
    ground.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Mathews noted this at  paragraph  10
    and from paragraph 13 onwards. In particular, Judge Mathews stated this
    at paragraphs 15 and 16:

         "15. The remaining issue is one or (sic) Article 8  and  the  first
             stage in such consideration is  to  consider  whether  or  not
             Article 8 is engaged.  The decision of MM (Tier 1 PSW  Article
             8 private life) Zimbabwe [2009] UKAIT 00037  established  that
             respect for an individual's private life  in  accordance  with
             Article 8 did not include a right to work per se, though bonds
             formed during  employment  were  capable  of  constituting  an
             engagement of Article 8.

         16.  I regret to say that on the evidence before me the simple wish
             of the appellant to pursue employment in the  United  Kingdom,
             is in my judgment not a desire that engages Article 8  in  the
             present case, it follows, given the limited rights  of  appeal
             available to the appellant, that she is unable to  succeed  in
             the present appeal."

 5. The determination is  somewhat  odd  in  that,  having  recognised  the
    limited grounds of appeal, paragraphs 17 to 20 appear to  suggest  that
    consideration was given as to whether the appellant had shown that  the
    Immigration Rules were met.  As above, Judge Mathews had already  noted
    that there was no jurisdiction for an appeal against the decision under
    the Immigration Rules.

 6. The grounds of appeal state (verbatim) on the first page:

         "If the honourable Judge has made notes of the whole discussion  in
         full, then I do not see any need of providing any more argument, as
         those notes  should  be  enough.   The  honourable  Judge  and  the
         Presenting Officer accepted that the decision given  to  Himani  in
         2013 was wrong and they  both  apologised  many  times  during  the
         hearing.  It  was  the  judge  who  in  particular,  apologised  on
         numerous occasions and even asked the  Presenting  Officer  of  his
         view on this.  Although Judge stated that this was not his role  to
         do this but  he  is  finding  it  wrong  and  would  like  to  take
         Presenting Officer's view on it.  The Presenting  Officer  accepted
         fully that this was a mistake and the permission should be  granted
         at the time and placing the  Section  320(7B)  was  totally  wrong.
         Even the Presenting Officer suggested me to apply  again  with  the
         papers I presented on the day, and then there is no reason that why
         Himani would not get the permission to enter the UK.

         ...

         The judge clearly showed his helplessness on the name of the  rules
         being changed in 2012, stated that his hands are tied and he is not
         allowed to comment on the previous decision and  only  concede  the
         case on the grounds of human rights.  He even went further  stating
         that if he had the power then he does not see any reason  why  this
         case cannot be reverted".

 7. As I read the grounds, they really reiterated  this  same  argument  in
    different ways.  The appellant remains of the view that the finding  in
    the [2013] entry clearance decision of making  a  false  representation
    was not correct. She does not  feel  she  has  had  an  opportunity  to
    address that incorrect decision and Mr Aggarwal, her  uncle,  put  that
    case very clearly to me at the hearing.

 8. The difficulty for the appellant here is that  Parliament  had  decided
    that an applicant for entry clearance in the Tier  2  category  is  not
    entitled to a right of appeal against the refusal under the Immigration
    Rules, only on human rights or race relations grounds. The decision  on
    false representations is part of the  decision  under  the  Immigration
    Rules so cannot be litigated head on.

 9. It might be a matter that comes into play  before  the  Tribunal  in  a
    second stage Article 8 proportionality assessment. Here,  as  shown  in
    paragraphs 15 and 16, Judge Mathews did not find that  the  appellant's
    wish to come to the UK to work amounted to a  family  or  private  life
    matter capable of engaging Article 8. Put another way, the first Razgar
    question, as to whether there was a sufficient interference  such  that
    Article 8 ECHR was engaged at all, was answered  in  the  negative  and
    therefore the Article 8 assessment could proceed no further  and  there
    was  no  proportionality  assessment  where  the  decision  that  false
    representations had been used could feature. There was no challenge  to
    Judge Mathew's decision that Article 8 was not engaged and I  found  it
    difficult to see how a material one could be  formulated  where  it  is
    only the appellant's wish to work in the UK that is concerned here.

10. I should also indicate, that on the face of it the  determination  does
    not indicate that the judge found strongly for the appellant as regards
    her not having made false representations in the 2013  application  and
    there is no comment on the correctness of the 2013  or  2014  decisions
    under the Immigration  Rules.   It  also  does  not  reflect  that  the
    Presenting Officer expressed a view on the matter either. Even  had  it
    done so, however aggrieved the appellant and Mr Aggarwal may  feel,  as
    above,  these  were  not  matters  that  could  have  made  a  material
    difference where Article 8 was found  not  to  be  engaged.  Therefore,
    where First-tier Tribunal Judge Mathews took the  correct  approach  to
    the human rights appeal, it cannot be material even if he  did  comment
    at the hearing on the correctness of the refusal under the  Immigration
    Rules. The same reasoning  must  also  apply  to  the  anomaly  of  the
    references to the consideration of the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules at paragraphs 17 to 20 of the decision.

11. For these reasons I do not find that the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal discloses legal error.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not  disclose  an  error  on  a
point of law and shall stand.


Signed   [pic]    Dated 8 February 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
