
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/14070/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 15th August 2014                             |On 20th August 2014        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE

                                   Between

                          Ms jyotsna upendra Kamat
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                  the entry clearance officer mumbai india

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Ofie-Kwatia counsel, instructed by Malik Law
For the Respondent:    Mr Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Ms Jyotsna Upendra Kamat, date of  birth  21st  November
    1982, is a citizen of India. In the circumstances  I  do  not  make  an
    anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the appellant against the determination of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Molloy promulgated  on  20th  February  2014.   The
    judge dismissed the appeal of the appellant against the decision of the
    respondent dated  5th  July  2013.  The  decision  was  to  refuse  the
    appellant entry clearance to the United Kingdom  as  the  spouse  of  a
    person present in the United Kingdom as a migrant under the point based
    system. The application was made under paragraph 319C and  was  refused
    initially under paragraphs 319C and 320(7B).

 3. The decision by the Entry Clearance Officer gives a number  of  grounds
    for refusing this  application  including  a  refusal  under  paragraph
    320(7B) of the Immigration Rules.

 4. The decision was reviewed by the Entry Clearance Manager and  the  only
    ground under which the  refusal  was  maintained  was  under  paragraph
    320(7B).

 5. The basis for the 320(7B) refusal is:

      i) Prior to 2011 the appellant had been granted entry clearance to and
         leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

     ii) In or about January 2011 the appellant made application for further
         leave to remain.

    iii) By decision taken on the 31st January 2011 that    application  was
         refused.

     iv) The reason for the refusal was based on  the  allegation  that  the
         appellant had in either that application or a previous  application
         submitted "a false document" namely  a  Post  Graduate  Diploma  in
         Hospitality Management  awarded  by  Hammersmith  and  West  London
         College. The grounds for refusal included  an  assertion  that  the
         appellant  had  breached  the  provisions  of  paragraph  322  with
         reference to paragraph 320(7A & 7B) of the Immigration Rules.

      v)  The  appellant  appealed  against  the  refusal,   appeal   number
         IA/15651/2011.

     vi) Prior to  any  hearing  the  appellant  withdrew  the  appeal.  The
         appellant claims that her mother was ill in India and  she  had  to
         return to India.

    vii) On the 5th August 2011 the appellant at her own expense voluntarily
         returned to India. A material fact which appears not to  have  been
         considered or put before Judge Molloy.

   viii) The appellant made the present  application  to  enter  the  United
         Kingdom as the spouse of a migrant under the  points-based  system.
         That application was refused as set out above.

     ix) In the present application it is asserted that the  consequence  of
         the appellant having been  refused  under  322  and  320(7A  &  7B)
         previously is that  she  is  to  be  refused  in  respect  of  this
         application on the mandatory grounds set out in paragraph 320(7B).

 6. Before the Judge Molloy this appeal was determined on the  papers.  The
    judge was concerned that there was little or no documentation from  the
    IA/15651/2011 appeal before the Tribunal including no reference to  the
    facts in paragraph 5(vii) above. The judge on  the  papers  upheld  the
    decision and dismissed  the  appeal  under  paragraph  320  (7B)  as  a
    mandatory ground for refusal. The judge went on to dismiss  the  appeal
    on Article 8 grounds.

 7. There was much about the documentation that left a lot to  be  desired.
    The grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal concentrate on Article
    8, as do the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  Little  is  said
    about the mandatory ground of refusal  under paragraph 370(7B).

 8. The grant of leave by the Upper Tribunal deals in  the  main  with  the
    issue of dishonesty and who bears the burden of proving the same and to
    what standard.

 9. The only ground for refusing this  application  and  appeal  under  the
    rules was the refusal under paragraph 320(7B). The  relevant  parts  of
    paragraph 320(7B) provide:-

         320 In addition to the grounds of refusal  of  entry  clearance  or
         leave to enter set out in Parts 2-8 of these Rules and  subject  to
         paragraph 321 below, the following grounds  for  refusal  of  entry
         clearance or leave to enter apply:

         Grounds on which entry clearance  or  leave  to  enter  the  United
         Kingdom is to be refused;

         ....

         (7B)  where  the  applicant  has  previously  breached   the   UK's
         immigration laws and was 18 or over at the time of the most  recent
         breached by:

         ...

         d) using deception in an application for entry clearance, leave  to
         enter or remain or in order to obtain documents from the  Secretary
         of State or a third party required in support  of  the  application
         (whether successful or not):

         unless the applicant:

         ..

         (iii) left the UK voluntarily, not  at  the  expense  (directly  or
         indirectly) of the Secretary of State, more  than  12  months  ago.



10. By reasons of the provisions set out where an applicant  has  left  the
    United Kingdom voluntarily and at his/her own expense, the applicant is
    only prevented from making an application for  entry  clearance  for  a
    period of 12 months and the mandatory ground of  refusal  applies  only
    for 12 months.

11. The appellant left the UK on the 5th August 2011 at her own expense.  A
    fact confirmed by the respondent. The present application was  made  on
    the 24th July 2013 by which time the provisions of  320  (7B)  were  no
    longer applicable to the appellant as a mandatory ground for refusal.

12.  The ECM had conceded that the only ground upon which this  application
    was refused was paragraph 320(7B). The other grounds raised by the  ECO
    had been considered and it was  accepted  the  appellant  met  all  the
    substantive requirements of paragraph 319C.

13. The judge in maintaining the refusal under paragraph 320(7B) has made a
    material error of law. The mandatory ground was not applicable  in  the
    circumstances.

14. The representatives accepted that the appeal could be re-determined  on
    the basis of the evidence  before  the  Tribunal  without  hearing  any
    further evidence.

15. On the basis of the evidence presented  the  appellant  meets  all  the
    requirements of paragraph 319C as accepted by the ECO and  the  ECM.  I
    find that the parties are validly married; the parties  have  met;  the
    parties have sufficient funds to maintain the  appellant  and  sponsor;
    there is sufficient accommodation; the parties are  intending  to  live
    together permanently; the spouse is a relevant point based migrant; and
    the parties do not intend to remain in the UK in contravention  of  the
    Immigration Rules and Law.  The appeal  is  to  be  allowed  by  reason
    thereof.

16. In  the  circumstances  there  is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination.  I substitute the following decision

         a) The appeal is allowed on the Immigration Rules grounds.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure


