
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: OA/14573/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons promulgated     |
|On September 22, 2015                |On October 5, 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Before

                            MR INDRA KUMAR GURUNG
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant   Mr Jesurum, Counsel, instructed by Howe & Co Solicitors
Respondent  Mr Tarlow (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a national of Nepal, applied on February  22,  2013  for
    entry clearance as an adult dependent. The  respondent  considered  his
    application under Section EC-DR1.1 of Appendix FM  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and on  June  19,  2013  she  refused  his  application  for  not
    satisfying Sections E-ECDR 2.4, 3.1 & 3.2 of Appendix FM  and  for  not
    meeting the requirements of the "Ghurkha" policy or article 8 ECHR.

 2.  The  appellant  appealed  under  section  82(1)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and the appeal came before Judge of the
    First-tier  Tribunal  Clarke  on  July  23,  2014  and  in  a  decision
    promulgated  on  September  1,  2014  the  appellant's   appeals   were
    dismissed.

 3. The appellant sought permission to appeal but both Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Parkes and Upper Tribunal Kekic rejected his  application
    on November 24, 2014 and March 18, 2015 respectively.

 4. The appellant lodged an application for judicial review  and  on  April
    28, 2015 Mr Justice Mostyn stated-

         "I am satisfied  it  is  arguable  that  Judge  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Clarke made a grave and highly material error  of  law  in
         determining  whether  the  article  8  right  to  family  life  was
         engaged."

 5. On May 29, 2015 the Upper Tribunal's refusal  to  grant  permission  to
    appeal was quashed.

 6. A Rule 24 response was filed by the respondent on July 9, 2015  and  on
    September 10, 2015 Vice President Ockelton granted permission stating-

         "Permission is granted in light of the decision of the  High  Court
         in this case. The parties are reminded that  the  Upper  tribunal's
         task is  set  out  in  Section  12  of  the  Tribunals,  Court  and
         Enforcement Act 2007"

 7. Section 12 of the Tribunals, Court and Enforcement Act 2007 states:

         (1) Subsection (2) applies if the Upper Tribunal, in deciding an
         appeal under section 11, finds that the making of the decision
         concerned involved the making of an error on a point of law.

         (2) The Upper Tribunal-

             (a) may (but need not) set aside the decision of the First-
             tier Tribunal, and

             (b) if it does, must either-

               i) remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal with directions
                  for its reconsideration, or

               i) re-make the decision.

         (3) In acting under subsection (2)(b)(i), the Upper Tribunal may
         also-

             (a) direct that the members of the First-tier Tribunal who are
             chosen to reconsider the case are not to be the same as those
             who made the decision that has been set aside;

             (b) give procedural directions in connection with the
             reconsideration of the case by the First-tier Tribunal.

         (4) In acting under subsection (2)(b)(ii), the Upper Tribunal-

             (a) may make any decision which the First-tier Tribunal could
             make if the First-tier Tribunal were re-making the decision,
             and

             (b) may make such findings of fact as it considers
             appropriate.

 8. The matter came before me on the above date  and  both  representatives
    made submissions on whether there had been an error in law albeit these
    submissions were limited to the Tribunal's approach  to  the  issue  of
    article 8 ECHR.

 9. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
    pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I see no reason to make an order now.

    SUBMISSIONS

10. Mr Jesurum submitted that as this was a Ghurkha case the appellant must
    succeed under article 8  ECHR  if  he  demonstrated  that  family  life
    existed between him and his his parents. He  submitted  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred by failing to find family life existed. The Tribunal had
    erred when considering family life because it should have had regard to
    all of the affected parties and the historic injustice suffered by  the
    family. He submitted that following the decisions of Ghising and others
    (Ghurkhas/BOCs: historic wrong; weight) [2013]  UKUT  00567  (IAC)  and
    Gurung & Others v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 8 if family life and  dependence
    is established then it would be disproportionate to refuse him entry to
    the United Kingdom-something the respondent's  representative  accepted
    when the appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Clarke. He
    argued  the  Tribunal  failed  to  attach  sufficient  weight  to   the
    appellant's mother's medical condition's/appellant's condition as  well
    as the appellant's father's  commitment  to  the  appellant.  Financial
    support was evidence of a cultural bond and the Tribunal failed to make
    findings on this and wrongly concluded that the appellant had  to  show
    "indispensable support". An earlier decision was the starting point but
    was decided based on the case law of Kugathas v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 31 which the cases of  Ghising  and
    Gurung had stated was too restrictive and that earlier decision had  no
    regard to the appellant's mother's medical condition. The Tribunal  had
    failed to engage with the fact the appellant was still  young  and  was
    being supported by his father and continued to live in a  family  home.
    The appellant's father was trying to keep the family together  when  he
    came to the United Kingdom and the appellant remained in a family home.
    If these factors had been properly considered, then  the  appeal  would
    have been allowed under article 8 ECHR. The  Tribunal  failed  to  have
    regard to the test set out in paragraph [49] of AA v UK [2012] Imm AR 1
    and in paragraph [14] Patel v ECO [2010] EWCA Civ 17 and  he  submitted
    there was an error in law and the article 8 decision should  be  remade
    and the appeal allowed.

11. Mr Tarlow relied on the Rule 24 letter filed. He submitted the Tribunal
    had taken into account the degree of hardship and the bonds established
    between the appellant and sponsors and  concluded  these  factors  were
    insufficient to engage article 8(1) ECHR. The Tribunal  had  regard  to
    the evidence of depression as  well  as  the  fact  the  appellant  was
    studying but it also had regard to the fact the  appellant  was  living
    with a family member who occasionally cooked meals for him. Despite the
    level of financial support, the appellant  was  living  an  independent
    life as a thirty-year-old male.

12. I reserved my decision.

    DISCUSSION AND REASONS ON ERROR IN LAW

13. Mr Jesurum's submission is that if  the  appellant's  father  had  been
    granted his status in the United Kingdom when he finished  his  service
    for the armed services in 1986, the appellant would  have  been  living
    here and would have been entitled to be educated here and the fact they
    were separated did not mean there was no family life.

14. The appellant's parents had been granted indefinite leave to enter  the
    United Kingdom on July 13, 2009  based  on  the  fact  the  appellant's
    father had served in the British army for  twenty-five  years.  He  had
    been discharged in 1986 and his evidence was that if he had been  given
    the opportunity to settle in the United Kingdom in 1986 he  would  have
    done. At that time the appellant would have been three years of age and
    clearly eligible for permission to be with his parents as a dependent.

15. A similar application, to the current one, was submitted in April  2010
    but this was refused and on appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    Judge found the appellant had  an  older  sister  and  other  relatives
    living in Nepal and he concluded there would be  no  breach  of  family
    life because the appellant was not dependent and  they  could  maintain
    contact  with  each  other  by  telephone  and  other  media  and   the
    appellant's parents would be able to visit him in Nepal and accordingly
    there was no breach of the existing family life.

16. Following the decision of Ghising the appellant renewed his application
    but this was rejected  by  the  respondent  and  his  appeal  was  then
    rejected by the First-tier Tribunal.

17. Mr Jesurum submitted the First-tier Tribunal's assessment  did  not  go
    far enough in that it failed to consider the whole issue of family life
    specifically as it applied to Ghurkha cases.  He  referred  me  to  the
    decision of AA and  argued  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  incorrectly
    assessed the dependency the appellant had on his parents.

18. In response to this Mr Tarlow argued that the appellant was independent
    and whilst he had some dependency  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  been
    entitled to conclude that article 8 was not engaged.

19. The Court in AA at paragraph [49] found-

         "... as Article 8 protects  the  right  to  establish  and  develop
         relationships with other human beings and the outside world and can
         sometimes embrace an  individual's  social  identity,  it  must  be
         accepted that the totality of social ties between settled  migrants
         and the community in which they are living constitutes part of  the
         concept of private life within the meaning of Article 8."

20. The First-tier Tribunal dealt with a thirty (now thirty-two)  year  old
    male who had been living apart from his parents for a number of  years.
    The First-tier Tribunal was entitled to take this into account, as well
    as the written and oral  evidence  of  the  parties,  when  considering
    whether there was family life.

21. Mr Jesurum  has  submitted  the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  give
    sufficient weight to the historic injustice suffered or  the  fact  the
    appellant was still reliant on his father. At paragraph [14]  of  Patel
    the Court of Appeal stated-

         "... what may constitute an extant family life falls well short  of
         what  constitutes  dependency  and  a  good  many  adult  children,
         including children on whom the parents themselves are  now  reliant
         may still have a family life with parents who are now settled  here
         not by leave or by force  of  circumstances  but  by  long  delayed
         right.  That  is  what  gives  the  historical  wrong  a  potential
         relevance to article 8 claims such as these. It does not  make  the
         Convention a mechanism for turning the clock back but it does  make
         the history and its admitted injustices potentially relevant to the
         application of article 8(2)"

22. The Tribunal in Ghising  and  others  (Ghurkhas/BOCs:  historic  wrong;
    weight) [2013] UKUT 00567 (IAC) considered  what  the  Court  meant  in
    Gurung  with  regard  to  the   issue   of   historic   injustice   and
    proportionality. They found at paragraphs [59] and [60]-

         "59. ... we accept Mr Jacobs' submission that where  Article  8  is
         held to be engaged and the fact that but for the historic wrong the
         Appellant  would  have  been  settled  in  the  UK  long   ago   is
         established, this will ordinarily  determine  the  outcome  of  the
         proportionality assessment; and  determine  it  in  an  Appellant's
         favour. The explanation for this is to be found, not in any concept
         of new or additional "burdens" but, rather, in  the  weight  to  be
         afforded   to   the   historic   wrong/settlement   issue   in    a
         proportionality balancing  exercise.  That,  we  consider,  is  the
         proper interpretation of what the Court of Appeal were saying  when
         they referred to the historic injustice as being such an  important
         factor to be taken into account in the balancing exercise. What was
         crucial, the Court  said,  was  the  consequence  of  the  historic
         injustice, which was that Gurkhas and BOCs:

           "were prevented from settling  in  the  U.K.  That  is  why  the
           historic injustice is such an important factor to be taken  into
           account  in  the  balancing  exercise  and  why  the   applicant
           dependent child of a Gurkha who is settled in the UK has such  a
           strong  claim  to  have  his  article  8(1)  right   vindicated,
           notwithstanding  the  potency  of  the   countervailing   public
           interest in maintaining of a firm immigration policy". [41]

         In other words, the historic injustice issue will carry significant
         weight, on the Appellant's side of the balance, and  is  likely  to
         outweigh the matters relied  on  by  the  Respondent,  where  these
         consist solely of the public interest just described.

         60. Once this point is grasped, it can immediately  be  appreciated
         that there may be cases where Appellants in Gurkha cases  will  not
         succeed, even though their family life engages Article 8(1) and the
         evidence shows they would have come  to  the  United  Kingdom  with
         their father, but for the injustice that prevented the latter  from
         settling here on  completion  of  his  military  service.   If  the
         Respondent can point to matters over and above the "public interest
         in maintaining of a firm immigration policy", which argue in favour
         of removal or the refusal of leave to enter, these  must  be  given
         appropriate weight in the balance in the Respondent's favour. Thus,
         a bad immigration history and/or criminal behaviour  may  still  be
         sufficient  to  outweigh  the  powerful  factors  bearing  on   the
         Appellant's side. Being an adult child of a UK settled  Gurkha  ex-
         serviceman is, therefore, not a "trump card", in the sense that not
         every application by such a person will inevitably succeed.    But,
         if  the  Respondent  is  relying  only  upon  the  public  interest
         described by the Court of Appeal at paragraph 41  of  Gurung,  then
         the weight to be given to  the  historic  injustice  will  normally
         require a decision in the Appellant's favour."

23. With this background and the representative's  submissions  in  mind  I
    have considered the First-tier Tribunal's approach.

24. The First-tier Tribunal accepted that the historic  injustice  argument
    was relevant but concluded on its own it was not in  itself  sufficient
    to permit the appellant entry clearance. The  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    regard to the following:

          i) The appellant was thirty years of age and  had  been  studying
             for a number of years.

         ii) He had lived apart from his parents for a number of years.

        iii) He was living with a family  member  albeit  he  had  a  large
             degree of independence.

         iv) His parents contributed money to his studies and  upkeep  from
             their benefits.

          v) The appellant had not demonstrated he  was  dependent  on  his
             parents.

         vi) There was a lack of medical evidence to support the claim that
             the appellant suffered  from  any  medical  problems  and  the
             medical   evidence   concerning   the    appellant's    mother
             demonstrated nothing more than ailments connected with  people
             who were getting older.

25. The Tribunal's assessment of article 8 is contained between  paragraphs
    [16] and [20] of its decision. The Tribunal took as its starting  point
    the previous Tribunal's decision from 2010 and had in mind the decision
    of Gurung when assessing whether article 8 was  engaged.  The  Tribunal
    noted in paragraph [17] of its decision-

         "... What I have to do is differentiate between the usual emotional
         bonds between parents and their children with a case where there is
         a requisite degree of emotional dependence."

26. Mr Jesurum submits the Tribunal applied the wrong test.

27. The case of Gurung is of assistance  in  this  case  for  two  reasons.
    Firstly, the Court set out the approach that should be taken in article
    8 cases involving Ghurkha dependents and secondly it  considered  cases
    similar to the appellant's.

28. The Court's approach in Gurung, to the issue of family life, is set out
    in paragraphs [45] to [46]. The court stated-

         "45. Ultimately, the question whether an individual  enjoys  family
         life is one of fact and depends on a careful consideration  of  all
         the relevant facts of the particular case... in some  instances  an
         adult child (particularly if he does not have a partner or children
         of his own) may establish that  he  has  a  family  life  with  his
         parents. It all depends on the facts.

         46. Paras 50 to 62 of  the  determination  of  the  UT  in  Ghising
         contains a useful review of  some  of  the  jurisprudence  and  the
         correct approach to be adopted. It concludes at para  62  that  the
         different outcomes in cases  with  superficially  similar  features
         emphasises to us that the issue under Article 8(1) is highly  fact-
         sensitive."

29. At paragraphs [47] to [50] of  the  Gurung  the  Court  considered  the
    appeals of two applicants who were 24 and 26 years  of  age  and  whose
    parents came to live in the United Kingdom in circumstances similar  to
    the appellant's in this appeal. Like  the  appellant  these  applicants
    were students and were both funded by  their  fathers.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal (in Gurung) concluded:

      i) There was little evidence of  family  life  between  them  although
         there was evidence the father supported  the  applicants  but  that
         this was expected in Nepalese culture.

     ii) There was nothing to suggest a bond over and above that usually  to
         be expected from the relationship between adult parents  and  their
         children.

30. The basis for their appeals was that the  Tribunals  erred  in  law  in
    failing to attach any (or any adequate) weight to  the  fact  that  the
    appellants had always lived with their parents as a family unit. It was
    argued before the court that the family unit, with a  strong  emotional
    bond and elements of financial dependency, enjoyed  family  life  while
    the appellants were growing up and it was not  suddenly  cut  off  when
    they reached their majority. The Court concluded there was no error  of
    law. The critical issue was whether there  was  sufficient  dependence,
    and in particular sufficient emotional dependence, by the appellants on
    their parents to justify the conclusion that they enjoyed family  life.
    That was a question of fact for the First-tier Tribunal  to  determine.
    In their view, the First-tier Tribunal was entitled to  conclude  that,
    although the usual emotional bonds between parents and  their  children
    were present, the requisite degree of emotional dependence was absent.

31. Every case is fact sensitive and in assessing whether there has been an
    error in law I have to consider whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    regard to all of the fact sensitive issues  and  thereafter  approached
    his claim applying the correct test.

32. I accept the sponsors are honest witnesses but  they  are  not  medical
    experts. The Tribunal rejected aspects of the appellant's  case  in  so
    far as the medical  issues  were  concerned  and  those  findings  were
    clearly open  to  it  for  the  reasons  given,  despite  Mr  Jesurum's
    submissions.

33.  The  mere  fact  the  appellant's  father  financially  supported  the
    appellant did automatically mean there  was  family  life  and  as  the
    courts have made clear being a  Ghurkha  dependent  does  not  mean  an
    automatic entry to the United Kingdom.

34. This appellant had lived apart from his parents for a number  of  years
    albeit not through choice. The First-tier Tribunal  was  aware  of  the
    level of contact between the parties, the background  and  all  of  the
    current circumstances but was not satisfied there was family  life.  As
    the courts have made clear each  case  has  to  be  considered  on  its
    merits.

35. I am  not  satisfied  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  deal
    adequately with the issue of family life. The Tribunal set out all  the
    relevant factors and demonstrated it was clearly aware  of  the  family
    circumstances and in particular those in which their father and  mother
    came to live in the United Kingdom  while  the  appellant  remained  in
    Nepal. The Tribunal took into account the appellant's age at  the  date
    of decision and the fact that his father was paying everything for  his
    upkeep. The Tribunal was entitled to  reach  the  conclusion  that  the
    appellant had failed to show anything behind  the  normal  relationship
    between adult children and his parents. The Tribunal's  findings  about
    the appellant living independently must be read in the context  of  the
    evidence  as  a  whole  and  does  not  indicate  any  misdirection  or
    misunderstanding of the family position.

36. It is therefore not the case as  the  grounds  allege  that  the  judge
    failed to consider the family as a whole or make a lawful article  8(1)
    assessment.

37.  I  am  satisfied,  having  considered  all  of  the  submissions,  the
    Tribunal's findings were open to it and that consequently there  is  no
    error in law.

    DECISION

38. There was no material error. The original decision shall stand.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
