
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/14013/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15th September 2015                        |On 29th September 2015        |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRENCH

                                   Between

                          SALMA NAEF ESMAIL ESMAIL
                          (ANONYMITY order NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                        (on behalf of ECO ABU DHABI)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr O Shoker of S H & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, who is residing in Yemen and is a citizen of that state,
    had applied for entry clearance to come to the United Kingdom  to  join
    the Sponsor Ghaleb Mohammed Mahmood, a British citizen,  as  his  wife.
    The application was refused as it was not accepted that  the  Appellant
    was in a genuine and subsisting marriage with the Sponsor and that  the
    couple intended to live permanently together.  The Appellant  exercised
    her right of appeal and in doing so requested that at the hearing there
    should be available for the Sponsor an Arabic interpreter able to speak
    the Yemeni dialect.

 2. The appeal was  heard  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Pirotta  at
    Birmingham on 3rd July 2014.  On that  occasion  the  Sponsor  was  not
    professionally represented.  The judge was not satisfied  that  it  had
    been shown that the couple were in a genuine married relationship which
    was subsisting and she dismissed the appeal.

 3. The Appellant, by this time  represented  by  her  current  solicitors,
    applied on 11th August 2014 for permission to appeal.  In  the  grounds
    it was contended that the judge had made a material  error  of  law  by
    deciding to hear the  appeal  in  the  absence  of  an  official  court
    interpreter and by going on to hear the case with the aid of  a  person
    who was a member of  the  Yemeni  community  who  had  accompanied  the
    Sponsor to the hearing.  As  a  consequence  it  was  argued  that  the
    Sponsor had not been  able  to  give  satisfactory  oral  evidence  and
    address the issues as to the marriage upon which the judge had  relied.
    There were explanations for alleged  discrepancies  which  the  Sponsor
    would have been able  to  put  forward.   On  this  basis,  of  alleged
    procedural irregularity, permission was granted.

 4. By the time of the hearing before me  no  further  documents  had  been
    served on behalf of the Appellant.  At the commencement of the  hearing
    Mr Shoker said that the Sponsor was currently in hospital and he handed
    in a letter to that effect in which it was stated that the Sponsor  had
    been admitted to a hospital in Birmingham on  1st  September  suffering
    from cardiac failure.  There was no application for an  adjournment  at
    that stage.  I had checked the original file and noted  that  according
    to the printed  Record  of  Proceedings  there  had  been  an  official
    interpreter arranged for the  original  hearing.  That  document  reads
    "Interpreter: Applied Language Solutions: Ms Sofia Manaoui-Tri  1151751
    language Arabic (Middle-Eastern)".  Mr Shoker  said  that  the  Sponsor
    said that someone had accompanied him and interpreted and he would  not
    be able to add to that assertion.

 5. Mr Smart for his part said  that  it  has  not  been  established  that
    somebody else had interpreted rather than an official interpreter.   He
    noted from the Home Office file that the notes made by  the  Presenting
    Officer made no reference to any problems with securing the services of
    an interpreter.  The judge had in fact said  at  paragraph  18  of  her
    decision that no witnesses had been present to support the application,
    which rather indicated that there had not been an interpreter from  the
    community.  The determination was quite detailed and made no  reference
    to any problems with interpretation or lack of an official interpreter.
    It was also the case, he said, that there was no witness statement from
    the Sponsor or from the person who had allegedly interpreted for him.

 6. Mr Shoker replied that it was not disputed that the  Sponsor  was  aged
    and quite frail and he could well have been accompanied by someone else
    at the hearing.  If somebody else had interpreted that person would not
    have been able to give evidence.  If the correct  interpreter  was  not
    there it made the whole decision unsafe.  He had nothing else  to  add.
    At that stage he asked whether he could have more time  and  sought  an
    adjournment.  I enquired how long his firm had been on the  record.   I
    noted that it was they who had filed the Notice of Appeal in August  of
    the previous year.  I was of the view that there  had  been  more  than
    adequate time to obtain statements from the Sponsor and from any person
    who had allegedly interpreted for  him  and  to  lodge  them  with  the
    Tribunal in support of the appeal.  Although it  was  regrettable  that
    the Sponsor was currently in hospital this was an error of law  hearing
    and oral evidence would not normally be required. Sufficient  time  had
    been available for the case to be  prepared  and  at  this  late  stage
    adjournment was not required  or  warranted.   There  were  no  further
    submissions.

 7. The burden is  upon  the  Appellant  to  make  out  the  allegation  of
    procedural irregularity.  All I had before me was a bare  assertion  to
    this effect made by solicitors on behalf of  the  Sponsor.   I  had  no
    witness statement from the Sponsor nor any witness statement  from  the
    alleged community interpreter.  I noted from the Record of  Proceedings
    that it was recorded that an official interpreter from Applied Language
    Solutions had been secured for the hearing.  The judge's  determination
    is detailed and makes no reference to any difficulties  concerning  the
    services of an interpreter.  At paragraph  4  the  judge  recites  "The
    Sponsor attended and  gave  evidence  through  the  interpreter."   The
    implication from that sentence is that it was an  official  interpreter
    who carried out the interpretation.  The judge's Record of  Proceedings
    makes no reference to any lack of official interpreter or  decision  as
    to  an  unofficial  interpreter  being,  most  unusually,  allowed   to
    interpret.  On that basis I was satisfied that the  Appellant  had  not
    made out the allegation. It is clear from, amongst other  sources,  the
    reported case of Azia (proof of misconduct by judge) Iraq  [2012]  UKUT
    96 (IAC) that where there are allegations that a judge  has  not  acted
    properly in conducting a hearing proof is required.  There  was  simply
    no such proof before me and all the indications were that  the  hearing
    had been conducted in proper form.  In reaching that decision I did not
    rely upon Mr Smart's information as to the minute from  the  Presenting
    Officer at the original hearing but in  passing  I  note  that  he  had
    nothing to say which might have made me consider that  there  had  been
    any impropriety in the way the hearing was conducted.   The  allegation
    is not made out and accordingly this appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision
There was no material error of law in the original decision and this  appeal
is dismissed.
There was no application for an anonymity order and none is made.

Signed                              Date 28 September 2015










