
  [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/14849/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 April 2015                      |On 6 May 2015                        |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER NEW DELHI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               SATWINDER SINGH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Figiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Miss A Mohsin, Counsel, instructed by Marks & Marks
                    Solicitors
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I see no need for, and do not  make,  an  order  restricting  reporting
    about this decision.

 2. This appeal  comes  about  because  the  respondent,  hereinafter  "the
    claimant", made an unsuccessful application for entry  clearance  as  a
    partner under Appendix FM of the Immigration  Rules.   His  application
    was refused on 19 June 2013 and the claimant given a document  entitled
    "Notice of Immigration Decision - Refusal of Entry Clearance".

 3. He appealed successfully to the First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  present
    appellant,  hereinafter  "the  Entry  Clearance  Officer",  was   given
    permission to appeal. It was said that the reasons for  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision were, arguably, inadequate and, in any  event,  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  decide  if  the  appellant  could  be
    accommodated in accordance with the rules. It was also said the  First-
    tier Tribunal had not applied properly section 117B of the  Nationality
    Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  (described  wrongly  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer as "paragraph 117B of the Immigration Act 2014) which
    is entitled "Article 8: public interest  considerations  applicable  in
    all cases".

 4. Before  considering  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  Determination  it  is
    necessary to look carefully at the Entry Clearance  Officer's  "Refusal
    of Entry Clearance" dated 19 June 2013 to try and unravel just what has
    happened in this case. For reasons that will become apparent, the Entry
    Clearance Officer's decision, which was upheld by  an  Entry  Clearance
    Manager, is not as helpful as it could have been.

 5. The Notice begins  by  recording,  correctly,  that  the  claimant  has
    applied for entry clearance as a  partner  under  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration  Rules  and  that  the  application  was  considered   with
    reference to paragraph EC-P.1.1 of  Appendix  FM  and  320(11)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 6. Paragraph EC-P.1.1 of the Immigration Rules is headed "Entry  clearance
    as a partner" and  is  a  "catch  all"  provision  requiring  that  the
    applicant is outside the United Kingdom,  that  he  has  made  a  valid
    application for entry clearance as a partner, that the applicant  "must
    not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in S-EC and the applicant
    must meet all of the requirements of Section EC-P.

 7. Paragraph 320(11) is under the general heading "Grounds on which  entry
    clearance or leave to enter  the  United  Kingdom  should  normally  be
    refused".  Paragraphs 320(8) to 320(22) (less three deleted paragraphs)
    create the relevant grounds. I set out below  the  terms  of  paragraph
    320(11) as I need to consider them later.   The Rule states that  there
    is  ground on which entry clearance should normally be refused:

         (11) Where the applicant has previously contrived in a  significant
         way to frustrate the intention of the Rules by:

             (i) overstaying; or

             (ii) breaching a condition attached to his leave; or

             (iii) being an illegal entrant; or

             (iv) using deception in an application  for  entry  clearance,
         leave to enter or remain or in order to obtain documents  from  the
         Secretary of State or a third party  required  in  support  of  the
         application (whether successful or not); and

         there are other aggravating circumstances, such as absconding,  not
         meeting  temporary   admission/reporting   restrictions   or   bail
         conditions, using  an  assumed  identity  or  multiple  identities,
         switching  nationality,  making  frivolous  applications   or   not
         complying with the agreed documentation process."

 8. Having set out that reminder of the requirements of paragraph 320(11) I
    set out below the Entry Clearance Officer's "Reasons  for  Refusal"  on
    this point.

 9. The Entry Clearance Officer said:

         "You state in your application that you entered the  UK  in  August
         2004.  You state that you travelled to Moscow in 2002 and then into
         the UK illegally via France in a lorry.  You  state  that  you  met
         your sponsor in 2006.  I note that you remained illegally in the UK
         and at no point during this time attempted to regularise your stay.
          By your own admission you  worked  illegally.   You  came  to  the
         attention of the police in 2008 and  were  convicted  of  theft  on
         22/01/08, this is an unspent conviction.  I note that by  your  own
         admission you were imprisoned in the UK.

         You gave three  different  identities  to  the  authorities;  SINGH
         SATIWNDER [sic], GILL SATWINDER SINGH, SONGRA AMRINDER SINGH, along
         with  three  different  dates  of  birth;  15/09/79,  25/12/74  and
         15/09/78.

         You  then  made  an  in-country  application  on  17/12/09  for  an
         Unmarried Partners Common-law Spouse Visa, however I note that this
         application was voided as an inappropriate application,  as  whilst
         this  application  was  being  processed  you  were  extradited  to
         Brussels on 27/10/10 from UK to serve a four year prison sentence.

         You have applied for settlement to join your spouse.  In your  visa
         application you have chosen not to declare: that you have  made  an
         application to the Home Office to remain in the UK in the last  ten
         years (Q59); that you have any criminal convictions in any  country
         (Q60), and you have not declared that you have ever been  known  by
         any other names. At interview you again chose not to  declare  your
         different identities, when asked if you ever used a different name,
         you stated 'No'.  I note you stated as an explanation that you  did
         not give your surname to the authorities as you were not using  it,
         and out of confusion told them your year of birth  was  1978.   You
         failed to satisfactorily to declare that you had also used a  false
         identity,  and  I  do   not   find   your   explanation   credible.
         Furthermore,  you  failed  to  declare  at  interview  or  in  your
         application form that you have any criminal convictions in the UK.

         I note that you also  made  an  application  to  join  the  Olympic
         Accreditation Work Force which was refused on 17/07/12.   You  made
         this application two months prior to  your  settlement  application
         and have chosen not to declare this in your visa application or  at
         interview.

         It is clear from  the  foregoing  that  you  not  only  made  false
         declarations to the Immigration Authorities but you also  continued
         to frustrate the Immigration  Rules  in  your  attempts  to  remain
         there.  I am satisfied that your persistent and continued deception
         is consistent  with  having  contrived  in  a  significant  way  to
         frustrate  the  intentions  of   the   Immigration   Rules.    Your
         application is therefore one that, according to  paragraph  320(11)
         of the Immigration Rules,  should  normally  be  refused.   I  have
         considered the  circumstances  of  your  application.  However,  on
         balance I am not satisfied that your particular  circumstances  are
         of a sufficiently compelling nature to justify  my  granting   your
         application, having regard to the fact that it should  normally  be
         refused."

10. As will soon become  apparent,  many  of  the  claims  made  above  are
    unjustified. I set out below some comments on the Reasons for Refusal.

11. The paragraph beginning "You state in your application ..."  makes  the
    incorrect assertion that the appellant's conviction is not spent.   The
    rehabilitation period for an offence punished by a fine is  five  years
    and so the conviction would appear to have been  spent  on  22  January
    2013, which is about six months before the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's
    decision.  I note that the  application  was  made  in  2012  when  the
    conviction was not spent but it is plain that  even  this  introductory
    paragraph to the Reasons for Refusal contains an error on a point  that
    might be thought important.

12. Neither can I reconcile the assertion that the claimant  "At  no  point
    during this time attempted to regularise your stay" with the  assertion
    that he made an in country application on 17 December 2009.

13. The evidence that the claimant has used  false  identities  appears  to
    come from a "Police Certificate Issued For  Entry  Clearance  Purposes"
    and answers at interview.   According to the Certificate  the  claimant
    was known to the  police  as  "Satwinder  Gill"  who  was  born  on  15
    September 1978 and has used the aliases "Satwinder  Singh",  "Satwinder
    Singh Gill" and "Amrinder Singh Songra".    There  were  two  dates  of
    birth identified as being linked with his aliases.    One  was  for  15
    September 1979  and  the  other  was  25  December  1974.  It  will  be
    appreciated that,  unlike  the  police,  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    regards "Satwinder Singh date of birth 15/09/1979" as  the  appellant's
    true identity.  We are not told which dates of birth were  said  to  be
    linked to which of the three alternative names.

14. I set out below the relevant questions and answers at  the  applicant's
    interview on 12 March 2013
    "Q40:         Have you ever used a different name?
    A:       No
    Q:41     Official records in the UK show you have used alias names.
    A:       No. It was just that I was not using my  surname.  My  surname
was Gill.
    Q42.     Have you ever used different dobs?
    A:       Yes. When I was arrested the first time I gave them the  wrong
date of birth.
    Q43:     Why did you give them a different date of birth?
    A:       I was confused.
    Q44:     What does that mean, you were confused?
    A:       My date of birth is 79 but I told them 78.
    Q45:     Why did you give them a different dob?
    A:       It was a mistake.
    Q46:     Did you correct the mistake?
    A:       Yes, I told."

15. Firstly, this explanation, such as it is, does not begin to justify the
    use of the name Amrinder Singh Songra.   The  claimant  was  not  asked
    about his alleged use of this name, and, as I read the interview,  does
    not admit using it.  No efforts appear to have been made to investigate
    the  police  report.   In  my  experience   such   reports   are   made
    conscientiously and are usually reliable, but they are  not  infallible
    and given that the point was never raised with  the  claimant  and  not
    investigated by the Entry Clearance Officer, it  is  difficult  to  see
    that much weight can be given to it.

16. Similarly, the admitted inconsistency in the date of  birth  cried  out
    for further investigation.  The  interview  records  suggest  that  the
    claimant remembered giving a false name. He said that he had  corrected
    the error.  It would be very interesting to know if the correction  was
    made immediately, as might occur if there was a slip of the tongue,  or
    only after the error had been pointed out and if the  latter,  to  know
    exactly what was said and in what circumstances.  Again this is an area
    where further questions were  appropriate.  The  possibility  that  the
    claimant has used an entirely different name and date of birth was  not
    investigated or even raised with him and his explanation for  giving  a
    different date  of  birth,  namely  that  it  was  a  mistake  that  he
    corrected, was untested.

17. This neglect seriously diminishes the weight that can  be  attached  to
    the Entry Clearance Officer's concerns.  The evidence in the  interview
    is as consistent with  the  appellant  being  a  manipulative  man  who
    specialises in obfuscation as it is with an apprehensive man who made a
    silly mistake that he quickly corrected.  It really was incumbent  upon
    the Entry Clearance Officer to ask more searching questions.  The  role
    of an Entry Clearance Officer is to investigate an application, not  to
    collect uncritically answers that would justify a refusal.   Additional
    questions may well have either shown that the claimant did not do  very
    much wrong or that he had embarked on a deeply dishonest course.

18. The paragraph beginning "You made an in country  application  ..."   is
    inconsistent with the suggestion that he did  nothing to regularise his
    stay.

19. However, the biggest worry is the contention that he was "extradited to
    Brussels on 27/10/10 from UK to serve a  four  year  prison  sentence".
    This is, at best, seriously incomplete.  Whilst it might be right  that
    the claimant was extradited because he was thought to be due to serve a
    sentence of imprisonment in Belgium, the fact is he  did  not  serve  a
    four year sentence of imprisonment in Belgium.  If he had he would  not
    have been able to make an application from India in  July  2012  or  be
    interviewed in March 2013 when he said that  he  was  released  by  the
    Belgian authorities after two months  (question  36).  According  to  a
    letter from his solicitors dated 28 June  2012  "All  criminal  charges
    against Mr Singh [were]  dropped  in  Brussels  and  Mr  Singh  made  a
    voluntary departure to India". The First-tier Tribunal Judge  noted  at
    paragraph 19 of his determination that the appeal  had  been  adjourned
    specifically  for  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  to  provide  further
    evidence concerning the appellant's extradition and application to join
    the Olympic Accreditation Workforce but none had been provided.

20. It seems clear to me that the contentions that the  claimant  served  a
    prison sentence in Belgium, applied to join the  Olympic  Accreditation
    Workforce  and  used  the  name  "Amrinder  Singh  Songra   cannot   be
    substantiated and should be ignored which is essentially the view taken
    by the First-tier Tribunal.

21. Similarly the contention that the claimant used a false date  of  birth
    can go no further than finding that  on  an  unidentified  occasion  he
    wrongly said that his year of birth was 1979 rather than 1978 and  that
    he drew the attention of the authorities to his mistake.

22. The assertion that "You also  continue  to  frustrate  the  Immigration
    Rules in your attempts to remain there" is an odd  allegation  to  make
    against someone who manifestly was not in the United Kingdom.

23. More positively from the Entry Clearance Officer's perspective, is that
    the claimant wrongly answered question 59 on his application form "Have
    you made an application to the Home Office to remain in the UK  in  the
    last ten years?" in the negative when he clearly has.   He  applied  to
    stay as a partner but the application was void.  We  are  told  nothing
    about that application. There is nothing before me to support a finding
    that the claimant completed the application  form  unsatisfactorily  in
    respect of that application.

24. Similarly the claimant answered  the  question  60  "Do  you  have  any
    criminal convictions in any country (including traffic  offences)?"  in
    the negative, when he has been convicted in the United  Kingdom  of  an
    offence of theft.  The paragraph also complains that he  had  not  said
    that he had been identified by other names but did not explain where in
    the application form he should have offered that information.

25. I note that in the first paragraph the Entry Clearance Officer referred
    to the appellant having admitted that he was imprisoned in  the  United
    Kingdom but that is irrelevant.   It would interesting, if inconsistent
    with the police  evidence,  if  he  had  admitted  being  sentenced  to
    imprisonment following conviction of a criminal offence. As it  is  the
    claimant has done no more than admit to being detained which  is  usual
    in the case of someone being extradited.

26. The last paragraph beginning "It is clear  from  the  foregoing..."  is
    revealing.    The  applicant  did  make  false  declarations   to   the
    immigration  authorities.  He  said  untruthfully  that   he   had   no
    convictions when he has been convicted of  an  offence  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  He further said untruthfully that he had not made a  previous
    application to remain in the United Kingdom in the last ten years  when
    he had made such an application, even though it  was  actually  voided.
    However, the paragraph continues:

         "I am satisfied that your persistent  and  continued  deception  is
         consistent with having contrived in a significant way to  frustrate
         the intentions  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  Your  application  is
         therefore  one  that,  according  to  paragraph  320(11)   of   the
         Immigration Rules, should normally be refused."

27. The use of the word "therefore" cannot be ignored. It is clear that the
    application  was  refused  because   of   "persistent   and   continued
    deception".  That is not a reason for refusing anything under paragraph
    320(11).  The terms are set out above.  Paragraph 320(11) applies where
    there has been deception in a previous  application  and  that  is  not
    alleged against this claimant.

28. If it was the Entry Clearance Officer's case that the claimant  had  to
    be  refused  with  reference  to  paragraph  320(11)  because  he   had
    previously contrived in a significant way to frustrate the intention of
    the Immigration Rules by  being  an  illegal  entrant  and  there  were
    aggravating circumstances, namely his use of multiple  identities,  the
    refusal, whether or not justified, would have made sense.  As it is  it
    is a mess. That is neither the fault of the claimant nor the First-tier
    Tribunal. It would however be clear to the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,
    as it is clear to me, that the Entry Clearance  Officer's  reasons  for
    refusing entry are not made out.

29. The First-tier Tribunal found  that  the  claimant's  criminal  conduct
    could not be "treated as part of a programme of deception" and was  not
    contrary to paragraph  320(11).   Put  simply  it  rejected  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer's reason for relying on paragraph 320(11).

30. The Section headed EC-P.1.1(c) - S-EC; suitability  -  entry  clearance
    requirements gives two different reasons  for  refusal.  The  first  is
    unfounded.  It relies on S-EC2.5(a) but that was  amended  with  effect
    from 13 December 2012 to apply only to convictions within twelve months
    prior to the date on which the application was decided and there is  no
    such conviction.  The theft conviction relied on was in  January  2008.
    The second part relies on paragraph S-EC.2.2(b) which, read with  S-EC-
    2.1, provides that  an  application  will  normally  be  refused  where
    "there has been a failure to disclose material facts in relation to the
    application".  The facts relied upon are that he failed to disclose  an
    earlier application to remain in the United Kingdom  and  his  criminal
    conviction as well as his identities.  These omissions are said  to  be
    material  "because  they  show  repeated  attempts   to   deceive   the
    Immigration Authorities".  Something is material if it might have  made
    a difference to the outcome of the application.  Given that  the  facts
    were known to the authorities, I am not sure why they were  thought  to
    be material but I do not think that it can  be  said  that  failing  to
    disclose a criminal conviction when prompted by a direct  question  can
    ever be thought of as incapable of making a  difference.  Similarly  an
    earlier application form, even if the  application  was  voided,  might
    disclose points that assist the Entry Clearance Officer.

31. It follows that there was a failure to disclose material facts. In such
    circumstances refusal is normal but the First-tier Tribunal Judge  held
    that the failure had not "crossed the threshold  of  amounting  to  the
    kind of deception" that would breach the  requirements  of  the  rules.
    This approach was criticised and it is,  frankly,  clumsy  but  it  was
    clearly the judge's view that an  undisclosed  (but  now  spent)  theft
    conviction punished by a fine is not a proper  reason  to  prevent  the
    claimant joining his wife in the  United  Kingdom  (see,  for  example,
    paragraph 26 of the Determination).

32. The remaining  paragraphs  deal  with  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's
    finding that the claimant had not shown a genuine relationship and  had
    not shown that he  satisfied  the  accommodation  requirements  of  the
    Rules.

33. The First-tier Tribunal Judge was clearly satisfied that the  appellant
    was in a genuine and subsisting relationship and  gave  proper  reasons
    for that finding  which  have  not  been  criticised.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal thought that the facts did come within the scope of  paragraph
    320(11) of HC 395 and also found that paragraph S-EC.2.2(b) applied but
    decided that this was  a case where the normal consequence  should  not
    follow.  His essential point is that there is here was a valid  genuine
    marriage and the claimant should not be denied entry clearance  because
    of an offence in 2008 for which he  was  fined  and  some  equivocation
    about his  identity  in  circumstances  which  have  not  been  clearly
    established.

34. The First-tier Tribunal was also asked to consider the  application  of
    Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  This
    must be a mistaken reference to paragraph 117B(4)(b)  which  says  that
    little weight  should  be  given  to  "a  relationship  formed  with  a
    qualifying partner, that is established by a person at a time when  the
    person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully."

35.  Although  this  seemed  to  have   taxed   the   First-tier   Tribunal
    considerable, I do not see that  this  section  is  in  the  least  bit
    relevant to the application under appeal.   It  is  under  the  heading
    "Article 8 of the ECHR; public  interest  considerations"  and  Section
    117B is said to be "applicable in  all  cases".   However,  the  appeal
    before me has nothing to do with human rights. The appeal was against a
    decision to refuse under the Rules.

36. Whether it is lawful to proscribe the weight that can be attached to  a
    relationship in an article 8 balancing exercise by reference to when it
    started rather than its nature and quality remains to be seen. I do not
    consider it relevant to a decision such as  this  which  is  not  about
    "weighing" for the purposes of  "Article  8"  but  about  applying  the
    rules.

37. I have considered the grounds relied on by the Secretary of State.   As
    I have explained above, paragraph 320(11) was  not  relied  upon  in  a
    meaningful way by the Entry Clearance Officer and it is not the job  of
    a Judge to redraft the Entry Clearance Officer's  case.   Paragraph  S-
    EC.2.2(b) only applies to material omissions.  The Secretary  of  State
    made no effort to explain why the omissions were material.  The  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge was not particularly concerned about the omissions.

38. Clearly the Entry Clearance Officer  has  taken  a  dim  view  of  this
    claimant because he believed he was dealing with someone sentenced to a
    long term of imprisonment for people trafficking. The  Entry  Clearance
    Officer was wrong.  This  case  is  about  someone  with  a  now  spent
    conviction for theft from  a  motorcar  who  was  imprecise  about  his
    personal details and failed  to  disclose  that  he  had  made  a  void
    application.

39. The First-tier Tribunal was sympathetic to the appellant not giving his
    full details when he was detained by the police. This might be  thought
    generous but, as I have noted, the circumstances  of  the  use  of  his
    false name are not entirely clear. It is not a  perverse  or  otherwise
    unlawful finding.

40. Moving on to the second point, the First-tier Tribunal clearly  omitted
    to make any findings about the availability of accommodation. There was
    evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  from  the   estate   agent
    confirming that the claimant would be allowed to live at  the  proposed
    address provided he had proper immigration status.  This  was  seen  by
    Miss Figiwala who, realistically, could not argue against it.   Clearly
    the First-tier Tribunal meant to make a finding  about  this  and  just
    overlooked it.

41. As I indicate above, I do not understand why paragraph 117B is  thought
    to be relevant. This is not a balancing exercise  but  a  qualification
    under the Rules.

42. The First-tier Tribunal did err  in  law.  It  made  no  finding  about
    accommodation. I find that accommodation satisfying the requirements of
    the rules was available.

43. Having found no error in the findings that the First-tier Tribunal  did
    make, and having resolved  the  failure  to  make  any  findings  about
    accommodation in the claimant's failure it follows therefore  that  the
    claimant satisfies the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

44. Although I must allow the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's  appeal  to  the
    limited extent indicated above I substitute  a  decision  allowing  the
    claimant' appeal against the Entry Clearance Officer's decision.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 30 April 2015                  |

