
                                    [pic]

Upper-Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/14539/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On the 23rd January 2017           |On 1st February 2017               |

Before:
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY

Between:
                         MISS SHENIQUE KAYCIA GORDON
                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND
                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Slatter (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Clarke promulgated on the 20th July 2016, in  which  he
      dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  refusal  to
      grant entry clearance as a child of a person present  and  settled  in
      the United Kingdom under paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules and on
      human rights grounds.

   2. Within the Grounds of Appeal, which is  a  matter  of  record  and  is
      therefore not repeated in their entirety here, but which I have  fully
      taken account of, it is argued, inter-alia, that  the  learned  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge misdirected himself  in  law  when  assessing  the
      issue of "sole  responsibility",  and  that  although  the  Judge  had
      referred to the Upper Tribunal decision in the case of  TD  (paragraph
      297(i)(e): "Sole responsibility") Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049, the  Judge
      had failed to apply the ratio of the case when finding there had  been
      shared responsibility between the sponsor and the grandmother.  It  is
      argued that the Judge failed to acknowledge that  the  Rules  envisage
      that a parent who is settled in the UK may  have  sole  responsibility
      for the child's upbringing in another country. It is argued  that  the
      Judge relied upon attendance  by  the  grandmother  at  parent-teacher
      meetings  and  dealing  with  the  day-to-day  matters  such  as   the
      Appellant's  schooling,  at  [34]  of  the  decision  to   find   that
      responsibility was shared and it is argued that these were matters  of
      day-to-day responsibility that were not inconsistent with the  sponsor
      having "sole responsibility" for the  Appellant  for  the  purpose  of
      paragraph 297(i)(e) of the Immigration Rules.

   3. It was further argued within the Grounds  of  Appeal  that  the  Judge
      placed  undue  weight  on  the  financial  contribution  made  by  the
      grandmother between 2002 to 2009 during a period when the sponsor  was
      not working, when finding that the financial arrangements indicated  a
      sharing of  parental  responsibility  and  that  the  Judge  erred  in
      requiring sole financial responsibility to  last  for  any  particular
      duration. It was further argued that the Judge failed to take  account
      of the fact when relying upon absence of visits  before  2009  between
      the sponsor and the  Appellant,  that  the  sponsor  was  not  granted
      indefinite leave to remain until the 19th May 2009.

   4. In respect of Article 8 it is argued within the Grounds of Appeal that
      the Judge failed to properly apply the case of Secretary of State  for
      the Home Department v SS (Congo) [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387  and  had  not
      applied the test as to whether there was a  reasonably  arguable  case
      under Article 8 which had not already been  specially  dealt  with  by
      consideration of application of  the  substantive  provisions  of  the
      Rules. It is argued that the  sponsor  had  two  British  children  by
      different fathers with whom they  maintained  contact,  for  whom  she
      cared  for  in  the  UK  and  that  there  were  therefore  Article  8
      considerations which were not dealt  with  by  paragraph  297.  It  is
      further argued that the Judge misdirected himself when relying upon  a
      deportation case namely the Secretary of State for the Home Department
      v AQ (Nigeria) and Others [2015] EWCA Civ 250, which it is argued lead
      the Judge into error when approaching  proportionality  and  that  the
      Judge should have attached considerable weight to the  fact  that  the
      Appellant was said to be  unable  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the
      Immigration Rules. It is further  argued  that  the  Judge  materially
      erred when finding that the Appellant did not have  family  life  with
      her sponsor mother, and that there was a strong presumption in  favour
      of family life between mother and child and  that  inadequate  reasons
      were given for finding the Appellant did not enjoy  family  life  with
      her mother. It was further argued that  the  Secretary  of  State  had
      accepted  that  the  Appellant  could  be  adequately  maintained  and
      accommodated for the purpose of paragraph 297, and that therefore  the
      Judge had misdirected himself in finding that the  Appellant  was  not
      financially independent.

   5. Permission to appeal has been granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Shimmin on the 28th November 2016, he found that it was arguable  that
      the Judge misdirected himself as to  the  law  in  relation  to  'sole
      responsibility'  of   the   evidence   relating   thereto   and   that
      "furthermore, it is arguable the Judge misdirected himself in  respect
      of the law in relation  to  the  Article  8  assessment".  He  granted
      permission on those grounds.

   6. In the Rule 24 Reply filed on behalf  of  the  Respondent,  is  argued
      inter-alia,  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   direct   himself
      appropriate and the grounds amount to a  mere  disagreement  with  the
      Judge's findings and the Judge considered aspects of the Appellant and
      sponsor's account and  considered  the  evidence  in  the  round  when
      arriving at the decision of sole responsibility and the Judge did  not
      find the Appellant's claim to be wholly credible. It  was  said  these
      were conclusions the Judge was entitled to come to and the  Judge  was
      entitled to attach weight  to  the  financial  agreement  between  the
      Grandmother and the sponsor and  the  Grandmother's  involved  in  the
      Appellant's education and the absence of visits by the sponsor over  a
      seven-year period and the sponsor's  decision  to  remain  in  the  UK
      without a daughter. It is further argued within the Rule 24 Reply that
      the Judge's findings on Article 8 were open to  him  and  the  grounds
      simply attempt to reargue  the  case.  It  was  argued  there  was  no
      material error of law.

   7. Within the Appellant's skeleton argument, which again is a  matter  of
      record and is therefore not repeated in its entirety here, but which I
      have fully taken account of in reaching my  decision,  it  is  argued,
      again that the Judge failed to take account of the ratio in  the  case
      of TD (paragraph 297(i) (e): "sole responsibility") Yemen [2006] UKAIT
      00049 when finding that there  had  been  a  share  in  responsibility
      between the sponsor and Grandmother. It was argued the Judge erred  in
      treating the  grandmother's  day-to-day  care  for  the  Appellant  as
      meaning there being a lack  of  sole  responsibility  by  the  sponsor
      mother. Reference was made in the  grounds  to  paragraph  49  of  the
      decision in TD (Yemen) where it stated  that  "where  one  parent  has
      disappeared from the child's life and so relinquished or abdicated his
      (or her) responsibility for the child, the starting point must be that
      it is the remaining active parent who has  'sole  responsibility'  for
      the child. The fact that the remaining active  parent  is  in  the  UK
      makes no difference to this. Of course, the geographical separation of
      the parent from the child  means  day-to-day  care  of  the  child  do
      necessarily be undertaken by others-relatives  or  friends  abroad-who
      will look after the child...". The Tribunal continued at  [50]  in  TD
      (Yemen) defines that "the fact that day-to-day decision-making  for  a
      child-such as 'getting the child to school  safely  and  on  time,  or
      putting the child to bed, or seeing what it has for breakfast, or that
      it cleans the teeth, or has enough clothing and so forth' (Ramos,  per
      Dillon LJ at page  151)-rests  with  the  carers  abroad  and  is  not
      conclusive with the issue of 'sole responsibility'  ".  It  is  argued
      that the Judge placed undue weight upon the absence of words  such  as
      'sole'  or  'exclusive'  responsibility  in  the   letter   from   the
      Appellant's school dated the 19th May 2016 in respect  of  the  mother
      sponsor's involvement and  the  Judge  had  aligned  the  concepts  of
      parental responsibility and sole responsibility. It was further argued
      that the  Judge  misdirected  himself  in  requiring  the  sponsor  to
      establish that she carried the greater  financial  burden  since  2002
      through  to  the  date  of  the  decision  in  2014  and   that   sole
      responsibility did not need to lastly for any particular duration.  It
      was further argued that the Judge misapplied the case of Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department v SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA  Civ  387  when
      assessing the Appellant's Article 8 case and the test was not  whether
      or not the Appellant's family life had already been  considered  under
      the Rules but whether or not there was  "a  reasonably  arguable  case
      into  Article  8  which  had  not  been  specially  dealt   with,   by
      consideration of the application under substantive provisions  of  the
      Rules then in  considering  that  case  individual  interests  of  the
      applicant and others whose Article 8 rights are  an  issue  should  be
      balanced against the public interest, including as  expressed  in  the
      Rules, in order to make an assessment whether refusal to grant LTR  or
      LTE, as the case may be, is disproportionate  and  hence  unlawful  by
      virtue of Section 6 (1) of the Human Rights Act, read with Article 8".
      It is argued that the  question  as  to  whether  or  not  the  family
      comprising of a mother two children and minor Appellant could all live
      in Jamaica was not addressed at all.

Oral Submissions

   8. In his oral submissions, Mr Slatter relied upon his skeleton argument,
      and went through the same, reiterating the arguments made within  that
      skeleton argument. He argued that the Judge had misdirected himself in
      treating day-to-day care as conclusive of lack of sole  responsibility
      and that  the  Rules  envisaged  a  UK  based  parent  may  have  sole
      responsibility. He argued that the Judge requiring  the  Appellant  to
      have been financially supported over the years and there having been a
      lack of visits between 2002 and 2009 was wrong in law  and  the  Judge
      had erred in requiring sole responsibility to have  been  present  for
      any particular period of time. He  further  argued  the  Judge  placed
      undue weight upon the letter from the Appellant's school.  He  further
      argued the Judge had failed to explain his finding that no family life
      existed between the Appellant and  sponsor  and  that  the  Judge  had
      wrongly applied SS Congo, as he argued within the skeleton argument.

   9. He argued the Judge was wrong to say that the test was simply  whether
      or not family life had already been considered and that the Judge  had
      not considered the sponsor's sons in the UK and  whether  or  not  the
      mother and her family would be able to live in Jamaica  had  not  been
      considered.

  10. In his submissions on behalf of the Respondent, Mr Tufan  relied  upon
      the Rule 24 Notice. However, he conceded that the Judge had  erred  in
      requiring sole responsibility to  have  been  present  throughout  the
      entire period that the sponsor was in the UK, but  argued  that,  that
      error was not material. He argued that the Judge  had  considered  the
      evidence in the round and for a significant period there had been sole
      responsibility on the part of the grandmother. He argued that  if  the
      Appellant could not succeed under paragraph 297, then  she  could  not
      succeed under Article 8 and asked me to bear in mind that the  sponsor
      had entered into a voluntary arrangement, whereby she came to  the  UK
      leaving the Appellant in the care her parental Grandmother.

My Findings on Error of Law and Materiality

  11. In the case of TD (paragraph 297 (i) (e): "sole responsibility") Yemen
      [2006)  UKAIT  00049,  at  [28],  the   Tribunal   noted   that   sole
      responsibility for the purpose of paragraph 297 (i) (e) did  not  need
      to last any particular duration and the Tribunal noted that the  Court
      of Appeal in the case of Nmaju v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2001] INLR 26 had declined to place any gloss on the Rule.
      However, it is clear, having read First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Clarke's
      decision in its entirety, that although Judge Clarke indicated at [10]
      that the Tribunal must consider the circumstances appertaining at  the
      date of the refusal which was the 16th  October  2014,  in  fact,  the
      First-tier Tribunal Judge has  when  considering  the  issue  of  sole
      responsibility,  considered   that   it   was   necessary   for   sole
      responsibility to have existed throughout the  entire  time  that  the
      sponsor had been in the UK since March 2002. The Judge [21] had  found
      that the level of contact was not as frequent as claimed in 2002,  and
      took account of the fact that the sponsor was unable to obtain work in
      the United Kingdom from 2002 through to 2009 and was  homeless  for  a
      period of time and he was not persuaded the sponsor's  claim  to  have
      phone contact, as she claimed in evidence. When considering whether or
      not there was sole  responsibility,  she  did  not  accept  that  sole
      responsibility existed for the reasons which she set out  between  [28
      and 39] inclusive. In this regard, the Judge took account of the  fact
      that the paternal grandmother had borne the greater  financial  burden
      over the years for the maintenance of the Appellant  and  on  her  own
      evidence the sponsor said that she was  unable  to  obtain  employment
      between 2002 and 2009 and that during that time the financial  burdens
      borne by  the  grandmother.  At  [31]  the  Judge  accepted  that  the
      Appellant now contributed financially to the upkeep of  her  daughter,
      but found that it was clear there was a shared financial  contribution
      from the sponsor  and  Grandmother  towards  the  maintenance  of  the
      Appellant with the Grandmother solely maintaining the  Appellant  from
      2002 to 2009 and that the financial arrangements indicated  a  sharing
      of parental responsibility for the  Appellant.  In  this  regard,  the
      Judge further erred [38], in relying upon  the  fact  that  the  seven
      years the sponsor had not visited the Appellant in Jamaica or  applied
      to come to visit the sponsor in the UK between 2002 and 2009, as being
      a reason why sole responsibility did not exist as at the date  of  the
      refusal. The Judge in this regard found that  there  had  been  visits
      since  2009,  but  it  is  then  not  considered   the   circumstances
      appertaining as at the date of refusal in that regard.

  12. In that regard, the Judge has clearly  erred  in  requiring  that  the
      sponsor provide financially for the upkeep of her daughter  throughout
      the time she was in the UK in 2002 and in seemingly requiring  contact
      as  claimed  throughout  the  period.  The  Judge   has   not   looked
      specifically at the situation as at the date of the refusal.  In  this
      regard, although clearly the pre-existing circumstances and the extent
      to which the sponsor had  contributed  financially  for  her  daughter
      previously and had contact with her,  may  well  be  relevant  to  the
      question as to the circumstances appertaining as at the  date  of  the
      refusal, it was not a  requirement  that  the  sponsor  maintained  or
      contacted her daughter throughout the entire period.

  13. Further, the First-tier Tribunal Judge has erred at  [34]  in  relying
      upon the fact that the Appellant's  maternal  grandmother  dealt  with
      matters such as ensuring the Appellant had breakfast, going to school,
      something to eat during  the  day,  signing  permissions  that  school
      required, supervising homework on the basis she was looking after  the
      Appellant on a day-to-day basis, as being a reason why  responsibility
      was shared, and has failed to take into account  in  this  regard  the
      judgment of the Tribunal in the case of TD  (Yemen)  [49]  that  "work
      where  one  parent  has  disappeared  from  a  child's  life  and   so
      relinquished or abdicated (his) or (her) responsibility for the child,
      the starting point must be that it is the remaining active parent  who
      has 'sole responsibility' for the child. The fact that  the  remaining
      active parent is in the UK makes no difference to this. Of course, the
      geographical separation of the parent from the child means the day-to-
      day care of the child  would  necessary  be  under  taken  by  others-
      relatives or friends abroad-who will look after the child..." and  the
      finding of the Tribunal in TD (Yemen) at [50] that "the fact that day-
      to-day decision-making for a  child-such  as  'getting  the  child  to
      school safely and on time, putting the child to bed,  seeing  what  it
      has for breakfast,  or  that  it  cleans  its  teeth,  or  has  enough
      clothing, and so forth' (Ramos, per Dillon LJ at page 151)-rests  with
      the  carer  aboard  is  not  conclusive  with  the   issue   of   sole
      responsibility" and that therefore the Rules envisage  that  a  parent
      settled  in  the  UK  may  have  sole  responsibility  for  a  child's
      upbringing in another country, and what  is  in  fact  required  is  a
      consideration as to who makes the important decisions  in  respect  of
      the child's life, rather than simply consideration of who provided the
      day-to-day care.

  14. Further, the finding of First-tier Tribunal Judge Clarke at [49]  that
      "I am not persuaded that the Appellant has family life is envisaged by
      Article 8. This is because of refusal  of  entry  clearance  does  not
      interfere with family life between the sponsor and the  Appellant  but
      that simply maintains the status quo", is clearly wrong. The  question
      as to whether or not there is  a  disproportionate  interference  with
      family life is entirely separate from the questions as to  whether  or
      not  family   life   is   engaged.   Further,   in   considering   the
      proportionality question, the Judge attached  considerable  weight  to
      the fact that the Appellant was unable to meet the requirements of the
      Immigration Rules. However, for the reasons stated above the Judge has
      misapplied  the  Immigration   Rules,   and   thereby,   the   Judge's
      consideration of the balancing exercise for the purpose of Article  8,
      is similarly tainted by that error.

  15. I do find that these errors are material, in that it  cannot  be  said
      that the decision would necessarily have been the same, had the errors
      not have been made, given that the Judge has fundamentally  misapplied
      the test in respect of sole responsibility and the evidence  from  the
      sponsor and the  Appellant  was  that  there  had  been  a  change  in
      circumstances since 2009.

  16. The decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Clarke  therefore  does
      contain material errors of law and  is  set-aside  with  no  preserved
      findings of fact.



Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Clarke does contain material  errors  of
law and is set aside.

The matter is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  heard  before
any First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Clarke.

I make no order in respect of anonymity, no such order  having  been  sought
before me.


Signed
[pic]
Deputy Upper  Tribunal  Judge  McGinty                                 Dated
24th January 2017

