
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/14495/2013
     OA/14496/2013
     OA/14497/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 12 August 2014                             |On 15th Aug 2014             |
|Oral determination given following the hearing|                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            SAMUEL ABAYOMI SEGUN
                            MAYOWA WILLIAM SEGUN
                              LOLA LYDIA SEGUN

                                                                 Respondents
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr L Jegede, OJN Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Entry Clearance Officer who is  the  appellant
    in these proceedings.  For clarification, I shall refer to the  parties
    as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.  Applications were made by
    the three appellants who were born on 29 May 1995, 28 December 1997 and
    2 October 1996 respectively, for entry clearance under paragraph 297 of
    the Immigration Rules to settle with a parent in the UK,  namely  their
    mother.  The appellants are all citizens of Nigeria. Their applications
    were  made  on  21  March  2013  and  the  decisions  to  refuse  their
    applications were made on 31 May 2013.

 2. Their appeals were heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Callow on 27  May
    2014.  The judge allowed their appeals under the Immigration Rules.

 3. The decisions to refuse the applications were  based  in  part  on  the
    question of whether the appellants' father is  dead.   They  were  also
    based on the issue of 'sole  responsibility'.   Both  parties  however,
    agreed that if the question of the death of the appellants' father  was
    a matter that was the subject of sustainable conclusions by the  First-
    tier Tribunal, there is no need to consider the grounds advanced by the
    Entry Clearance Officer in relation to sole responsibility.  The  issue
    in the grounds in relation to the judge's reasons in terms of  adequate
    accommodation was a matter that  was  not  pursued  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent  before  me  and,  if  I  may  say,  that  was  an  entirely
    appropriate course in  the  light  of  the  judge's  findings  and  the
    evidence that was before him on that issue.

 4. If there is no error of law in the judge's finding in relation  to  the
    death of the appellant's father, or none that requires the decision  to
    be set aside, there is no  need  to  consider  further  the  ground  in
    relation to the judge's finding on sole responsibility.

 5. The notices of decision assert  that  in  a  previous  application  the
    appellants had stated that they did not know where their father was and
    they had at that time provided no documents to confirm his whereabouts.
     That implicitly  contrasts  with  the  present  position  whereby  the
    appellants assert that their father is dead, and the death  certificate
    provided in these proceedings. The Entry Clearance Officer remarked  on
    the ease with which documents of that kind are obtainable  in  Nigeria.
    These are matters that are said to undermine  the  reliability  of  the
    death certificate which was produced in respect of this application.

 6. Judge Callow heard evidence from the sponsor  and  from  the  sponsor's
    mother, the appellants' grandmother, Veronica Lloyd Oti.  At [8] of the
    determination the judge stated that the authenticity  or  otherwise  of
    the death  certificate  in  relation  to  the  appellants'  father  was
    "traversed" at the hearing before him. He then referred to the evidence
    that was given in relation to that  death  certificate.   He  noted  at
    [8(a)] the evidence that it was obtained by the appellants' grandmother
    in a year that she could not remember (possibly 1978) and that she  was
    uncertain as to the correct names of the appellants' father.

 7.  The  judge  further  noted  that  a  copy  of  the  first  appellant's
    application form submitted on-line on 28 February 2012, that is to  say
    a previous application, simply recorded the  personal  details  of  the
    father and made no reference to his whereabouts.  The judge then  heard
    evidence  about  the  possible  source  for  the  assertion  that   the
    appellants did not know the whereabouts of their father.

 8. In submissions on behalf of the appellant before Judge Callow,  it  was
    said that in the 2012 refusal there had been no mention of  the  father
    but that in the present decisions to refuse these applications that had
    been "misconstrued" in terms that it was said that the  appellants  had
    previously stated in their application form  that  they  did  not  know
    where their father was.  It was submitted to Judge Callow that  it  was
    this unsubstantiated allegation that led to  the  authenticity  of  the
    death certificate being challenged, amplified  by  the  assertion  that
    such documents were easily obtained in Nigeria.

 9. The judge recorded the submissions made on behalf of the respondent  in
    terms of the death certificate, those submissions being to  the  effect
    that no weight could be attached to it.   The  judge  dealt  with  this
    issue directly at [14] whereby he stated as follows:

         "Despite some imperfections in the  grandmother's  evidence  as  to
         when she obtained the death certificate in issue  and  the  correct
         names of the appellants' father, I am satisfied that she  has  told
         the truth about the death of the appellants' father."

10. The judge went on to say that certainly no such  person  has  played  a
    role in the upbringing of the children. He referred to  the  degree  of
    devotion and affection for the appellants with  which  the  appellants'
    grandmother had acted, and he went on to find that the sponsor too  was
    a credible witness.

11. Mr Avery referred me to the notes of hearing  made  by  the  Presenting
    Officer at the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  in  order  to
    support the assertion that the judge's use of the word  "imperfections"
    in the grandmother's evidence was not an accurate  characterisation  of
    the evidence that she gave in the light  of  the  deficiencies  in  her
    evidence.

12. However, it is clear the First-tier Tribunal Judge was best  placed  to
    make a decision on the credibility of the witnesses  that  he  saw  and
    heard. He expressed  in  clear  terms  that  he  found  both  witnesses
    credible.  The issue of the death certificate was not only canvassed in
    evidence but was the subject of submissions which are recorded  by  the
    First-tier Judge.  It was, and is,  unquestionably  a  matter  for  the
    judge seized of the appeal to make his or her  own  assessment  of  the
    credibility of witnesses based on the  evidence  that  is  before  that
    judge.  I am satisfied that Judge Callow was entitled to  come  to  the
    view that he did, for the reasons that he gave.

13. In those circumstances, having concluded that the appellants' father is
    dead, the judge did not need to go on to consider  the  issue  of  sole
    responsibility. He did however do so, and his conclusion in that regard
    is the subject of a separate challenge, as I  have  already  indicated.
    It is not necessary for me to consider that challenge  any  further  in
    the light of my conclusion that  there  is  no  error  in  the  judge's
    determination in terms of the reliability of the evidence of the  death
    certificate and consequently the death of the appellants' father.  That
    conclusion was one which was sufficient to allow the judge to  find  in
    the appellants' favour in terms of paragraph 297(i)(d) of  HC  395  (as
    amended).

14. It follows therefore, that I am not satisfied that there is  any  error
    of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and the  decision  to
    allow the appeal under the Immigration Rules stands.






Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek
                                                 13/08/14

