

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Numbers: OA/14356/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                               |Determination           |
|                                                   |Promulgated             |
|On  9th July 2014                                  |On 14th July 2014       |
|                                                   |                        |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                  Between:

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 ARFOZ HASAN
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:          Ms N Hashmi, instructed by IEC Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    I shall refer to the  parties  as  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The
      Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 10th March 1940. Her appeal
      against the refusal of entry  clearance  was  allowed,  on  Article  8
      grounds, by the First-tier Tribunal  in  a  determination  dated  17th
      April 2014. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal.




2.    Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  McDade
      on 19th May 2014 on the grounds that it was arguable  that  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Wellesley-Cole had erred in law in finding  that  there
      were compelling circumstances in the Appellant's  appeal  outside  the
      criteria laid down in Appendix FM.

3.    Mr Duffy relied on the grounds of appeal and  submitted  that  on  the
      facts of  the  case,  the  appeal  should  have  been  dismissed.  The
      Appellant could not succeed under the Immigration Rules and there were
      no additional factors to  take  into  account.  The  Judge  failed  to
      identify anything exceptional in this case and therefore Article 8 was
      not engaged. The Immigration Rules would be otiose if the  appeal  was
      allowed. The matters referred to at paragraph 18  did  not  amount  to
      compelling  or  compassionate  circumstances  not  recognised  by  the
      Immigration Rules. There was no evidence before the Judge to show that
      the Appellant could not get medical treatment and assistance with  her
      daily needs in Pakistan.

4.    Ms Hashmi  submitted  that  the  Rules  were  quite  prescriptive  and
      Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct  approach)  [2013]  UKUT  640
      (IAC) acknowledged the existence of  compelling  circumstances  for  a
      matter to be considered outside the Rules. The  Judge  had  considered
      all relevant factors including the Appellant's ill health and the fact
      that the Appellant's daughter was unable to assist her. The Respondent
      had failed to follow her own Immigration Directorate Instructions  and
      the Judge thoroughly analysed all the  individual  circumstances.  The
      Judge's finding that those circumstances were compelling was  open  to
      her on the evidence. The Judge had considered the medical evidence and
      the evidence that the Appellant's maid had stole  from  her.  She  had
      looked at matters outside the Rules,  e.g.  the  Appellant  could  not
      leave the house unaided. These factors were sufficient to  render  the
      refusal of entry clearance disproportionate.


Findings and conclusions

5.    At paragraph 11 of the determination, the Judge found that looking  at
      matters in the round, the Appellant did not satisfy  the  requirements
      of the Immigration  Rules  because  she  could  manage  some  everyday
      chores, although she had some difficulty cooking meals;  she  did  not
      have a maid because the last one stole from her.

6.    At paragraph 12, the Judge  found  that  "even  on  the  most  liberal
      interpretation of the Rules, the Appellant does  not  appear  to  meet
      them because her daughter in the past did help her and  is  not  in  a
      position to do so now and she has failed to make out her case that she
      has a disability requiring long-term care to perform  everyday  tasks,
      although she has some age related illnesses as a 73  years  old."  The
      Judge concluded that the Appellant had not fulfilled the  requirements
      of the Immigration Rules.


7.    At paragraph 17, the Judge found that the medical  report,  which  was
      not  before  the  Respondent,  showed  that  the  Appellant's  medical
      problems were present at the date of decision. This coupled  with  her
      son's oral testimony of her worsening health and the effect  on  other
      family members of being apart from the Appellant, shifted the  balance
      in the Appellant's favour because all of the difficulties set  out  in
      the grounds of appeal rebutted the Respondent's concerns.

8.    At paragraph 18, the Judge found "I have accorded considerable  weight
      to the public interest, but  find  that  this  is  outweighed  by  the
      compassionate, compelling circumstances of this  73  years  old  lady,
      living alone in a country where she  is  afraid  to  leave  the  house
      unaided, who effectively has sight in one eye, walking  with  a  stick
      who needed a wheelchair when she travelled to England where she  lived
      for two years and is totally  financially  dependant  and  emotionally
      [sic] I find on her sponsoring son. It follows from everything I  have
      said that having regard to the case of Huang [2005]  EWCA  Civ  105  I
      allow this matter under Article 8 of the European Convention of  Human
      rights."

9.    The Judge appears to have allowed the appeal on the basis that  there
      was  additional  evidence  which  was  not  before   the   Respondent.
      Unfortunately, this evidence did not show  that  the  Appellant  could
      satisfy the  Immigration  Rules  and  did  not  amount  to  compelling
      circumstances.  It  was  open  to  the  Appellant  to  make  a   fresh
      application and submit further evidence.

10.   I find that the Judge failed to identify compelling circumstances not
      recognised by the Rules in allowing the appeal under  Article  8.  The
      Judge's findings at  paragraphs  17  and  18  were  not  substantially
      different from her findings at  paragraph  11  and  12.  None  of  the
      factors relied on at paragraphs 17 or 18 were not already provided for
      in the Immigration Rules. In allowing the appeal under Article 8,  the
      Judge materially erred in law.

11.   The Appellant had failed to provide sufficient  evidence  to  satisfy
      the Immigration Rules. The medical evidence  did  not  show  that  the
      Appellant's physical or mental condition  meant  that  she  could  not
      perform everyday tasks and there was  insufficient  evidence  to  show
      that she was unable to obtain the required level of care  in  Pakistan
      (E-ECDR 2.4 and 2.5 of  Appendix  FM  and  paragraphs  34  and  35  of
      Appendix FM-SE).

12.   There were no compelling circumstances  not  sufficiently  recognised
      under the Immigration Rules. The refusal of entry  clearance  did  not
      breach Article 8 of the  European  Convention  of  Human  Rights.  The
      Respondent's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.


13.   I find that the Judge erred in  law  in  allowing  the  appeal  under
      Article 8 and I set the decision, dated 17th April 2014, to allow  the
      appeal on human rights grounds aside and remake  it  as  follows:  The
      Appellant's appeal against the refusal of entry clearance is dismissed
      on human rights grounds.






Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
11th July 2014
