
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/14798/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham, Sheldon Court              |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 11th July 2014                               |On 21st July 2014          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS



                                   Between

                               mr samuel quaye
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E Rutherford (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Snape, promulgated on 22nd April 2014,  following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham Sheldon Court on 7th April 2014.  In the determination,  the
    judge allowed the appeal of Mr Samuel Quaye.   The  Respondent  applied
    for, and was granted permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,  and
    thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Ghana who was born on 20th February 1973.
     He appealed against the decision of the Respondent Secretary of  State
    dated 18th July 2013, refusing revocation of the deportation order made
    against the Appellant on 10th February 2009  and  implemented  on  19th
    February 2009, on the basis of the Appellant's alleged Article  8  ECHR
    rights, which the Appellant claimed  to  have  been  infringed  by  the
    decision against him.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim, with respect to his Article 8 rights, is that he
    is now married to a British citizen, Ms Doreen Abu, and the couple have
    a child who was born in April 2013.  The Appellant would not be able to
    relocate to Ghana, because his wife could not go back there, as she  is
    settled in this country.  He had discussed this matter  with  his  wife
    (paragraph 8).

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge had regard to all the facts before him.  He  noted  that  the
    Appellant's wife could not relocate to Ghana because she was completing
    a nursing course which would  not  finish  until  2015  (paragraph  8).
    Although she had married  the  Appellant  knowing  about  his  criminal
    convictions she was not aware that the effect  of  the  deportation  is
    that he would be banned for ten  years  from  re-entering  the  country
    (paragraph 14).  The judge  heard  submissions  from  the  Respondent's
    representative  that the Appellant had married the Sponsor knowing that
    he would be removed and would be illegible to return to the UK for  ten
    years (paragraph 19).  Moreover,  the  birth  of  the  Appellant's  and
    Sponsor's child was planned deliberately and the parties had a child in
    the hope that "it would strengthen  his  claims  of  returning  to  the
    United Kingdom" (paragraph 20).

 5. On the Appellant's  behalf  himself,  there  were  submissions  by  his
    Counsel that the Appellant had already been out  of  the  UK  for  five
    years and there was no evidence he had committed further offences,  and
    the offence that he had committed involved the use of a false  passport
    in order to obtain employment.  There were no allegations of  drug  use
    or of violence or of theft (paragraph 22).

 6. The judge went on to consider the position with respect  to  Article  8
    and clearly and carefully laid down the applicable law in  relation  to
    Article 8 (see paragraph 28).  The  judge  also  methodically  followed
    through the steps that have to be applied with  respect  to  Article  8
    (see paragraphs 29 to 31).

 7. Proper consideration was given by the judge to the  best  interests  of
    the child (paragraph 33).  Furthermore, the judge fully recognised that
    "the Appellant  and  the  Sponsor  are  architects  of  their  personal
    situations by deciding to marry whilst the Appellant was subject  to  a
    ten year ban in returning  to  the  United  Kingdom..."(paragraph  35).
    However, all things considered as far as Article 8 was  concerned,  the
    balance of considerations fell in favour of  the  Appellant  (paragraph
    37).

Grounds of Application

 8. In the Grounds of Appeal, it was submitted that  the  judge  failed  to
    provide adequate reasons for her decision and failed to  give  adequate
    consideration to the Secretary of State's public interest in the  field
    of deportation.

 9. On 22nd May 2014, permission to appeal was granted by the Tribunal.

Submissions

10. At the hearing before me on 11th  July  2014  Mr  Mills,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Respondent, submitted that the judge fell into  error  in
    two  fundamental  ways.   First,  the  application  was  refused  under
    paragraphs 390 and 391 of HC 395, and yet the judge did  not  refer  to
    these provisions at all.

11. Second, insofar as the judge did refer  to   Article  8,  she  did  not
    consider the balance of considerations,  in  the  specific  context  of
    deportation proceedings, where the Secretary of State's  interest  with
    respect to the deterrence of foreign criminals and  the  expression  of
    firm disapproval of criminality, is a vital consideration.  The latter,
    indeed, was referred to  in  the  Grounds  of  Appeal   itself  by  the
    Secretary of State in the case of Masih [2012]  UKUT.   This  makes  it
    clear that it is not enough to say that there is  no  further  risk  of
    reoffending.  That is not the sole issue.

12. Given these errors, Mr Mills submitted that I should make a finding  of
    an error of law and remit this matter back to be  reheard  again  by  a
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.

13. For her part, Ms Rutherford submitted that although  it  was  the  case
    that the judge had not expressly referred to the "public interest" with
    respect to matters arising from deportation,  nevertheless,  the  judge
    was alive to the issues  before  her,  as  was  clear  from  the  final
    sentence at paragraph 37 which read as  follows:  "In  considering  the
    issue of proportionality I have also taken into account the Appellant's
    offences,  although  serious,  did  not  involve  crimes  of  violence,
    terrorism or drug use" (paragraph 37).  Therefore, the judge  did  take
    into account the nature of the offences as being serious  and  properly
    evaluated the crime.  It was unnecessary for the  judge  to  cite  case
    law.

14. In reply, Mr Mills submitted that, although it was clearly correct that
    it was unnecessary for a judge to recite the case names,  nevertheless,
    regard had to be given to the public interest in the particular context
    of deportation proceedings.  This had not happened.

15. As an indication of how important the issue was, he handed up the Court
    of Appeal judgment in SS (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 550, where  Laws  LJ
    explained how even children's interests do not necessarily outweigh the
    public interest in favour of  removal  or  deportation,  which  may  be
    stronger in particular circumstances (see paragraph 45).



Error of Law

16. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside  this  decision.   I  come  to  this
    conclusion notwithstanding the judge's otherwise very comprehensive and
    clear determination.  My reasons are as follows.

17. First, the refusal decision was predicated on the  basis  of  paragraph
    390 and 391 of HC 395.  The judge does not give consideration to these.



18. Second, whilst it is clearly the case that the judge does refer to "the
    Appellant's offences  although  serious,  did  not  involve  crimes  of
    violence..." (paragraph 37), nevertheless, this is not enough  to  deal
    fully with the  weight  of  public  interest  considerations  that  the
    Secretary of State must bring to bear in cases of this kind.  The  case
    of Masih [2012] UKUT is already cited in the Grounds of Appeal.   There
    are other cases as well.  (See Lee).

19. In the circumstances, it seems to me that this matter must be  remitted
    back to the First-tier Tribunal, after the decision of the judge  below
    being set aside, so that it can be considered on the basis of the range
    of cases that nowadays attest to the importance of the public  interest
    of the state when it comes  to  dealing  with  criminality  of  foreign
    nationals.

Decision

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  This matter is remitted  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in Birmingham to be heard by a judge other than Judge Snape at
    the first available opportunity.

21. No anonymity order is made.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 21st July 2014

