
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/14843/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 18 August 2014                             |On 3 September 2014          |
|Prepared 18 August 2014                       |                             |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - BEIRUT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            SAMIRA YOUSIF MAREEB

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C McIndoe, Solicitor of Latitude Law


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   In this determination the Appellant is referred to as the ECO  and  the
    Respondent is referred to as the Claimant.

2.   The Claimant, a national of Iraq, date of birth 1 July  1948,  appealed
    against the Respondent's decision, dated  17  August  2012,  to  refuse
    entry clearance as a dependent relative with reference to paragraph 317
    of the Immigration Rules HC 395 as amended (the Rules).

3.   Refusal was with reference to whether or not the  Claimant  was  mainly
    or wholly financially dependent upon the Sponsor, her son, present  and
    settled in the United Kingdom, with reference to paragraph 317(iii) and
    as to her age, with reference to paragraph 317(i)(e).

4.   The Entry Clearance Officer's decision was  appealed  and  that  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge R Callender Smith who, on  6  May
    2014, allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

5.   The issue of the Appellant's age was resolved and therefore  no  longer
    remained an issue as a result of Entry Clearance Manager's review.  The
    only issue remaining was whether or not  the  Claimant  was  wholly  or
    mainly dependent upon the UK Sponsor.

6.   The judge found as a fact that  approximately  70%  of  the  Claimant's
    financial support came from or was sourced from a foundation called Al-
    Khoie and that the balance of 30% or thereabouts came from  the  pocket
    of the UK Sponsor.  Nevertheless for other reasons the outcome  is  the
    same.

7.   For reasons which the judge  gave,  with  which  I  do  not  agree,  he
    concluded that although the  money  was  sourced  and  the  percentages
    identified, they were to be treated as funds from the UK Sponsor.

8.   The grounds in the skeleton argument  correctly  analyse  the  position
    and Mr Tarlow accepts it, although he does not have formal instructions
    to do so and maintains reliance upon the reasons given in the notice of
    immigration decision.

9.   The case law relied upon is the decision in Ahmed Mahad  and  Others  v
    ECO [2009] UKSC 16 in which the Supreme Court  set  out  the  following
    conclusions at paragraph 35:

         "This paragraph is concerned simply to establish the financial link
         between the dependent relative  abroad  and  the  relative  settled
         here.  Provided only that the relative abroad is getting  funds  on
         which he is wholly or mainly dependent and which he  would  not  be
         getting save for his relative present and settled in the UK that is
         sufficient.  It is not necessary for the funds ever  to  have  been
         part of the settled relative's own personal resources."

10.  And at paragraph 56 it was stated:

         "Financial dependency for  the  purposes  of  the  Rule  (paragraph
         317(iii)) is established by the fact of the payment by the resident
         relative.  It is not displaced from that condition  simply  because
         the money for the payment comes from a different source."

11.  It was accepted by the judge that the  Al-Khoie  foundation  could   no
    longer make payments to the Claimant in Syria where she  lives  because
    they had been  forced to withdraw for safety reasons from the  country.
    They therefore used the present and  settled  relative  in  the  United
    Kingdom to be the conduit of financial support for the Appellant  which
    would not have happened if the Sponsor had not been present in UK.

12.  The judge found at paragraphs  15  and  16  of  the  Determination  and
    Reasons that: "... The foundation could no longer operate there safely"
    and "The foundation would supply him with the financial support for his
    mother and he arranged for people going to Syria to pass this money  on
    to her".  Therefore there is, as is rightly  pointed  out,  nothing  to
    indicate that the foundation's offer of support was not genuine,  would
    not continue or that it was somehow unreliable.

13.  Further relying upon Mahad, Mr McIndoe argued that there is  sufficient
    evidence to show that the Appellant is  wholly  or  mainly  financially
    dependent on the moneys passing through to her by her son.   Therefore,
    relying on Mahad, it was clear that the nature of the funding  met  the
    requirements of the Rules.  I agree with that submission and  it  would
    have been more helpful if the judge had expressed it with reference  to
    that case law.

14.  I find that there is no sustainable  argument  against  that  evidence.
    The evidence before the judge was that the foundation were committed to
    support for the Claimant and that she would not have been and could not
    have been wholly  or  mainly  financially  dependent  solely  upon  the
    Sponsor's own money.

15.  In the light of the judge's findings it seems to me that the judge  was
    entitled to reach the view he did.  I find the original  Tribunal  made
    no error of law even if the reasoning was not as clear as it could have
    been.

16.  The appeal by the ECO is dismissed.

17.  The original Tribunal's decision stands.

Anonymity Order

18.  No anonymity order was made nor is one requested or necessary.



Signed                                  Date 27 August 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

