
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/14206/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined at Field House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 September 2019                  |On 12 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                ARUN DASGUPTA
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (New Delhi)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R De Mello and Mr T Muman, both of Counsel,
                    instructed by JM Wilson Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Sheldon, of Counsel, instructed by the
                    Government Legal Department, and Mr A Henderson (in
                    respect of the written submissions dated 11 January
                    2019)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This appeal has an unfortunate procedural history and is tinged  by
         the death of the appellant on 24 September 2018.  The  promulgation
         of this decision has been delayed due to the relative complexity of
         the  issues  and  other  professional  commitments,  for  which   I
         apologise.

Background

      2. The appellant was a national of India,  born  in  1930.  He  was  a
         retired businessman and widower, his  wife  having  died  in  2007.
         Since then he had visited his British citizen  daughter  (Dr  [SD],
         hereafter 'the sponsor')  and  her  family  (her  husband  and  two
         children) almost annually. He developed a strong relationship  with
         his daughter and his grandchildren.

      3. On 29 March 2013 the appellant applied for entry clearance to  come
         to the UK as the Adult Dependent Relative (ADR) of his sponsor. The
         application was refused in a decision made by the  Entry  Clearance
         Officer of New Delhi (the respondent), dated 27  June  2013,  under
         Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules. An appeal to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal was dismissed under the Immigration Rules but  allowed  on
         grounds that the decision breached Article 8 ECHR.

      4. Both parties cross-appealed the decision of the Judge of the First-
         tier Tribunal R R Hopkins (FtJ), the respondent on the  basis  that
         the FtJ erred in law by allowing the appeal under  Article  8,  the
         appellant on the basis that the FtJ should have allowed the  appeal
         under the Immigration Rules and decided that the ADR rule  was,  at
         least  in  part,  not  in  accordance  with  the  law  and/or   was
         incompatible with Article 8 ECHR. The grounds of  appeal  contended
         that the ADR rules were  ultra  vires,  irrational,  unlawful,  and
         disproportionate and incompatible with Article 8, that they  failed
         to provide for the best interests of children, that they were based
         on an  inadequate  consultation  process,  and  that  they  led  to
         discriminatory  consequences  based  on  race,  religion,   ethnic,
         cultural and  national  origins  in  respect  of  those  culturally
         obliged to care for their adult dependent relatives.

      5. In  granting  the  appellant  permission  to  appeal  a  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge stated,

             "It  seems  to  me  that  the  Appellant's   submissions,   in
             suggesting that the Upper Tribunal could  deal  simultaneously
             with the case as a judicial review  (deploying  a  High  Court
             Judge), has  [sic]  not  only  technical  obstacles  (no  such
             application having been made) but overlooks that  a  challenge
             to the vires of the  Rules  is  excluded  by  the  Lord  Chief
             Justice's Practice Direction governing  UT  judicial  reviews.
             However, there is some authority for the proposition  that  in
             exercising  its  statutory  'in  accordance  with   the   law'
             jurisdiction ... the Upper Tribunal in deciding appeals cannot
             exclude issues going to vires."

The appeal within the Upper Tribunal

      6. The Upper Tribunal heard the appeal and cross-appeal on 3  December
         2015. The parties' submissions on the appellant's cross-appeal were
         not completed and the Upper Tribunal was informed that another half
         day was required for this  purpose.  A  further  hearing  date  (21
         January 2016) was chosen to enable the parties  to  complete  their
         submissions.

      7. By way of directions dated  7  December  2015  the  Upper  Tribunal
         informed the parties of its view that the respondent's  appeal  was
         severable from the appellant's appeal and  that,  while  they  were
         clearly  inter-related,  there  was  no  inter-dependency.   Having
         considered the  overriding  objective  in  the  Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (the Procedure  Rules),  including  the
         factor of delay, and having regard to the pending  application  for
         permission to proceed with a judicial review of the  lawfulness  of
         the ADR rules in the Administrative Court, and  taking  account  of
         the appellant's advanced age, his deteriorating health and the ages
         of his grandchildren, the Upper Tribunal decided to  determine  the
         respondent's appeal first. The hearing listed for 21  January  2016
         was converted into a Case Management Hearing  and  the  29  January
         2016 was listed as the hearing date to complete the submissions  on
         the appellant's cross-appeal.

      8. Having heard  full  submissions  in  respect  of  the  respondent's
         appeal, and having assessed those submissions, the  Upper  Tribunal
         was satisfied that the FtJ was entitled, on the particular facts of
         the case, to find the existence of Article 8  family  life  between
         the  appellant  and  his  daughter  and  grandchildren.  The  Upper
         Tribunal was also satisfied that the FtJ properly directed  himself
         in accordance  with  the  applicable  legal  principles,  that  his
         conclusion in respect  of  Article  8  was  supported  by  adequate
         reasons,  and  that  his  finding  that  exceptional  circumstances
         existed that rendered the entry clearance decision disproportionate
         under Article 8 was sustainable in law. The respondent's appeal was
         consequently dismissed in a decision  promulgated  on  11  December
         2015. The respondent did not seek  permission  to  appeal  and  the
         appellant was granted limited leave to enter the UK and did so.

      9. On 16 December 2015 the Administrative Court granted permission  to
         BritCits (a charity set up to represent the interests  of  sponsors
         and  applicants  affected  by  the  Immigration  Rules  on   family
         migration introduced in July 2012 and  to  campaign  to  revoke  or
         alter them) to proceed with a judicial review in which it sought to
         quash  the  new  ADR  provisions  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   In
         directions issued on 20 January 2016 the hearings listed for 21 and
         29 January 2016 were vacated in light of the grant of permission in
         the BritCits judicial review. As the BritCits case also concerned a
         challenge to the lawfulness of the ADR Rules and the  compatibility
         of the Immigration Rules with Article  8,  the  appellant's  cross-
         appeal was stayed pending the  handing  down  of  judgment  by  the
         Administrative Court.

     10. On 20 April 2016 Mr Justice  Mitting  gave  an  extempore  judgment
         dismissing the judicial review claim on all  grounds  (BritCits,  R
         (on  the  application  of)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2016] EWHC 956 (Admin)).  Mr  Justice  Mitting  however
         granted permission to appeal to  the  Court  of  Appeal.  Following
         directions  issued  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in   September   2016
         concerning the continued prosecution of the appeal, and in light of
         the parties' responses and the impending decisions of  the  Supreme
         Court  in  a  trio  of  cases  involving  the  status  of  the  new
         Immigration Rules (Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC 60, Agyarko  [2017]  UKSC
         11, and MM (Lebanon) [2017] UKSC 10), the Upper  Tribunal  directed
         that the cross-appeal would be listed after the handing down of the
         Supreme  Court  judgments.  The  directions   also   required   the
         appellant's skeleton argument to include the precise formulation of
         his suggested interpretation of ECDR.2.5 by reference to s.3 of the
         Human Rights Act 1998.

     11. Following the handing down of the Supreme Court decisions the cross-
         appeal was listed for 17 May 2017.  The  Court  of  Appeal  however
         heard the appeal brought by BritCits in early May 2017. The hearing
         listed for 17 May 2017 was therefore  vacated  and,  in  directions
         issued on 9  May  2017,  the  Upper  Tribunal  indicated  that  the
         remaining cross-appeal would be listed for  hearing  on  the  first
         available date after the Court of Appeal handed down its judgement.
         The directions also noted that the  appellant's  skeleton  argument
         was to include the appellant's precise formulation of his suggested
         interpretation of ECDR.2.5 by reference to s.3 of the Human  Rights
         Act 1998.

     12. The Court of Appeal handed  down  its  judgment  on  24  May  2017,
         dismissing  BritCits's  appeal  on  all  grounds  (BritCits  v  The
         Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  368;
         hereafter 'BritCits'). The appellant  however  requested  that  the
         cross-appeal before the Upper Tribunal be stayed  as  BritCits  had
         lodged an application for permission to  appeal  with  the  Supreme
         Court. In directions issued on  1  August  2017  the  parties  were
         required to inform the Upper Tribunal when a decision  was  reached
         by the Supreme Court, and, if the Supreme Court refused permission,
         the appellant was to inform  the  Upper  Tribunal  within  14  days
         whether he wished to  proceed  with  his  appeal  and,  if  so,  to
         particularise in detail the grounds for so doing.

     13. The Supreme Court refused permission to appeal in the BritCits case
         on 14 December 2017. By email dated 20 April 2018  the  appellant's
         legal representative indicated  that  he  wished  to  continue  the
         appeal "... on the section 55 ground" (a reference to s.55  of  the
         Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009,  which  requires
         decision-makers to take into account the welfare and best interests
         of children). The representatives wished to  "...  reserve  [their]
         position in respect of  the  other  grounds  in  respect  of  which
         BritCits lost." On 10 May 2018 the Upper Tribunal issued  a  notice
         for a Case Management Review Hearing (CMRH) to be held  on  8  June
         2018, directing that the  parties  were  expected  to  identify  in
         detail the issues in contention and to formulate with precision the
         arguments they intended to advance at the substantive hearing.  The
         appellant's representative sought an adjournment of the CMRH citing
         the unavailability of counsel, but this was refused. There  was  no
         attendance by any representative on behalf of the appellant at  the
         CMRH hearing.  In  response  to  directions  issued  by  the  Upper
         Tribunal following the CMRH, in which the Tribunal  indicated  that
         it was considering determining the appeal on the basis  of  written
         submissions, the appellant's counsel provided a Note formulating in
         outline the legal arguments  to  be  advanced  on  the  appellant's
         behalf and explaining why an oral hearing was necessary. The  Upper
         Tribunal consequently listed the appeal for hearing on  12  October
         2018,  but  this  was  subsequently  adjourned  due  to   counsel's
         unavailability.

     14. By letter dated 5 October  2018,  the  appellant's  representatives
         informed the Upper Tribunal that the appellant passed  away  on  24
         September 2018. The letter spoke of the "compelling" facts  of  the
         case and the representative's awareness of many applicants who were
         "shut out from accessing this Rule", and that, as the  cross-appeal
         raised a number of important points of law, the appeal  should  not
         be considered academic.  Although  referring  to  the  strength  of
         feeling the case generated with the appellant's family there was no
         further  evidence  from  the  family  and  no  details  as  to  how
         instructions could be taken to continue the appeal given  that  the
         appellant had died.

     15. In  directions  issued  on  16  October  2018  the  Upper  Tribunal
         indicated that, in light of the appellant's  death,  it  was  again
         considering  determining  the  appeal  on  the  basis  of   written
         submissions to be provided by the parties.  On  the  same  day  the
         appellant's representatives agreed to have the appeal determined on
         the basis of written submissions only, and  the  respondent  agreed
         the same on 18 October 2018. In directions dated 7  November  2018,
         but issued on 13 November 2018, the Upper Tribunal directed that it
         would determine the appeal on the basis of written  submissions  as
         agreed by the parties,  and  set  out  a  timetable  requiring  the
         appellant's representatives  to  serve  their  written  submissions
         within  14  days  of  the  sending  of  the  directions,  with  the
         respondent serving its submissions within 14 days  thereafter,  and
         the  appellant's  representatives  to  file  and  response  to  the
         respondent's written submissions within 7 days of the  respondent's
         deadline. The Upper Tribunal's directions also stated,

             "The written submissions from both parties  must  engage  with
             and consider the relevance of the death of the appellant,  the
             basis upon which the appellant's legal representative are able
             to take instructions and continue with  the  appeal,  and  any
             relevant provision of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
             Rules 2008."

     16. A request from the appellant's legal representatives to extend  the
         time for serving their written submissions until  7  December  2018
         was refused by the Upper Tribunal, and it was only on  17  December
         2018  that  the  appellant's  representatives  filed  the   written
         submissions upon which they relied,  which  consisted  of  Mr  Tony
         Muman's skeleton argument before the First-tier Tribunal  dated  29
         July 2014, the skeleton argument dated  15  October  2015  and  the
         speaking Note dated 16 November 2015, both of which  were  prepared
         by Mr Ramby De Mello and Mr Muman for the Upper Tribunal hearing on
         3 December 2015, and a document entitled  'Written  Submissions  on
         Behalf of the Cross-Appellant', dated 14 December 2018, prepared by
         Mr De Mello and Mr Muman.

     17. Given the late service of the written submissions,  the  respondent
         was granted permission to lodge his response by  14  January  2019.
         The respondent's submissions, drafted  by  Mr  Alasdair  Henderson,
         were lodged on 11 January 2019. There were no  further  submissions
         from the appellant's representatives.

The decision of the respondent, so far as material

     18. The respondent noted that the appellant's application for clearance
         to enter the United Kingdom had been made  as  an  adult  dependant
         relative under Appendix FM of the Rules. The respondent  considered
         the application under paragraph EC-DR.1.1 thereof, continuing:

             "You have applied to join your sponsor in the  UK,  [SD],  and
             you have stated that she provides you with  financial  support
             in the form [of] providing you [with]  accommodation  here  in
             India and payment of  all  of  your  utility  bills  and  tax.
             However, you have not submitted any evidence of any  financial
             support from your sponsor.  You  have  also  stated  that  you
             require care on a day to day basis due to both having  medical
             conditions ...

             You are aged 83 years  and  state  that  you  have  end  stage
             macular degeneration in both eyes, Glaucoma and Ischemic heart
             disease ...

             From the evidence I am not satisfied that these conditions are
             so severe that you would both require long term personal  care
             to perform everyday tasks ...

             I am ... not satisfied that you require, due to  either  [sic]
             age, illness or disability, long term personal care to perform
             every day tasks. I therefore  refuse  your  application  under
             paragraph  EC-DR1.1(d)  of  Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration
             Rules."

         The decision of the respondent continued:

             "Additionally you state that you have employed  your  domestic
             help ... for several years and  that  she  currently  provides
             care for you; cooking for you and doing  other  daily  chores.
             Although you state that only your  daughter  can  provide  the
             care you need, I am  therefore  not  satisfied  that  you  are
             unable to obtain the required level of care  in  India.  I  am
             also  satisfied  that  the  financial  support  you  currently
             receive from your sponsor will continue and that any  care  if
             required could be provided through financial help from her."

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal, so far as material

     19. The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was pursued on three bases:

         (a)  The appellant satisfied the age/illness/disability requirement
             enshrined in paragraph E-ECDR2.4/2.5 of the Rules.

         (b)  In  the  alternative,  the  impugned  decision  infringed  the
             appellant's right to respect for family life under  Article  8
             ECHR.

         (c)  In the further alternative, the operative  provisions  of  the
             Rules were incompatible with Article 8 ECHR.

     20. The FtJ heard oral evidence  from  the  sponsor.  In  summary,  she
         maintained  that  a  man  called  Chaitanya,  who  lived  with  the
         appellant in an apartment owned by the sponsor, provided daily help
         to the appellant. The sponsor described how the appellant's  health
         had deteriorated significantly. The sponsor was full of praise  for
         Chaitanya, who had been able to  provide  24-hour  care.  Chaitanya
         recently got married and wished to relinquish his  employment.  The
         sponsor had made enquiries but had not  found  anyone  suitable  to
         take over from Chaitanya. Although there were care homes  in  India
         the sponsor did not consider these would be a satisfactory  option.
         The FtJ also considered a letter from the  sponsor's  daughter  and
         letters from two couples who were friends of the  sponsor  and  her
         husband. The FtJ also considered a statement from  the  appellant's
         carer, dated 10  April  2014,  and  a  number  of  medical  reports
         relating to the appellant.

     21. The FtJ accurately set out the relevant legal provisions and  noted
         the argument advanced by Mr Muman, who  represented  the  appellant
         before the First-tier Tribunal. Mr Muman  contended  that  the  ADR
         Rules were not Article 8 compliant, and  that  the  effect  of  the
         Rules was to virtually close the door for adult dependent relatives
         to settle in the UK with their children or grandchildren.

     22. At [36] & [37] the FtJ stated,

             "In considering whether an immigration rule is unlawful, it is
             important  to  step  aside  from  the  Appellant's  particular
             circumstances. The rule has to be looked at in  the  abstract.
             Further, I must recognise that material before me such as  the
             reports of the All Party Parliamentary Group on Migration, and
             of JCWI are looking at  the  new  rule  with  the  benefit  of
             hindsight when  evidence  of  its  impact  is  available.  The
             Secretary of State, in promulgating the rule,  does  not  have
             that advantage.

             I am not satisfied that the rule is discriminatory, manifestly
             unjust, made in bad faith involves an oppressive or gratuitous
             interference with people's rights. It is  suggested  that  the
             rule has harsh consequences, but this is not the  same  thing.
             As far as the ECHR concerned, it is  clear  the  Secretary  of
             State  thinks   that   the   rule   is   not   an   inherently
             disproportionate interference with the rights to  respect  for
             family life."

     23. At [38] the FtJ accepted that in many cases the Rule was likely  to
         interfere with family life with a person in the UK and to a  degree
         that  potentially  engaged  and  interfered  with  Article  8.  The
         interference was however in accordance with the law as it  was  not
         suggested that the relevant changes  had  not  been  properly  laid
         before  Parliament,  and  the  government's  stated  objective   of
         reducing the burden on  taxpayers  and  promoting  integration  and
         preventing and tackling abuse  and  contributing  to  reducing  net
         migration were in the public interest and  therefore  a  legitimate
         aim.

     24. At [39] the FtJ stated,

             "... It is claimed  that  the  rule  does  not  recognise  the
             position of minor children, whose welfare must, in  accordance
             with section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration
             Act 2009, be taken into account. But in many  adult  dependent
             relatives there would  be  no  minor  children  who  would  be
             affected by the decision. Even if there are, the effect of the
             decision upon their welfare may not always  be  great,  either
             because the grandparents whose entry to the UK is being sought
             has not hitherto played a major part in the child's upbringing
             or because the child's parents have no thoughts of  relocating
             the family to join the grandparents abroad  in  the  event  of
             leave to enter being refused."

     25. The FtJ did not find that the relevant Rule was incapable of  being
         proportionate.

     26. The  FtJ  went  on  to  consider  whether  the  appellant  met  the
         requirements of E-ECDR.2.4 and E-ECDR.2.5. The judge was  satisfied
         (at [44]) that the requirements of E-ECDR.2.4 were met and that the
         appellant was, at the date of the respondent's decision, in need of
         long-term personal care to perform everyday tasks.

     27. At [45] the judge stated,

             "As regards the  other  requirement  that  is  in  issue,  the
             Appellant has had the benefit  of  the  support  of  Chaitanya
             Patra, who services the Sponsor is well able to pay  for.  The
             Sponsor states he wants to give up this role  because  he  has
             got married. She says she has not found anyone  who  would  be
             suitable to take over from him. However, I find  it  difficult
             to believe that there is no one in India who could continue to
             provide the level of care the Appellant has been receiving  up
             until now. There is also the option  of  the  Appellant  going
             into a care home, although the Sponsor does not regard this as
             culturally acceptable. Mr  Box,  the  Home  Office  Presenting
             Officer,  placed  before  me  some  pages  from  the  Internet
             referring to organisations offering care for  the  elderly  in
             India, which, it seemed might be at a residential home  or  at
             the individual's own home. There is no indication  as  to  the
             cost of such care, but as the  Sponsor  and  her  husband  are
             quite well off, there is no reason to doubt that such services
             are affordable. In the circumstances I am not  satisfied  that
             the Sponsor [sic] is unable, with the practical and  financial
             help of the Sponsor, to obtain the required level of  care  in
             India. I find he does not meet the requirement of  E-ECDR.2.5.
             of Appendix FM."

     28. At [47] the FtJ considered a report prepared by the  Joint  Council
         for the Welfare of Immigrants ("JWCI"), which he summarised thus:

             "The JCWI report refers to the culture  in  India  of  younger
             generations caring for elderly parents and grandparents  under
             the same roof. Although there are care homes in  the  country,
             there are not enough of them providing good care and there  is
             a stigma attached to the  idea  of  formal  care  homes.   The
             Appellant is, in my view, likely to be  less  vulnerable  than
             many to the risk of being given inadequate care because he has
             children who would be in  a  position  to  pay  for  the  best
             possible service.  But  this  does  not  entirely  remove  the
             sponsor's anxiety about letting him go into a care home since,
             as long as she remains in  the  UK,  she  would  have  a  very
             limited opportunity to monitor the level of care so as to give
             her reassurance that her  father  is  well  looked  after.  In
             considering the impact of the decision upon family life, it is
             appropriate to  take  into  account  the  culture,  which  the
             sponsor refers to in her statement, that children are expected
             to take care of their parents when they are  old  and  infirm.
             There is every reason to think that the sponsor would be in  a
             position to continue to look after her father, if he is in the
             UK, for the foreseeable  future  without  recourse  to  public
             funds."

     29. The FtJ noted his duty to consider the welfare of  the  appellant's
         grandchildren  as  a  primary  consideration  and  found  that  the
         grandchildren, who were 13 and 15 at the date of the decision,  did
         not have  a  remote  relationship  with  the  appellant  given  his
         frequent visits and that there was an emotional attachment  between
         the grandchildren and the appellant. The FtJ accepted the  evidence
         of the sponsor that if her father were unable to secure  settlement
         in the United Kingdom she would leave and go to look after  him  in
         Delhi. The FtJ noted the further evidence on this  issue  emanating
         from the BMA. He continued:

             "The impact on family life upon the sponsor  being  forced  to
             return to India after having spent many years  in  the  UK  is
             considerable.  The  welfare   of   the   children   would   be
             particularly affected, as they would  either  be  uprooted  in
             order to live in a country which is very  different  from  the
             one they have been brought up in or the family would be  split
             while their mother is in India whilst  they  remained  in  the
             UK."

     30.  The  FtJ  concluded  that  the  decision  was  a  disproportionate
         interference with Article 8 and allowed the appeal on that basis.

Submissions on behalf of the appellant relating to his death

     31. In their written submissions dated 14 December 2018 Mr de Mello and
         Mr  Muman  submit,  in  reliance  on  s.1(1)  of  the  Law   Reform
         (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1934  ('the  1934  Act'),  that  the
         appellant's cause of action against the respondent survives for the
         benefit of his estate. Legislation provides for specific  instances
         where an appeal is treated as discontinued or abandoned or excluded
         (e.g. s.104(4) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002;
         rules 17 and 17A of the Procedure Rules; s.11(1) of the  Tribunals,
         Courts and Enforcement Act 2007). The relevant legislation  clearly
         and expressly state the limited circumstances where  an  appeal  is
         automatically terminated and it is not  permissible  to  imply  any
         further circumstances when  it  can  be  said  to  be  so.  If  the
         legislation intended to state that the appeal will be automatically
         terminated once an appellant dies it  would  have  stated  so.  The
         appeal raises an extant point of  law  of  general  importance  and
         wider interest and, combined with the fact that it  is  a  pre-2014
         Act appeal and the  delays  involved,  the  Upper  Tribunal  should
         continue  to  determine  the   cross-appeal   notwithstanding   the
         appellant's death.

     32. It was submitted that the appeal was not rendered academic  by  the
         appellant's death. As this appeal was brought  under  the  previous
         statutory appeals regime the  "not  in  accordance  with  the  law"
         ground was consigned to history save for this  extant  appeal.  The
         Court of Appeal's decision in the BritCits case will invariably act
         as a block to any future challenge to the legality of the ADR rule.
         The refusal of permission to appeal by the Supreme  Court  did  not
         render the cross-appeal academic. The Supreme Court stated,

             "Permission to appeal be refused because the application  does
             not  raise  an  arguable  point  of  law  which  ought  to  be
             considered at this time. This may well raise point which ought
             to come here on a particular set of facts (or sets of facts)."

     33. The BritCits challenge was a judicial review and in  the  abstract.
         In the present appeal there was no question that  the  respondent's
         decision interfered with family life and was unjustified. The  real
         challenge was to the underlying  rule  itself  and  it  was  highly
         probable that this was the only statutory appeal before  the  Upper
         Tribunal challenging the legality of the ADR rule  per  se.  Whilst
         the appellant accepted that  the  Court  of  Appeal's  decision  in
         BritCits was binding on the Upper Tribunal, it was  submitted  that
         the Court  of  Appeal  erred  in  dismissing  the  appeal.  It  was
         submitted that this was an issue that could only be  determined  by
         the  Supreme  Court  and  required  conclusive  determination.  The
         current appeal was distinguishable  from  BritCits  on  the  proven
         facts  and  the  recognised  unjustified  interference   with   the
         appellant's family life rights and that of his British children and
         minor grandchildren.

Submissions on behalf of the respondent relating to the appellant's death

     34. In the  written submissions dated 11 January  2019  the  respondent
         submitted that the Upper Tribunal  did  not  have  jurisdiction  to
         determine the appellant's cross appeal, that the  cross-appeal  was
         bound to fail in light  of  the  Court  of  Appeal's  judgement  in
         BritCits, that even  if  the  cross-appeal  were  arguable  it  was
         academic as the appellant was granted entry clearance, and the fact
         that the appellant was now deceased meant that there was  no  cause
         of action and his estate could not continue the cross-appeal in his
         stead. There was no secondary beneficiary status that would  change
         if  the  appellant  were  to  succeed  in  his  cross-appeal.  With
         reference to the 1934 Act, for a cause of action to subsist (absent
         a few torts such as false imprisonment  which  are  actionable  per
         se), there must be not only a tortious wrong, breach of contractual
         obligation or public law error, but also some  kind  of  damage  or
         impact on the claimant. In this case, now that  the  appellant  has
         died, there is no effect whatsoever, good or ill,  upon  him  as  a
         result of the outcome of these proceedings. There is  therefore  no
         longer any cause of action to pursue.

     35. Nor have the appellant's legal representatives explained  who  they
         are now representing or how they are taking instructions.  If  they
         are representing the appellant's estate they  would  need  to  show
         that they were taking instructions from the  executor(s)  and  that
         the estate had some interest in these proceedings. The  appellant's
         legal representatives had not provided any detail  in  relation  to
         either of these matters. It was therefore difficult to see how  the
         cross-appeal could properly be pursued. To continue the  appeal  in
         the  circumstances  was  an  improper  use  of  Tribunal  time  and
         resources.

Discussion

     36. The Upper Tribunal was established by  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and
         Enforcement Act 2007 (the 2007 Act) (see s.3(2)). Its  jurisdiction
         and scope of operation therefore stems from statute. A party has  a
         right of appeal to the Upper Tribunal "on any point of law  arising
         from a decision made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  other  than  an
         excluded decision" (s11(1) and (2) of the 2007 Act).  S.12  of  the
         2007 Act reads, so far as its material:

             'Proceedings on appeal to Upper Tribunal

             (1)  Subsection (2) applies if the Upper Tribunal, in deciding
             an appeal under section 11,  finds  that  the  making  of  the
             decision concerned involved the making of an error on a  point
             of law.

             (2)  The Upper Tribunal -

                  (a)  may (but need not) set  aside  the  decision  of  the
                  First-tier Tribunal, and

                  (b)  if it does, must either-

                      (i)  remit the case to the First-tier  Tribunal  with
                      directions for its reconsideration, or

                      (ii) re-make the decision.'

     37. Reading sections 11 and 12 it is apparent that the  Upper  Tribunal
         must determine whether there has been an error on a point of law in
         a First-tier Tribunal decision.  The  2007  Act  makes  no  express
         provision in respect of the death of a party.

     38. Sections 104(4) and 104(4A) of the 2002 Act (as they  were  at  the
         relevant time for the purposes of  this  appeal)  provided  for  an
         appeal to be treated as abandoned  if,  in  respect  of  an  appeal
         brought by a person while he was she is in the UK, they  leave  the
         UK or are granted leave to enter or remain (subject  to  exceptions
         that are irrelevant for the purposes of this appeal). The appellant
         was not in the UK when his appeal  was  brought  and  s.104(4)  and
         s.104(4A) would therefore not apply to him. The 2002 Act  makes  no
         express provision in the event of the death of an appellant.

     39. The Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  were  made
         pursuant to s.22 of the 2007 Act. There  is  no  express  provision
         within the Procedure Rules dealing with a situation where  a  party
         has died. Rule 17 sets out the process by which the Upper  Tribunal
         may give its consent to a party's application to  withdraw  all  or
         part of its case,  and  Rule  17A  provides  that  a  party  in  an
         immigration case must notify the Upper Tribunal  if  the  appellant
         has been granted leave to enter or remain in the UK and that  where
         an appeal is treated as abandoned pursuant to sections  104(4)  and
         104(4A) of the 2002 Act the Upper Tribunal must send the parties  a
         notice  informing  them  that  the  appeal  is  being  treated   as
         abandoned. Neither the appellant nor the respondent have applied to
         withdraw their case.

     40. Section 1(1) of the Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act  1934
         states,

             'Effect of death on certain causes of action

             (1)  Subject to the provisions of this section, on  the  death
             of any person after the commencement of this Act all causes of
             action subsisting against  or  vested  in  him  shall  survive
             against, or, as the case may  be,  for  the  benefit  of,  his
             estate. Provided that  this  subsection  shall  not  apply  to
             causes of action for defamation.'

     41. On behalf of the appellant it is contended that his cause of action
         against the respondent survives for the benefit of his estate.  The
         appellant' cause of action consisted of an  application  for  entry
         clearance under the Immigration Rules which, if he  was  successful
         in meeting the requirements, would have  resulted  in  a  grant  of
         Indefinite  Leave  to  Enter  (ILE),  and  his  challenge  to   the
         respondent's adverse decision by way of an appeal to the First-tier
         Tribunal.

     42. The appellant's cause of action was  concerned  with  his  personal
         entitlement to a particular immigration status.  The  determination
         of this appellant's  immigration  status  did  not  and  could  not
         realistically have any impact on anyone other than  the  appellant.
         The cause of action was,  on  the  specific  facts  of  this  case,
         personal and exclusive to the appellant. It did not involve debt or
         a claim for damages of any kind (the First-tier  Tribunal,  in  any
         event, has no power to award damages on an appeal against an  entry
         clearance decision and the powers of Upper Tribunal in respect of a
         statutory immigration appeal does not include jurisdiction to  make
         an award of damages).

     43. Section 1(1) of the 1934 Act  enables  a  cause  of  action  to  be
         maintained "for the  benefit  of"  a  person's  estate.  There  can
         however be no benefit to the appellant's estate from his  cause  of
         action. Although the cause of action was concerned  with  a  public
         law status, it was entirely personal to him. The appellant's estate
         is incapable of benefiting from a posthumous grant  of  ILE  rather
         than the grant of limited leave following his successful Article  8
         appeal. The cause of action related exclusively to the appellant as
         a living individual. It is difficult to see how his  challenge  can
         continue to subsist in the absence of any  other  tangible  benefit
         that could conceivably accrue to his estate. As such, I  find  that
         this appellant's cause of action cannot continue after his death. I
         do not consider the absence of any express provision  dealing  with
         these circumstances supports the submission made on behalf  of  the
         appellant  that  it  is  impermissible   to   imply   any   further
         circumstances in which an appeal is terminated.  My  attention  has
         not been brought to any case law  or  other  legislative  provision
         capable of  supporting  the  submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the
         appellant in reliance on the 1934 Act. As there  is  no  longer  an
         appellant capable of maintaining this appeal, the appeal  falls  to
         be dismissed on this basis.

     44. This is sufficient to  dispose  of  these  proceedings.  An  appeal
         cannot continue if the appellant has died and the determination  of
         his immigration status cannot benefit his estate or anyone else.

     45.  It   is   additionally   unclear   how   the   appellant's   legal
         representatives are now able to represent  the  appellant  and  how
         they can take instructions. As was pointed out in the  respondent's
         submissions dated 11 January 2019, if the legal representatives are
         representing the appellant's estate they would need  to  show  that
         they are taking instructions from  the  executor(s)  and  that  the
         estate has some interest  in  the  proceedings.  In  my  directions
         issued  on  13  November  2018   I   requested   that   appellant's
         representatives explain the basis upon which they were able to take
         instructions and continue with the appeal. The written  submissions
         advanced on behalf of the appellant stated that,  "...  the  estate
         now wishes to pursue the extant cross-appeal on his behalf." I have
         not  received  any  documentation  from  the  executor(s)  of   the
         appellant's estate and I have not been informed of any  application
         made by the appellant's estate for an order to enable them to carry
         on proceedings.

     46. In light of my above  findings  it  is  not  necessary  for  me  to
         consider the appellant's other submission in great detail, and I do
         not propose to do so. By his cross-appeal, the appellant  contended
         that the FtJ erred in  law  in  dismissing  his  appeal  under  the
         Immigration Rules. Underlying this contention  is  the  proposition
         that the relevant provision of the Immigration Rules is unlawful as
         it is  ultra  vires  and/or  irrational  and/or  incompatible  with
         Article 8. The written submissions dated 14 December  2018  contend
         that "the real challenge in the appeal is to  the  underlying  rule
         itself" (at paragraph 18) and this is an  appeal  "challenging  the
         legality of the ADR rule per se." However,  as  recognised  in  the
         same submissions, the Court  of  Appeal  decision  in  BritCits  is
         binding on this Tribunal (see paragraphs 15 and 20 of  the  written
         submissions). Although the challenge before the Court of Appeal was
         brought by an organisation and not  an  individual  appellant,  the
         Court considered a large body of written evidence including several
         'paradigm cases' with similar facts involving  grandchildren  (e.g.
         [18] and [46]). Although the Court of Appeal accepted that the  new
         rules imposed "a rigorous and demanding test" they were held to  be
         lawful and compatible with Article 8. I note that  a  challenge  to
         the lawfulness of the relevant part of Appendix  FM  ((E-ECDR.2.5))
         was withdrawn in the context of a  statutory  appeal  in  Ribeli  v
         Entry Clearance Officer, Pretoria [2018] EWCA Civ 611 following the
         decision in BritCits.

     47. Whilst  I  accept  the  canons  of  construction  advanced  by  the
         appellant's representatives at paragraph 29 of  the  December  2018
         submissions (that E-ECDR.2.5 should be  construed  compatibly  with
         Article 8 ECHR and s.55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration
         Act 2009), the FtJ's approach to E-ECDR.2.5 was in accordance  with
         such an approach. At [45] (see paragraph 27 of this  decision)  the
         FtJ considered the particular care needs of the appellant  and  was
         rationally  entitled  to  conclude  that  the  level  of  care  the
         appellant required, as had previously been provided  by  Mr  Patra,
         would be available in India and that this included the  possibility
         of the appellant entering a care home or by way of care provided to
         him in his own home. The FtJ's construction of the requirements  of
         E-ECDR.2.5 was in accordance with section 3 of the Human Rights Act
         1998 (requiring legislation to be read and given effect  in  a  way
         which is compatible with Convention rights) and with  s.55  of  the
         Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 given that the  focus
         is on the 'level of care' that is potentially available in India.

     48. Even if an error of law were uncovered (which is not the case),  it
         would not be appropriate to set the decision aside given the  death
         of the appellant and the exclusively personal nature of his  claim.
         The appeal would, for similar reasons, fall be to be  dismissed  on
         the basis that it is academic (applying SM (withdrawal of  appealed
         decision: effect) Pakistan [2014] UKUT 00064 (IAC) and MS (A child)
         v The Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2019]  EWCA  Civ
         1340). The  appellant's  representatives  submit  that  the  issues
         raised in this appeal are untested and of general  importance,  but
         they have been conclusively determined in the BritCits  litigation.
         The fact that this appeal is brought under the appeals regime prior
         to that introduced by the Immigration Act 2014 does not prevent the
         legality of the immigration rules or their application  from  being
         challenged in a future case either by way  of  judicial  review  or
         statutory appeal  (a  refusal  of  an  application  under  the  ADR
         provisions of Appendix FM constitutes a refusal of a  human  rights
         claim which gives rise to a right of appeal and, although the  'not
         in  accordance  with  the  law'  ground  of  appeal  is  no  longer
         available, the legality of the immigration rules  may  still  be  a
         relevant factor that  a  Tribunal  is  entitled  to  consider  when
         determining the overall proportionality of the challenged  decision
         under Article 8).



Notice of Decision

The appeal under the immigration rules is dismissed.

(The First-tier Tribunal had allowed the Article 8 human rights appeal,  and
this is maintained)


D.Blum                                  4 September 2019

Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum

