
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-VP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/14602/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House London          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24th November 2016                |On 16th January 2017                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                             miss shamiLa mpore
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NAIROBI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Akinbolu (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Lal, promulgated on 28th  April  2016,  following  a  hearing  at
    Hatton Cross on 19th April  2016.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    allowed the appeal of Miss  Shamila  Mpore,  whereupon  the  Respondent
    Entry Clearance Officer, subsequently applied  for,  and  was  granted,
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the  matter  comes
    before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female, a citizen of Burundi, who was born  on  15th
    June 1997.  She appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  Entry
    Clearance Officer dated 12th September 2014, refusing  her  application
    for entry clearance to settle in the  UK  under  paragraph  320(3)  and
    paragraph 297 of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that she wishes to join her mother, Mrs  Amina
    Nbabazi, and that she has applied previously twice before, because  her
    father is deceased.  She submitted a registered death certificate dated
    6th September 2013.  However, this was nearly a year after the death of
    her father which was on 22nd August 2012.  Moreover, the death was  not
    medically certified.  The ECO held that documents  of  these  kind  are
    easily generated and readily available in a country like Uganda and the
    Appellant  provided  no  reasonable  explanation  for  the   delay   in
    registering this death.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge observed how the evidence from Mrs Amina Nbabazi  before  him
    was that she had always maintained that she and  her  husband  together
    with their children were  all  from  Burundi.   Her  documentation  has
    always shown this.  She and her family  fled  to  Rwanda  and  then  to
    Uganda and her husband was killed in  a  car  crash  in  2012  and  she
    described the burial according to Islamic practice  and  how  she  sent
    monies from the UK to cover expenses.

 5. Judge Lal made two observations.  First, that with respect to the issue
    of nationality, there is no requirement under Rule  297  to  produce  a
    valid national passport.  The  issue  between  the  Appellant  and  the
    sponsoring mother, Mrs Amina Nbabazi has been  established  beyond  any
    reasonable doubt because of the  DNA  application  submitted  with  the
    application.

 6. Moreover, previously Judge Raymond found that  the  Appellant  and  her
    brothers were from Burundi but  living  in  Uganda  as  refugees.   The
    Sponsor has also described them as coming from Burundi  (see  paragraph
    10).

 7. Furthermore, the Tribunal had been provided with the Appellant's  birth
    certificate and her brother's birth  certificate  which  list  them  as
    asylum seekers in Uganda (paragraph 11).

 8. Judge Raymond had also found  the  Appellant  and  the  Sponsor  to  be
    credible witnesses.

 9. Second, with respect to the application of Rule 276  and  consideration
    of whether the Appellant's father was dead the Ugandan birth and  death
    registration at UBDRA 1973 had been  referred  to.   Ms  Akinbolu,  who
    appeared as Counsel before the Tribunal on that occasion

         "has enclosed the totality of the Act which shows at Section 18, an
         exception to the Rule that all deaths must be registered within one
         month.  This is where the registrar is satisfied as to the truth of
         the particulars and the proscribed fee has been paid.  The Tribunal
         is satisfied that this precisely what the  Sponsor  described  when
         she herself travelled to Uganda to register the  death"  (paragraph
         12).

10. The judge went on note how the Sponsor had  used  an  intermediary  but
    that there was nothing to suggest that the certificate was not  genuine
    and the Tribunal accepted the explanation that the father was listed as
    "Ugandan" because this was

         "in all  probability  to  facilitate  the  issuance  of  the  death
         certificate is a timely manner as it would not normally  be  issued
         in respect of foreign nationals.  Likewise, the description of  the
         'brother' was a mechanism used by the intermediary" (paragraph 12).



    Third, what Judge Lal found "to be most significant" was  the  evidence
    of Mr Jones who described that when he met the Sponsor some three years
    ago she told  him  her  husband  was  dead,  and  Mr  Jones  was  in  a
    relationship with the Sponsor now, and Judge Lal observed how "this was
    before the current application and adds to her overall  credibility  in
    respect of the chronology and the events described" (paragraph 13).

11. The judge went on to conclude that "the Tribunal is satisfied that  the
    Appellant has established her identity and her Burundi nationality  and
    that her only living parent is in the UK" (paragraph 14).

12. The appeal was  allowed  on  the  basis  that  the  Appellant  met  the
    requirements of the Rules (paragraph 15).

Grounds of Application

13. The grounds of application state that firstly, the judge was  wrong  to
    conclude that paragraph 297 has no requirement  for  the  Appellant  to
    produce a valid national passport because paragraph 320 applies to part
    8 (paragraph 297), under which the Appellant  has  applied.   Secondly,
    there had been a misdirection because the  judge  overlooked  the  fact
    that the Sponsor used an intermediary  to  obtain  the  father's  death
    certificate, such that the judge was wrong to conclude that  "there  is
    nothing to suggest that the certificate is not a genuine one".   Third,
    the  judge  did  not  give  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  the
    opportunity to cross-examine the Sponsor  because  she  was  repeatedly
    interrupted.  In fact, the judge indicated that the Presenting  Officer
    should stop the submissions because he was going to  find  the  Sponsor
    credible.

14. On 15th September 2016, permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions

15. At the hearing before me on 24th November 2016, Mr Tufan handed up  the
    notes of the Home Office Presenting Officer ("HOPO").  These were dated
    19th April  2016.   They  showed,  submitted  Mr  Tufan,  a  degree  of
    "procedural impropriety", in that the judge  prejudging  the  issue  in
    circumstances of paragraph 320(3) had  not  been  satisfied.   A  death
    certificate had been produced which was anonymous not least in the fact
    that it was not produced within three months as  required  under  local
    law.  Second, Mr Tufan submitted that although there  was  an  apparent
    allegation of bias on the part of the judge, he did not wish to  labour
    this point because the stronger point was the failure  to  comply  with
    the requirements of paragraph 320(3) in the way that the  evidence  had
    been submitted.

16. For her part, Ms Akinbolu  relied  upon  her  Rule  24  response.   She
    submitted that paragraph 320(3) deals with  the  mandatory  Grounds  of
    Refusal of someone who fails to produce "a valid national  passport  or
    other document satisfactorily stabling his identity  and  nationality".
    In this case the Appellant had provided "other document" and Judge  Lal
    dealt with this very issue resolving it in the Appellant's favour.

17. Secondly the case of AM (Somalia) [2009] UKAIT 0008 determined that the
    failure to produce a document proving identity  leads  to  a  mandatory
    refusal under paragraph 320(3).  He goes on to  say  that,  "There  is,
    however, a right of appeal  against  that  refusal  unless  a  document
    sought  by  the  decision  maker  falls  within   the   definition   of
    'immigration document' is Section 88(3)".  In this case  paragraph  297
    did not require the production of a valid passport because if one looks
    at the case of AM (Somalia) it is clear from the last paragraph in  the
    determination that the following is stated:

         "The Immigration Judge had before her  a  document  issued  by  the
         Ugandan Government, as we have indicated.  She  had  oral  evidence
         from the Sponsor, which she believed.  She was entitled to take the
         view that there was nothing in the document or in the evidence that
         she heard which threw any doubt upon the statement made  (no  doubt
         on the Appellant's instance, but) by a governmental authority.   In
         those circumstances it seems to us right that she should regard the
         document as having satisfactorily established identity.  We do  not
         say that a document of this sort is always to be taken in that way.
          Documents are produced in various countries in  various  ways  and
         other circumstances may from time to time give cause to  doubt  the
         accuracy or even genuineness.  The evidence before the  Immigration
         Judge taken as a whole in this case simply showed that there was no
         doubt.  There was therefore no reason to read the document  in  any
         other way than the way in which it reads on  its  face"  (paragraph
         12).

18. Third, what this meant was that so long as the Appellant could  produce
    sufficient other documentary evidence to satisfy  the  authorities  and
    the Tribunal about her identity that was sufficient.  In this case  the
    judge referred to the DNA evidence, to the judgment of Judge Raymond in
    favour of the Appellant, which appears at page 64 of  the  bundle,  the
    doctor who registered her as an asylum seeker in Uganda (see page  42),
    and all of this is sufficient to identity the Appellant such  that  she
    can be meet the requirement of the Rules.  This was  because  paragraph
    320(3) refers to, not just the valid national  passport,  but  to  "any
    other document" as well.

19. Fourth, as far as the issue of apparent bias was concerned there was no
    "procedural impropriety" because if one looks at the note of 19th April
    2016 produced by the HOPO there is no  suggestion  that  the  HOPO  was
    prevented from  cross-examining  the  witnesses.   The  complaint  here
    really is one of "interrupting my submissions".

20. Ms Akinbolu submitted that  she  was  Counsel  in  the  first  instance
    hearing as well and she remembers there having been a discussion at the
    outset of the appeal as to what the issues were, and the documents that
    were going to be relied upon, together  with  the  earlier  finding  of
    Judge Raymond, which the judge was bound to follow as a starting point.
     To complain about being interrupted does not  lead  to  an  inevitable
    conclusion of there being procedural impropriety.  Both representatives
    accepted that the determination of IJ Raymond had to  be  the  starting
    point.

21. In his reply before me, Mr Tufan stated that, "I  accept  IJ  Raymond's
    determination is the starting point", but his main submission was  that
    the judge did not deal with the death certificate  in  the  appropriate
    manner.

No Error of Law

22. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law such that I should set
    aside the decision.  My  reasons  are  as  follows.   First,  paragraph
    320(A) does not require the production of a valid passport as the  only
    means of ascertaining the identity of a person.  The reference there is
    to "any other document" as well, and as Ms Akinbolu has submitted there
    was substantial other evidence which enabled the judge to come  to  the
    view that he was satisfied about identity.

23. Second, this is entirely  consistent  with  the  determination  of  the
    Tribunal in AM (Somalia)  [2009]  UKAIT  0008,  which  recognises  that
    documents may be produced in various countries  in  various  ways,  and
    that the judge has to take the case into account as a whole,  and  that
    case established that it may very well be  that,  "the  consequence  of
    that is that, as a governmental document  apparently  testing  identity
    and   nationality,   it   satisfactorily   established   identity   and
    nationality, that is to say to  the  satisfaction  of  the  Immigration
    Judge" (paragraph 12).

24. And third, any concerns about the production of the death  certificate,
    almost a year after it was due to have been certified,  were  expressly
    addressed by the judge (at  paragraph  12)  who  pointed  out  that  Ms
    Akinbolu had produced the entire combination of the Ugandan  Birth  and
    Death Registration Act 1973, and this allows for an  exception  to  the
    Rule  that  all  deaths  must  be  registered  within  one  month.   An
    explanation was given and the judge accepted the explanation.

25. The judge also dealt with the matter of the father having  been  listed
    as "Ugandan" and came to the view that this was "in all probability  to
    facilitate the issuance of the death certificate in a timely manner  as
    it would not normally  be  issued  in  respect  of  foreign  nationals"
    (paragraph 12).  That was a conclusion that was open to the  judge  and
    is not at odds with what is stated by the Tribunal in AM (Somalia).

26. Fourth, the suggestion by the HOPO in the note of 19th April 2016 about
    the discussion between the judge and Counsel does not raise a  question
    of 'apparent bias' at all, and Mr. Tufan was wise  not  to  labour  the
    point.  There was no "procedural impropriety" because if one  looks  at
    the HOPO's own note of 19th April 2016 there is no suggestion there  of
    the HOPO being prevented from cross-examination and only of  the  Judge
    "interrupting my submissions".



Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.  The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    16th January 2017

