
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/14850/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 January 2016                   |On 26 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                                     C K
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (ACCRA)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Martin of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the appellant against a decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal who dismissed his  appeal  against  a  decision  taken  on  26
    October  2014  to  refuse  his  application  for  entry  clearance  for
    settlement to join his aunt and uncle in the United Kingdom.



Background Facts

 2. The appellant is a citizen of India  who  lives  with  his  parents  in
    Ghana.  His date of birth is  2  August  1999.  He  applied  for  entry
    clearance under Rule 297 of the Immigration Rules HC 395  (as  amended)
    (the 'Immigration Rules'). That application was refused  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer for  the  following  reasons.   The  Entry  Clearance
    Officer considered that the appellant had not provided any evidence  to
    demonstrate  that  his  aunt  and  uncle  had  continuing  control  and
    direction  over  his  upbringing  including  the  making  of  important
    decisions in his life.  No details had been provided as to why  he  was
    leaving his parents in Ghana to go and live with his aunt and uncle  in
    the UK.  The Entry  Clearance  Officer  was  not  satisfied  that  sole
    responsibility had been  established.   Further,  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer considered that the appellant's parents play an active part  in
    his life now and as  a  result  was  not  satisfied  that  he  met  the
    requirements of paragraph 297 of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The  Entry
    Clearance Officer also considered whether the  application  raised  any
    exceptional circumstances consistent with  the  right  to  respect  for
    family life contained in Article 8 of the European Convention on  Human
    Rights  ('ECHR').   The  Entry  Clearance  Officer   found   that   the
    appellant's application did not fall for a  grant  of  entry  clearance
    outside the Rules.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  against  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer's decision.  In a  determination  promulgated  on  16
    June  2015  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Heatherington  dismissed   the
    appellant's appeal.  The judge found that there  were  no  serious  and
    compelling family or other considerations which made the  exclusion  of
    the appellant from the UK undesirable.  The judge also found  that  the
    appellant's aunt and uncle  would  be  able  to  fund  the  appellant's
    education from the United Kingdom.  Outside of the requirements of  the
    Immigration Rules the judge found that the appellant does not fall  for
    a grant of entry clearance, finding that  the  best  interests  of  the
    appellant are for him to remain in Ghana with his parents.   The  judge
    found that the  appeal  raised  no  exceptional  circumstances,  which,
    consistent with the right to  respect  for  family  life  contained  in
    Article 8 of the ECHR, would warrant a grant of entry clearance to come
    to the UK.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 4. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  On  3
    November 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Zucker  granted  the  appellant
    permission to appeal.  Thus the appeal came before me.

Summary of the Submissions

 5. The grounds of appeal assert that although the  judge  was  correct  to
    focus on the appellant's  best  interests,  applying  the  decision  in
    Mundeba  [2013]  UKUT  00088  ('Mundeba')  the  judge's   analysis   in
    paragraphs 18 to 24 is not sufficiently  detailed  and  does  not  take
    account of the evidence supplied by the  appellant.   For  example,  at
    paragraph 22 the judge stated there are  stable  arrangements  for  the
    appellant's care in Ghana.  This is at odds with the  evidence  and  in
    conflict with the judge's finding in paragraph 26 that the  appellant's
    family's financial difficulties were credible.  The judge  accepted  in
    paragraph 27 that the appellant had  been  adversely  affected  by  the
    situation and given those findings  it  is  submitted  that  the  judge
    failed to take these matters into account later in the  same  paragraph
    rendering the finding irrational.  It is submitted that the  judge  has
    decided the issue of the appellant's best interests and  whether  there
    are serious and compelling family reasons  just  by  referring  to  the
    Rules.  It is asserted that those considerations seem to  apply  to  an
    application outside the Rules but the appellant was arguing that he met
    paragraph 297 and in those  circumstances  those  reasons  for  finding
    against the appellant are undermined.  It was also submitted  that  the
    judge has taken  into  account  irrelevant  factors  that  are  not  in
    paragraph 297.  This can be seen further  when  he  considered  whether
    there are any insurmountable obstacles to life continuing in Ghana.

 6. In his oral submissions Mr Martin asserted that  the  judge  took  into
    account irrelevant factors and failed to apply the  correct  test.   He
    submitted that the findings are not clear on central issues.  The judge
    looked exclusively at the situation in Ghana and the emotional needs of
    the appellant when undertaking a best interests' analysis.  The case of
    Mundeba says that best interests have to inform the decision  but  does
    not answer the question of serious and compelling reasons.  The judge's
    conclusions from paragraph 25 of the decision paraphrases  what  is  in
    297 of the Immigration Rules.  The question of  adequate  care  in  the
    country of origin is not the same  as  serious  and  compelling  family
    circumstances.  In paragraph 27 the judge records  that  the  appellant
    has been taken out of school and understands that this has  caused  him
    embarrassment.  In the preceding paragraph the  judge  found  financial
    difficulties were credible, that is the reason that the  appellant  was
    taken out of school and this was confirmed by the  school's  letter  at
    page 10 of the appellant's bundle.  At paragraph 27  he  asserted  that
    there is a lack of appreciation of the embarrassment that was caused by
    the unavoidable consequence of the family's circumstances in Ghana.  At
    the end of paragraph 27 the judge observes that  the  UK  cannot  offer
    universal health or education, these are not matters that come within a
    consideration of the test of serious and compelling circumstances  that
    would make exclusion of the child undesirable.   The  judge  has  taken
    into account extraneous matters that are not  relevant.   Referring  to
    the Mundeba case he submitted that head note 4  sets  out  that  family
    considerations require evaluation  of  the  child  including  emotional
    needs.  In this  case  there  are  unacceptable  social,  economic  and
    environmental issues and must  include  consideration  of  whether  the
    environment is unstable to  meet  the  needs  of  the  child.   It  was
    submitted  that  owing  to  the  electricity  crisis,  the  significant
    inflation, the family were restricted to one meal a day.   It  was  not
    only withdrawal of the child from school that ought to have been  taken
    into consideration.  The appellant had finished the end of year  10  at
    school and is now shut off from that development of his education.   At
    paragraph 29 the judge has not answered  those  points.   There  is  no
    analysis of the practical situation the appellant found himself  in  in
    Ghana.  It was submitted that the judge had failed to answer the  right
    questions.

 7. The respondent served a Rule  24  (of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008) notice opposing the appellant's  appeal.   It  is
    submitted that the grounds of appeal are mere  disagreements  with  the
    judge's findings and an attempt to reargue  issues,  which  were  fully
    considered.  It is asserted  that  the  Tribunal  in  Mundeba  provided
    guidance as to the parameters of paragraph  297(i)(f).   Reference  was
    made to paragraphs 33 and 34 of the  decision  in  Mundeba  and  it  is
    asserted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had due regard to the  high
    threshold and the meaning of very compelling circumstances when  making
    his  findings  of  fact.   While  the  financial  difficulties  of  the
    appellant's family may be credible, the material advantages of life  in
    the United Kingdom is not the test, see paragraph 50 of Mundeba.

 8. Ms Everett submitted that there is no error of law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision and that the judge directed himself  correctly.   The
    judge was required to consider  serious  and  compelling  reasons.   He
    looked correctly at the case of Mundeba and the guidance in Mundeba  at
    head note 4 which sets out the consideration of the best interests of a
    child  will  usually  involve  continuity  of  residence.   The   judge
    commences with those considerations at paragraph 18 and at paragraph 19
    considers that the  appellant  has  no  social  ties  to  the  UK.   In
    paragraph 20 the judge considers that the appellant does not  have  any
    illness and there is no evidence that  he  would  not  have  access  to
    healthcare if he was ill in the future.   At  paragraph  21  the  judge
    looks at the ties in the UK.  She submitted that the judge had directed
    himself correctly.  The judge considered the precarious nature  of  the
    family's economic situation impacting in such a way that denial of that
    opportunity brings him within the test.  The evidence supports the view
    that there is not enough food, which is a serious matter, but the judge
    looked in the round and found that the sponsor could support him; there
    was no need to take him away from his parents.  She submitted that  the
    comment about the health service in the UK was irrelevant and  it  does
    not render the rest of the reasoning in error.  The appellant's case is
    that he is within a loving family that is in economic  difficulty  that
    will impact on  the  appellant  and  does  form  part  of  the  judge's
    reasoning at paragraphs  28  and  29.   The  economic  needs  could  be
    obviated by support by the relatives in the UK.

 9. Mr Martin submitted in reply that the points referred to in paragraph 4
    in the head note to the Mundeba case are not pre-requisites, also  they
    set out that the best interests will  usually  be  served  by  a  child
    remaining with his parents and having continuity of residence but  that
    is simply another factor.  In all cases under paragraph 297 there  will
    be a change of location, the fact that the judge has correctly said  it
    is not a medical case at paragraph 20 does  not  answer  the  question.
    Having to stop education is a fundamental right.  The child  was  about
    to take his GCSEs.  Regarding the assertion that  the  aunt  and  uncle
    were able to support the family in  Ghana,  the  last  article  in  the
    appellant's bundle highlighted the issues to do with  the  depreciation
    of the currency in Ghana and the issue concerning foreign  currency  is
    that it is simply impractical to send money to Ghana.   On  that  basis
    the judge's  finding  was  incorrect  as  the  aunt  and  uncle  cannot
    practically provide resources to the appellant in Ghana.

Immigration Rules

10. Paragraph 297 of the Rules is in these terms:

         "297.    The requirements to be met by a person seeking  indefinite
         leave to enter the United Kingdom as the child of a parent, parents
         or a relative present and settled or being admitted for  settlement
         in the United Kingdom are that he:

             (i)  is seeking leave to enter to accompany or join a  parent,
             parents or a relative in one of the following circumstances:

                  ...

                  (f)  one parent or a relative is present  and  settled  in
                  the United Kingdom or being admitted on the same  occasion
                  for settlement and there are serious and compelling family
                  or other considerations which make exclusion of the  child
                  undesirable and suitable arrangements have been  made  for
                  the child's care; and

             (ii) is under the age of 18; and

             (iii)    is not leading an independent life, is unmarried  and
             is not a civil partner, and  has  not  formed  an  independent
             family unit; and

             (iv) can, and will, be accommodated adequately by the  parent,
             parents or relative the  child  is  seeking  to  join  without
             recourse to public funds in accommodation  which  the  parent,
             parents or relative the child  is  seeking  to  join,  own  or
             occupy exclusively; and

             (v)  can, and will, be maintained adequately  by  the  parent,
             parents, or relative the child is  seeking  to  join,  without
             recourse to public funds; and

             (vi) holds a valid United Kingdom entry clearance for entry in
             this capacity."

Discussion

11. The only issue that arises under the provisions in paragraph 297 of the
    Immigration Rules in  this  case  is  whether  there  are  serious  and
    compelling reasons family or other considerations, which make exclusion
    of the appellant form the UK undesirable.  The  other  requirements  of
    that paragraph have been accepted as met.

12. The starting point is that there is a high hurdle to overcome in  order
    to establish that that there are  'serious  and  compelling  family  or
    other considerations'. In Mundeba it was held that:

         "34. In our view, 'serious' means that there needs to be more  than
         the  parties  simply  desiring  a  state  of  affairs  to   obtain.
         'Compelling' in the context of paragraph 297(i)(f)  indicates  that
         considerations that are persuasive  and  powerful.  'Serious'  read
         with 'compelling'  together  indicate  that  the  family  or  other
         considerations render the exclusion of the child  from  the  United
         Kingdom undesirable. The analysis is one of degree and  kind.  Such
         an interpretation sets a high threshold that excludes cases  where,
         without more, it is simply the  wish  of  parties  to  be  together
         however natural that ambition that may be.

         ...

         36.  The exercise of the duty by the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  to
         assess the application under the Immigration Rules  as  to  whether
         there  are  family  or  other  considerations  making  the  child's
         exclusion undesirable inevitably involves an assessment of what the
         child's welfare and best interests require.  Where  an  immigration
         decision engages Article 8 rights, due regard must be had to the UN
         Convention on the Rights of the Child. An entry clearance  decision
         for the admission of a child under  18  is  "an  action  concerning
         children...undertaken by...administrative authorities"  and  so  by
         Article 3 "the best interests of  the  child  shall  be  a  primary
         consideration". Although the statutory duty under s.55  UK  Borders
         Act 2009 only applies to children within the UK, the  broader  duty
         doubtless explains why the Secretary of State's IDI  invites  Entry
         Clearance Officers to consider the statutory guidance issued  under
         s.55.

         37.  Family considerations require an  evaluation  of  the  child's
         welfare including emotional needs. 'Other considerations' come into
         play where there are other aspects  of  a  child's  life  that  are
         serious and compelling - for example where an applicant  is  living
         in an unacceptable social and economic environment. The focus needs
         to be on the circumstances of the child in the light of his or  her
         age, social background and developmental history and  will  involve
         inquiry as to whether: -

             (i)  there is evidence of neglect or abuse;

             (ii) there are unmet needs that should be catered for;

             (iii)     there  are  stable  arrangements  for  the   child's
             physical care.

         The assessment involves consideration as to whether the combination
         of circumstances sufficiently serious  and  compelling  to  require
         admission."

13. The grounds in essence  argue  that  there  is  a  lack  of  reasoning,
    irrelevant factors have been taken into account and certain aspects  of
    the evidence have not been taken into  account.  The  appellant  argues
    that the judge's finding that there are  stable  arrangements  for  the
    appellant's care in Ghana  is  at  odds  with  the  evidence  that  the
    appellant's family's financial difficulties were credible and that  the
    appellant had been adversely affected by the  situation  rendering  the
    finding irrational. It is asserted that the judge has not answered  the
    practical situation the appellant found himself namely the  electricity
    crisis, the significant inflation and that the family  were  restricted
    to one meal a day.  It was not only withdrawal of the child from school
    that ought to have been taken into consideration.

14. The judge has considered the factors in light of the considerations set
    out in the Mundeba case. The fact that the  appellant's  family  is  in
    serious financial difficulty is not at odds with a finding  that  there
    are stable arrangements for his care. The  grounds  of  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal indicated that the family have chosen  to  continue
    to continue to educate his sister so although the  financial  situation
    is difficult the family are currently paying for her  education.  There
    is evidence from the appellant's father that sometimes they had to have
    one meal a day. These factors clearly have an  adverse  effect  on  the
    family and should not be underestimated. However they affect the  whole
    family  including  the  appellant's  sister.   The  judge  has  clearly
    considered all of the relevant factors and evidence. A judge  does  not
    have to set out in detail all of the pieces of evidence considered.  In
    paragraphs  11-16  the  judge  addresses  the  financial  problems  and
    associated consequences. The judge found that the  financial  pressures
    result in some needs of the appellant not being met. The judge has  not
    focussed exclusively on the withdrawal of the appellant from school.

15. The appellant asserts that there is  a  lack  of  appreciation  of  the
    embarrassment that was caused by the  unavoidable  consequence  of  the
    family's circumstances in Ghana. The judge recognised that the  removal
    of the  appellant  from  his  school  was  as  a  result  of  financial
    difficulties - paragraph 11 and 14. The reference to  embarrassment  in
    paragraph 27 is recognised by the judge as resulting from his  untimely
    removal from his school. In any event howsoever the embarrassment might
    have  arisen  this  would  not  amount  to  a  serious  and  compelling
    consideration so as to require admission.

16. It is asserted that  the  judge  observes  that  the  UK  cannot  offer
    universal health or education, these are not matters that come within a
    consideration of the test of serious and compelling circumstances  that
    would make exclusion of the child undesirable. I accept that at this is
    not a relevant consideration. However, I  do  not  consider  that  this
    taints the decision to any or any material extent.

17. The appellant asserts that the judge fails to consider the correct test
    namely the serious and compelling  reasons  and  erred  by  considering
    almost exclusively best interests and erred when he considered  whether
    there are any insurmountable obstacles to life continuing in Ghana.

18. I accept that it is not relevant whether there are  any  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life continuing in Ghana. This is not a fundamental
    finding by the judge. The evaluation of the  appellant's  circumstances
    was not considered  through  the  lens  of  considering  insurmountable
    obstacles.

19. Although the judge has considered the best interests of  the  appellant
    as a primary consideration he has not failed to  consider  the  serious
    and compelling considerations test. The judge correctly considered what
    the best interests  of  the  appellant  were  in  the  context  of  the
    circumstances he faced in Ghana. The test involves evaluating family or
    other considerations, which make exclusion of the child undesirable. As
    set out above in Mundeba it was held that 'the  exercise...  inevitably
    involves an assessment of what the child's welfare and  best  interests
    require'. At  paragraph  20  the  judge  considered  whether  there  is
    evidence that the appellant has an illness and if health care would  be
    unavailable. At paragraph  22  he  considered  that  there  are  stable
    arrangements for the appellant's care in Ghana and  that  there  is  no
    evidence of neglect  or  abuse.  He  refers  in  paragraph  27  to  the
    appellant's removal form school and the possibility that the  appellant
    has  suffered  psychologically  as  not  amounting  to  a  serious  and
    compelling reason to require admission.

20. The appellant faces a  high  hurdle  in  establishing  that  there  are
    serious and compelling family or other considerations, which  make  his
    exclusion  undesirable.  As  set  out  in   Mundeba   there   must   be
    considerations that are persuasive and powerful. The appellant is being
    looked by his loving family who are meeting  his  needs.  Although  the
    appellant is not receiving an education,  I  do  not  consider,  having
    regard to his age at the date of application and his age now, that this
    of  itself  is  sufficient  to  create   a   serious   and   compelling
    consideration. The appellant is living in difficult circumstances as  a
    result of his family's severe financial  difficulties.  These  are  not
    sufficient to amount to serious and compelling consideration  requiring
    admission to the UK. Although the First-tier Tribunal decision is brief
    there is sufficient reasoning for the findings and conclusions reached.
    It was rationally open to the First-tier Tribunal on the facts of  this
    case to find that there were no family or other  considerations,  which
    make the appellant's exclusion undesirable.

21. The judge's findings regarding the ability of the appellant's  aunt  to
    fund his education is not a pre-requisite to the judge's finding on the
    serious and compelling considerations issue.  Whether or not the  judge
    erred in failing to consider the practical  difficulties  is  therefore
    not material.

22. There was no appeal against the findings on Article 8  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules. In any event there are no  circumstances  that  have
    not already been considered under the Immigration Rules  to  require  a
    consideration outside of the Immigration Rules.

Notice of Decision

23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a
    material error on a point of law. The appeal is  dismissed.  The  Entry
    Clearance Officer's decision stands.

24. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously. Having
    considered all the circumstances and evidence  I  do  not  consider  it
    necessary to make an anonymity direction.


Signed   P M Ramshaw   Date 25 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

