
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/14275/2014
                                                               OA/14276/2014
                                                               OA/14279/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                         |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On:  26 May 2016                         |On:  24 August 2016               |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                    THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, BEIJING
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                YIYING ZHANG
                                LIANGLIANG HE
                                LIANGPING HE
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.
For the Respondent:    Ms Cole, instructed by Katani & Co Solicitors.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The respondents, whom we shall call "the claimants", are  nationals  of
    China.  They sought  entry  clearance  for  settlement  in  the  United
    Kingdom as the claimed wife and children of Wenfa He, the sponsor.  The
    sponsor has indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom and it  is
    said that the various  members  of  the  family  are  in  very  regular
    contact, including by the sponsor's visits to China.

 2. This is not the first such application.  A previous application in 2012
    or 2013 was refused on the ground that the Entry Clearance Officer  was
    not satisfied that the relationship  between  the  applicants  and  the
    sponsor  was  genuine  and  subsisting,  nor  that  the  financial  and
    accommodation requirements of the rules would be met.  On appeal, Judge
    Bird found in favour of the claimants (the appellants  before  her)  in
    respect of accommodation and  the  relationship,  but  concluded  that,
    although there might have been sufficient funds  at  the  date  of  the
    hearing, the Entry Clearance Officer had been right  to  conclude  that
    the financial requirements of the rules were not met at the date of the
    decision.  It was thus envisaged that a new application,  supported  by
    better  evidence  in  relation  to  finances,  would  be  made.    That
    application was indeed  made  on  13  August  2014.   Its  refusal,  in
    relation to all three claimants, leads to the present appeal.

 3. The notices of refusal are dated 13 October 2014.  They assert, in each
    case, that photographs provided with the  application  are  false,  and
    that the application therefore falls foul of paragraph  S-EC.2.2(a)  of
    Appendix  FM  to  the  Immigration  Rules,  which  provides   that   an
    application for entry clearance "will normally be refused on grounds of
    suitability" if:

         "Whether or not to the applicant's knowledge


          a) false information,  representations  or  documents  have  been
             submitted in relation to the application...


             ...."

 4.  The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  acknowledged  that  in  the   previous
    determination the relationship between the claimants and their  sponsor
    had been accepted, but said that that had to be regarded as thrown into
    doubt by the submission of a falsified photograph showing the claimants
    and their sponsor together.  The officer therefore declared himself not
    satisfied that the relationship between the claimants and  the  sponsor
    was subsisting.  In those circumstances the Entry Clearance Officer did
    not reach any view on whether the claimants had satisfied the financial
    and other requirements of the rules.

 5. Thus the matter stood when the claimants'  appeals  came  before  Judge
    Morris in the First-tier Tribunal  on  4  June  2015.   The  judge  had
    available to him the papers submitted by the Entry  Clearance  Officer,
    including a report on two of the photographs that had  accompanied  the
    application.  He was asked  to  grant  an  adjournment  to  enable  the
    appellants to provide further evidence relating to  those  photographs.
    The  respondent's  representative  said  that,  if  the  appellant  was
    successful on this issue of the photographs, the respondent would  wish
    to take points relating to the financial requirements of the rules:  in
    particular, it appeared that certain specified documents had  not  been
    supplied in the course of the application.  The judge  apparently  said
    at the hearing that the application by the appellants before him  would
    perhaps not have motivated him to grant an  adjournment,  but  that  if
    issues of finance were to be rehearsed,  there  would  need  to  be  an
    adjournment in order to enable the claimants to adduce evidence on that
    issue.

 6. The judge proceeded to consider the question of the photographs.  After
    short submissions from the parties, he adjourned briefly  and  returned
    to indicate what he called his "then thinking", which he discussed with
    the representatives.  His position at that stage was that on the  basis
    of the evidence before him he was not satisfied  that  the  photographs
    were "false"; that the other requirements of the Immigration Rules  had
    not been considered; and that in those circumstances "the preferred way
    forward might be to remit the applications  to  the  respondent  for  a
    decision to be made, taking account of all relevant considerations  and
    evidence, that is in  accordance  with  the  law".   The  determination
    records agreement that "the course of action I had identified should be
    pursued".  The appeals were then allowed "to the  limited  extent  that
    they may be remitted to the respondent for a decision to be made taking
    account of all  the  substantive  issues  raised  by  these  respective
    applications and appeals".

 7. It is to be noted that the judge did not purport to  determine  any  of
    the issues before him.  In particular, he appears to  have  reached  no
    concluded view on the photographs, which would  presumably  fall  again
    for consideration by the Entry Clearance Officer: an indication of  the
    judge's "then thinking" is obviously not a decision  binding  a  future
    decision-maker.  Nor did the judge make any  decision  on  whether  the
    relationship between the parties had, or had not been established.   It
    may indeed be considered that it  is  difficult  to  see  exactly  what
    function the judge did perform.

 8. The one thing that is clear is that the judge allowed the appeals.  The
    Entry Clearance Officer sought and obtained  permission  to  appeal  to
    this Tribunal.  Permission  was  granted  on  the  ground  that  it  is
    arguable that:

         "As the judge did not engage with the Document Verification  Report
         he was unable to come to the finding that the submitted photographs
         were not "false".  Further, it is  questionable  as  to  whether  a
         photograph which has been admittedly photo  shopped  is  a  "false"
         document".

 9. It is clear that the  principal  issue  with  which  we  are  concerned
    relates to the documents and to the question whether they  fall  within
    the category of "false documents" within the meaning  of  paragraph  S-
    EC.2.2.  Two photographs are in question.  There are other  photographs
    on the file, but we were not  told  that  any  other  photographs  were
    submitted with the application.  Each of  the  photographs  shows  four
    people, three male and one female.  They  are  said  to  be  the  three
    appellants and the sponsor.  In one photograph ("the villa photograph")
    they appear to be posed in front of a villa.  In the  other  photograph
    ("the staircase photograph") they appear to be  posed  in  front  of  a
    staircase.  The positions of the four subjects are exactly reversed  in
    the two photographs: the first claimant is third from the left  in  the
    villa photograph and second from the left in the staircase  photograph.
    Neither of the photographs is dated, but the faces particularly that of
    the first claimant, appear to be  less  marked  by  age  in  the  villa
    photograph  than  in  the  staircase  photograph.    Other   than   the
    photographs  themselves,  the  evidence  available  about  them  is  as
    follows.  First, there is a Document Examination  Report  produced  for
    the Entry Clearance Officer.  It reads as follows:

         "The above two photos are detected as photo shopped images based on
         the following observation:


                . Height: the woman in the [villa photograph]  looks  taller
                  than the same person on the [staircase photograph].


                . Fake edge and poor blending: the subjects' hair edges  are
                  unnatural.  The subjects have been put  in  front  of  new
                  backgrounds.


                . Shadow: on the [staircase photograph], background  flowers
                  cast shadows on the floor.  However, there are no  shadows
                  of subjects.


                .  Overall:  the  images  are  blurring  and  they  are  not
                  realistic.


         Observations: I have conducted a visual examination  of  the  above
         document.  I am not satisfied,  therefore,  that  the  document  is
         false [sic]."

10. Despite the assertion under "observations", it is clear and has  always
    been assumed to be the case that the officer meant to say that  he  was
    satisfied that the document was false.

11. The only other material relating to the  photographs  is  an  assertion
    made by the claimants' representatives to Judge  Morris.   No  evidence
    appears to have been taken, and Judge Morris does not  appear  to  have
    reached a conclusion as to the credibility, accuracy  or  otherwise  of
    what he was being told.  The relevant paragraph  of  the  determination
    reads as follows:

         "24. The Appellants' representative explained  that,  according  to
             her instructions, the family comprising the  Sponsor  and  the
             three Appellants had visited a photographic studio  in  China.
             A photograph had been taken of them together against  a  white
             background.  That photograph of the family group had then been
             superimposed  onto  two  more  picturesque  backgrounds.    In
             further discussion it was acknowledged by both representatives
             that to compose an image by taking a photograph (in this  case
             of the three Appellants and  the  Sponsor)  and  superimposing
             that  image  on  a  new  background  did  not  mean  that  the
             photograph of the family group was false if the photograph  of
             the family group had been taken at  one  time.   The  opposite
             might be the case, of course, if the  group  had  itself  been
             composed from one or more images of the persons  comprised  in
             it. "

12. As is already apparent, that explanation cannot  be  the  whole  story,
    because the two purported family groups are different: they are not the
    result  of  one  photograph  being  superimposed   on   two   different
    backgrounds.

13. Further, it clear that the point about the height of the female subject
    taken by the Entry Clearance Officer is a good one.   In  each  of  the
    photographs she purports to stand next to her  purported  husband,  and
    both of them appear to be standing up straight.  In one of the pictures
    the top of her head is well above the top of her husband's ears; in the
    other, the top of her head is at about the level of the bottom  of  her
    husband's ears.  That is a difference of some inches  in  her  apparent
    height in the two pictures.  The other three subjects  appear  to  have
    about the same relative height in  the  two  pictures.   In  the  villa
    photograph, the sponsor's feet appear to be  enormous,  and  the  grass
    visible between his legs as he stands appears to be of different  focus
    and alignment from that shown elsewhere  in  the  photograph.   In  the
    staircase photograph it is  right  that  the  people  cast  no  shadow,
    although other objects  in  the  photograph  do  cast  a  shadow.   The
    sponsor's feet do not appear to be very firmly on the floor.

14. It was clearly accepted that the photographs produced did not represent
    real occasions when the four individuals stood together in front  of  a
    villa and a staircase respectively.  We consider that  there  is  ample
    reason to suppose that the explanation  provided  was  not  true.   The
    appearance of the pictures themselves shows that, so  far  as  being  a
    single group superimposed on two backgrounds, they are not  the  result
    of one photographic occasion.  And the point about the first claimant's
    height, which was taken by the Entry Clearance Officer, tends  to  show
    that the group of individuals is composite.  We are  not  experts,  but
    looking at the way in which the first claimant's jacket  overlays  that
    of the sponsor, and looking also at  the  colouring  of  the  sponsor's
    jacket and hands, compared with that of the other subjects in the villa
    photograph, we would be very surprised if the sponsor was part  of  the
    group when it was photographed.  Those features or their equivalent are
    less obvious in the staircase photograph.

15. As we have said, there are other photographs on the file.  It  is  not,
    so far as  we  are  aware,  said  that  they  were  produced  with  the
    application.  What is clear is that in those photographs all members of
    the family appear considerably older  than  they  do  in  the  disputed
    photographs.  Thus the latter would appear not even to purport to  show
    a recent occasion (or occasions).

16. The question whether a photograph is capable of being a false  document
    and, if so, under what circumstances it is to  be  regarded  as  false,
    admits of almost limitless debate.  That "the  camera  never  lies"  is
    simply not true.  The most  unsophisticated  endeavour  with  a  camera
    produces an image wholly unlike the world in front of  the  lens.   The
    world is three-dimensional: the image is  two-dimensional.   The  world
    extends to left and right, above and below, the centre of interest: the
    image has nothing beyond its boundaries.  The world  has  some  natural
    colour:  the  image  may  be  monochrome,  or  may,  because   of   the
    sensitivities of the sensor or the film,  have  colour  different  from
    what would be seen by an eye.  The size of the image is  likely  to  be
    different from the size of what is represented; and the  scale  of  the
    image can be infinitely varied, unlike that of  reality.   Yet  we  are
    used to treating images as more or  less  accurate  representations  of
    reality.  That is because we are used to reading them.

17. It  is  because  we  are  used  to  reading  them  that  pictures,  and
    particularly photographs, may be used  to  convey  information  to  us.
    Offered an image, we may interpret the gesture as more that merely  the
    presentation of a picture: in the right context we will treat the image
    as telling us something about a scene or event that can or  could  have
    been observed.  "A picture is worth a thousand words" precisely because
    of this communicative role.

18. But words used in communication may be false, in  the  sense  that  the
    information  conveyed  by  the  words  is  not  true;  and  a  document
    bearing words may itself be false in the sense that it is not what  it
    purports to be.  A message conveyed by a photograph may be false in the
    same ways.  First, an unaltered photograph may not tell the truth:  for
    example  (although  unsophisticated  as  a  photograph)  it  may  be  a
    representation of a  play-acted  scene  rather  than  a  "real"  event.
    Secondly, the artefact presented may not be what it appears or purports
    to be; it may in other words not be an image of what was (or could have
    been) seen through a camera lens.

19.  The  latter  possibility  is  the  product  of   the   alteration   of
    photographs.  From  the  primitive  retouching  of  early  photographs,
    through the smoothing of all wrinkles in portraits of  Soviet  leaders,
    to modern photo-editing programmes whether within a  camera  itself  or
    used afterwards by the agency of computer software, there has been  the
    opportunity of presenting, as a  photograph  of  reality,  an  apparent
    photograph of something  with  a  greater  or  lesser  difference  from
    reality.

20. It seems to us  that  each  of  those  types  of  falseness  makes  the
    photograph  a  "false  document"  in  just  the  same  way  as  if  the
    communication was by way of words in a document.  The  only  difference
    might be thought to be that because the  message  of  a  photograph  is
    implicit rather than being expressed in words, the message may be  more
    liable to being  misconstrued,  particularly  if  the  context  too  is
    unclear.  We think that is not right.  There is a photograph of a young
    man outside Edinburgh Castle.  It might be supposed to say "I have been
    to Edinburgh".  It might be supposed to say "When I was young I had  a
    full head of ginger hair".  Suppose then that it  turns  out  that  the
    image of Edinburgh Castle  has  been  added  to  a  photograph  of  the
    individual with a different background.  The photograph is false.  That
    is most obvious if it was supposed to say "I have been to  Edinburgh".
    It is to be noted that the same applies  even  if  the  individual  had
    indeed been to Edinburgh.  But the photograph is exactly  as  false  if
    its purpose was to show the subjects'  appearance  when  young.   If  a
    document is false, it is false whatever  its  use.  The  only  possible
    escape from that conclusion is a full explanation, at the time  of  the
    presentation of the document, of the means used to produce it.  Only so
    could the stigma of falsity perhaps be removed.

21. It seems to us that in the present case the photographs  are  obviously
    false documents; they are also accepted as being  false  in  the  sense
    that they do not represent a scene which could have been observed by  a
    person standing where the camera was.  Before the First-tier  Tribunal,
    the parties appear to have agreed that if the individuals were standing
    together somewhere, and were photographed together, then the photograph
    was not a false document.  We find that very difficult to accept.  When
    a photograph  which  has  been  altered  is  produced  as  part  of  an
    application, it cannot be right that the officer is  required  to  make
    such distinctions as were agreed in  court,  before  determining  as  a
    matter of classification whether the photograph is or is  not  a  false
    document.  Issues such as those raised  (particularly  if  there  is  a
    clear, full, frank and credible explanation) may  go  to  the  question
    whether a discretion should be  exercised  in  the  applicants'  favour
    despite the falsity of the document, but it seems to  us  that  if  the
    message apparently and obviously conveyed by  the  photograph  and  its
    presentation is a false message, the photograph is a false document.

22. In the present case the  photographs  appear  to  say  "we  four  stood
    together  in  these  two  different  places  on  these  two   different
    occasions, some time apart." Their presentation (bearing in  mind  that
    the question at issue was whether the relationship  was  subsisting  at
    the time of the application and at the time of  the  decision)  implies
    that they are recent photographs.  As we have said, there is reason  to
    suppose that they are not recent photographs,  and  as  we  have  said,
    there is reason to suppose that they are indeed  photographs  taken  at
    different times.  The explanation  provided  is  therefore  itself  not
    true.  It does not look as though the events purportedly  portrayed  by
    the photographs were recent, so that  any  implication  on  that  issue
    conveyed by the presentation of the photographs in the application  was
    itself false.  Further, as we have said, there  is  reason  to  suppose
    that the individuals, when photographed, did not form the grouping that
    is portrayed; and, as we have said, the explanation provided  does  not
    bear examination.

23.  We  reach  the  conclusion  that  these  photographs  were   correctly
    classified by the Entry Clearance Officer as false documents.  This  is
    not a case in which  it  has  ever  been  suggested  that  under  those
    circumstances the discretion  should  be  exercised  differently.   Our
    finding as to the nature of the documents is therefore determinative of
    the appeal.

24. The decision of Judge Morris,  such  as  it  was,  erred  in  law.   In
    relation to the photographs it seems to us that  it  was  at  fault  in
    failing properly to take  account  of  all  the  evidence,  failing  to
    consider properly what was meant by a "false document" as presented  to
    an Entry Clearance Officer, and failing to reach any proper  conclusion
    on the issue such as was capable of binding the parties.  We set  aside
    Judge Morris's determination.  We substitute a determination  that  the
    photographs were false documents within the  meaning  of  paragraph  S-
    EC.2.2., with the effect that in the circumstances of this  appeal  the
    Entry Clearance  Officer  was  right  to  refuse  the  applications  on
    suitability grounds.  We need add only that we entirely agree that  the
    production of these photographs in  the  context  of  this  application
    gives ample reason for suspicion  that  the  relationship  between  the
    parties is not what it is claimed to  be  and  that,  if  it  had  been
    necessary to  determine  the  issue,  we  would  have  concluded  that,
    whatever was the position when the previous determination was made, the
    position at the time of the present decision was that the  relationship
    had not been established on the evidence.

25. The claimants' appeal against the Entry Clearance Officer's decision is
    dismissed.


                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                         Date: 2 August 2016
