
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/14343/2014
                                                               OA/14345/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Upper Tribunal Manchester   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21st October 2015                 |On 3rd November 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                   master b.o. (a minor) (first appellant)
                  master M.o. (a minor) (Second appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr C Timpson, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are citizens of Nigeria born respectively on 4th October
    1997 and 15th June 2000.  At date of application  both  Appellants  are
    minors and the First-tier Tribunal made anonymity directions which  are
    maintained.  The Appellants have made application for  entry  clearance
    to join their mother pursuant  to  paragraph  297  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  Their applications had been  refused  by  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer on 23rd August 2014.

 2. The Appellants had appealed and the appeal had come before Judge of the
    First-tier Tribunal Davies sitting at Manchester on 4th June 2015.   In
    a determination promulgated on 11th June 2015 the  Appellants'  appeals
    were allowed.  Judge Davies found that  all  three  witnesses  who  had
    given  testimony  before  him  were  credible,  that   the   Appellants
    discharged the burden of proof upon them and  satisfied  him  that  the
    United  Kingdom  based  Sponsor  had  sole  responsibility  for   their
    upbringing and therefore they met the requirements of paragraph 297  of
    the Immigration Rules.

 3. On 16th June 2015 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds  of  Appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal.  Those Grounds of Appeal contended that  the  Judge
    had failed to give reasons  or  adequate  reasons  for  findings  on  a
    material  matter  namely  that  the  Judge  had  made  inadequate   and
    speculative findings by accepting that the Appellants'  mother  had  no
    responsibility for the Appellants despite the fact that she had contact
    with them.

 4. On 18th August 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Chohan granted permission
    to appeal.  He noted that it was argued that the Judge had erred in law
    by finding that the Appellants' mother had no responsibility  for  them
    in Nigeria and that because she continued to exercise contact with  the
    Appellants and therefore the Appellants' father  the  Sponsor  did  not
    have sole responsibility.  It was contended that  there  was  a  letter
    from the Appellants' mother and that  this  is  not  mentioned  in  the
    Judge's findings and that no weight had been given  to  that  evidence.
    Furthermore Judge Chohan concluded that the Judge had not made findings
    on whether or not the Appellants'  mother  had  any  contact  with  the
    Appellants but found that had the  Judge  dealt  with  that  particular
    point then there would be no arguable case for an error of law.

 5. It is on that basis that the appeal comes before me solely to determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellants appear by  their  instructed
    Counsel Mr Timpson.  The Secretary of State appears by her Home  Office
    Presenting Officer Mr Harrison.

Submissions/Discussion

 6. Mr Timpson points out that the  documents  have  to  be  looked  at  in
    isolation from the letter from the mother and that this letter which is
    dated 16th December 2013 is important for two factors.   Firstly  there
    is no mention therein as to contact and  secondly  when  the  issue  is
    considered by the Judge he takes contact into account in  reaching  his
    findings.  He points  out  that  the  Judge  heard  evidence  from  the
    children's father, brother and wife and that the Home Office Presenting
    Officer cross-examined the Appellants' father.  The fact  that  he  did
    not cross-examine other witnesses was a matter for his choosing.

 7. Mr Timpson takes me to paragraph 14 of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's
    determination.  The Judge has stated:

         "He confirmed that his wife,  the  Appellants'  mother,  still  had
         contact with the children on the telephone and saw them about  once
         every six months.  He did not want them to have a  lot  of  contact
         with their mother because he wanted them to  concentrate  on  their
         school work."

 8. Mr Timpson therefore emphasises that the Grounds of Appeal are not just
    inaccurate they are plainly therefore wrong  and  that  the  Judge  had
    taken into account contact.  So far  as  the  letter  is  concerned  he
    submits the fact that  it  was  not  referred  to  does  not  make  any
    difference because the letter does not take the issues any further.  He
    submits there is no error of law and asked me to dismiss the appeal.

 9.  Mr  Harrison  in  response  acknowledges  that  the   Judge   in   his
    determination has clearly commented both with regard to contact and the
    letter and does no more than seek to rely on the grounds.

The Law

10.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

11. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

12. This is a well  constructed  determination.   The  submission  made  on
    behalf of the Secretary of  State  is  that  the  Judge  was  wrong  to
    conclude that there was  sole  responsibility  and  seeks  to  rely  on
    purported inadequate and speculative findings  by  accepting  that  the
    Appellants' mother has no responsibility for the  Appellants  when  she
    has contact.  With the greatest of respect to the  Secretary  of  State
    the grounds amount to little more than  disagreement.   The  Judge  has
    given  at  paragraph  14  due   consideration   to   the   letter   and
    acknowledgement of the limited contact which the Appellants' mother has
    by way of telephone.  The letter in question does not I  am  satisfied,
    as put by Mr Timpson and indeed not pushed further by Mr Harrison,  add
    anything to the Secretary of State's basis for appeal.

13. This is a  Judge  who  has  taken  oral  testimony  from  a  number  of
    witnesses.  He has found those witnesses to be credible.  The Secretary
    of State through her Home Office  representative  at  the  hearing  has
    chosen only to cross-examine the Appellants' father.  That of course is
    a decision that was totally open to the Home Office Presenting Officer.
     There is nothing to suggest that the  approach  adopted  by  the  Home
    Office Presenting Officer was wrong.  However  it  does  not  sit  well
    following a full hearing for the Secretary of State to  seek  to  raise
    objections to the findings of the Judge seemingly on the basis that the
    Judge has erred his analysis of the evidence when he  has  set  out  in
    considerable detail the basis upon which he reached his  decision,  has
    considered all witness  evidence  and  found  that  the  Appellant  can
    discharge the burden of proof and  remain  satisfied  that  the  United
    Kingdom based Sponsor  has  sole  responsibility  for  the  Appellants'
    upbringing.  In  such  circumstances  the  determination  discloses  no
    material error of law and the findings are  ones  that  the  Judge  was
    perfectly  entitled  to  reach  namely  that  the  Appellants  met  the
    requirements of paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules.

14. These are Appellants who seek to join their Sponsor in  the  UK.   This
    appeal very nearly did not take  place  on  21st  October  due  to  the
    administrative error  the  Sponsor  not  been  served  at  the  correct
    address.   The  administration  has  referred  to  the  fact  that  the
    Sponsor's address is 14 [ - ] and not as set out on  the  notices,  nor
    indeed endorsed on the court file as 4 [ -  ].   Unfortunately  however
    with the very considerable assistance of Mr Harrison, for  which  I  am
    most grateful, and by the pure coincidence that Mr Timpson happened  to
    be in court earlier that day the matter was able to proceed and I  hope
    the administrative error can now be corrected and the parties  properly
    served with notice of this decision.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses no material error  of  law
and the appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed and  the  decision  of
the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity order.  No application is made  to
vary that order and it is maintained.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
