
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/14409/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 20 August 2014                             |On 4 September 2014          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVID TAYLOR

                                   Between

                              MR JIBIN PAULOSE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Heller of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State I  have,  for  the
    sake of consistency, retained the original  designations  of  appellant
    and respondent as in the First-tier Tribunal.

2.   The respondent  Secretary  of  State  has  appealed,  with  permission,
    against the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Owens  who,  in  a
    determination promulgated on 1st  May  2014,  allowed  the  appellant's
    appeal against the respondent's refusal to grant him entry clearance as
    the spouse of a British wife who is resident and  settled  in  the  UK.
    His wife, Mrs Leigh Samantha Warren is his sponsor.

3.   The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  allowed  the  appeal  both  under  the
    Immigration Rules and under Article 8 of the ECHR.  In respect  of  the
    Rules, she found, firstly, that  there  were  no  aggravating  features
    which entitled the respondent to refuse the application under paragraph
    320(11) of the Immigration Rules.  In  that  respect  she  applied  the
    decision of the Upper Tribunal in  PS  (paragraph  320(11)  discretion:
    care needed)  India  [2010]  UKUT  440  and  found  specifically,  with
    reasons, that the respondent had failed  to  discharge  the  burden  of
    proof in asserting that the appellant had used deception and that there
    were aggravating features.  The judge  also  found  that  the  sponsor,
    having submitted evidence of her employment and of her earnings met the
    minimum financial requirements as laid down in the Immigration Rules.

4.    In  relation  to  Article  8  and  in  finding  that   it   would   be
    disproportionate to refuse entry clearance, the judge at  paragraph  44
    of her determination said this:

         "I find that it is not reasonable for family life to take place  in
         India since the sponsor's British citizen 13 year old  daughter  is
         seriously  disabled.   She  suffers  from   inter   alia   profound
         developmental delay, four limb motor disorder and seizure disorder.
          She requires extensive input from the NHS and an  enormous  amount
         of personal care which is provided by the sponsor who also  to  her
         credit works full-time as a manager in a care home.  A  substantial
         amount  of  documentation  was  provided   in   relation   to   the
         stepdaughter's health and care needs.  I find that it would not  be
         in the best interests for this British citizen child to relocate to
         India interrupting her medical treatment, care arrangements in  the
         UK and her schooling.  I find that her mother the  sponsor  is  her
         main carer and that her natural father has nothing to do with  her.
         I also accept the sponsor's evidence that  the  appellant  assisted
         her with caring for her stepdaughter in particular helping  her  to
         move her as well as interacting with her.  I also find  that  given
         that the sponsor is a British citizen, has lived her entire life in
         the UK, works full-time and has no connection with India apart from
         her husband that it would  not  be  reasonable  to  expect  her  to
         relocate."


5.   It should also be stated that no issues arises as to  the  genuineness
    of this marriage.  The genuineness of the marriage has been accepted by
    the respondent.

6.   The grounds submitted by the respondent argue that  paragraph  320(11)
    applies because the appellant, it was argued,  had  used  deception  in
    order to obtain employment in the UK.  Having heard submissions from Mr
    Kandola on this point and having considered the very  detailed  reasons
    for rejecting the argument given by the First-tier Tribunal Judge, I am
    satisfied that there is no merit in the  ground.   I  can  identify  no
    error of law by the First-tier Tribunal in her decision  rejecting  the
    argument that the appellant should be precluded from  entering  the  UK
    under paragraph 320(11).   The  judge  correctly  identified  that  the
    burden of proof in such a case was on the respondent  and  the  judge's
    decision was plainly open to her on the evidence.

7.   The second ground argues, simply, in relation to Article  8  that  the
    judge did not consider Article  8  under  the  Rules  but  undertook  a
    freestanding Article 8 assessment.  It is fair to say  that  the  judge
    could and should have dealt briefly with the requirements of the  Rules
    under  Article  8  before  considering  whether  to  proceed  with   an
    assessment of Article 8 outside the Rules.  Whilst the judge would have
    been wise to have made reference to the Article  8  provisions  of  the
    Immigration Rules, it is clear from the facts of  this  case  that  the
    appellant could not meet them.  The judge would then have had  to  show
    exceptional circumstances for considering Article 8 outside  the  Rules
    but, in my judgment, she has done so with great clarity.  Her reference
    to the needs of the severely disabled daughter of the sponsor  and  her
    findings as to the role that the appellant plays in his  stepdaughter's
    life are such that the judge would, in any  event,  have  proceeded  to
    consider the question of proportionality.  If there was such  an  error
    of law in the determination it was not such that  it  was  material  or
    that the ultimate decision of the First-tier Tribunal would  have  been
    different.

8.   At the hearing before me I heard submissions from Mr Kandola on behalf
    of the Secretary of State.  In essence, he said no more than to  repeat
    the matters set out in the grounds.  Having read the entire file before
    commencement of the  hearing,  I  did  not  call  upon  Ms  Heller  but
    indicated that I was satisfied that there was no material error of  law
    in the First-tier Tribunal decision.

9.   I indicated that I would give my reasons in  a  written  determination
    and I have done so as set out above.

Decision

There was no error of law in the determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
in this case.  The decision shall stand.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge David Taylor
3 September 2014
