
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA145352014
     OA145362014
     OA145372014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 March 2016                              |On 15 June 2016               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                    [n f]
                                 sebina [f]
                                    [b f]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr Hussain, instructed by Harris and Green
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants were born in 2007, 1997 and 2011  respectively  and  are
    citizens of Nigeria.  They appealed against a  decision  of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer (ECO) who refused their  applications  for  leave  to
    enter as the children of a person present and  settled  in  the  United
    Kingdom (sponsor Flower [S]).  The  applications  were  refused  on  15
    September 2014.  First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Hindson),  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 17 July 2015, allowed the appeals under the  Immigration
    Rules.  The Entry Clearance Officer now appeals,  with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The  appeals  turned  on  the  question  of  sole  responsibility  (see
    paragraph 297(i)(e) of HC 395 (as amended)).  The judge found that  the
    United Kingdom sponsor had sole responsibility for the appellants.  The
    grounds of appeal challenge that finding.  First, it is asserted that

         "... the judge accepted the oral evidence of the  sponsor  and  his
         wife finding them to be credible witnesses.  This, despite the lack
         of  documentary  evidence  which  is  vital  to  the  core  of  the
         appellant's appeal.  For example, there was no adequate evidence to
         show that the appellants' mother did not have any involvement  with
         the appellants."

    The appellants' case was that their father (the sponsor) sends money to
    the appellants' mother who, in  turn,  sends  the  money  on  to  their
    grandmother.  It was submitted in the grounds that this account was not
    "plausible and demonstrated an indication that the  appellants'  mother
    has some involvement in the appellants' lives."

3.   In essence, the grounds raised  questions  of  perversity.   The  judge
    found that the witnesses who appeared before him (the sponsor  and  his
    wife, who is the mother of the third appellant) gave credible  evidence
    which withstood a detailed cross-examination by the Presenting Officer.
     The judge found that "the appellants' maternal  grandmother  has  [the
    appellants'] day-to-day care and  they  are  supported  financially  by
    their father."  The judge found that the sponsor "funds their education
    and makes all important decisions relating to their upbringing".  There
    appeared to be some discrepancies [20] as to the  documentary  evidence
    of payment made by the sponsor to the  appellants.   Whilst  the  judge
    acknowledged that this might "undermine the credibility of the sponsor"
    [21] he decided, in the context of all the evidence  before  him,  that
    the sponsor had given truthful evidence and, in particular, the unusual
    arrangement whereby money was sent to the mother of the  appellants  to
    be sent  on  to  the  grandmother  (who  had  day-to-day  care  of  the
    appellants) was true.  It was for the judge to act as  a  robust  fact-
    finder, a task which he has  plainly  discharged.   It  cannot,  in  my
    opinion, be said that the evidence of the  sponsor  was  such  that  no
    judge, directing him or herself correctly as to the law, could find the
    evidence  credible.   The  arrangements  were  unusual,  as  the  judge
    acknowledged,  and  it  was  open  to   the   judge   to   find   that,
    notwithstanding  the  fact  that  the  arrangements  were  out  of  the
    ordinary, they were nonetheless true and provided  evidence  sufficient
    to prove to the required standard that the sponsor was exercising  sole
    responsibility.

4.   The grounds go on to complain that the judge accepted  the  appellants'
    mother's   evidence   that,   "she   had   abdicated    her    parental
    responsibilities as confirmed in  her  letter."   The  Entry  Clearance
    Officer challenges that  evidence  on  the  basis  that  there  was  no
    independent corroborative evidence to confirm that the letter from  the
    mother upon which the judge relied had actually been  written  by  her.
    With respect to the ECO, there was no requirement for the judge to seek
    such corroborative evidence.  The judge had to  make  findings  on  the
    evidence which was put before him.  That he has  done.   Another  judge
    may have reached a completely different finding on the  same  evidence;
    however, that is not the point.   The  judge's  train  of  thought  can
    clearly be discerned in the decision and I reject the  submission  that
    the reasons given by the judge  were  not  adequate  (HS  (Afghanistan)
    [2009] EWCA Civ  771.)   The  Upper  Tribunal  should  hesitate  before
    interfering with a decision of the First-tier Tribunal which  has  been
    achieved by a proper and thorough examination of the evidence and which
    is supported by cogent reasoning.  It was open to the judge  to  accept
    the evidence given to him orally by the sponsor and  his  wife  and  to
    accept also written evidence of the mother of the appellants.   Nothing
    which is said in the grounds undermines those findings.

Notice of Decision

5.   This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 9 June 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
