
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/15463/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 1 September 2016                       |On 18 October 2016               |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                TAHMINA AKTAR
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, NEW DELHI

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M K Mustafa, Kalam Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh.  She appealed to a  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal against the refusal of  the  respondent  on  31
    October 2014 to issue her with entry clearance as  the  spouse  of  the
    sponsor, Mr Md Abdul Ahad.

2.   The refusal was on the basis that the Entry Clearance Officer  did  not
    accept that the sponsor's claimed employment was genuine, believed that
    false declarations had been made in respect of his  ongoing  employment
    and income and also refused it under  Appendix  FM-SE  because  he  had
    failed to provide specified evidence  in  that  the  employment  letter
    provided was dated more than 28 prior to the date of  the  application.



3.   The judge, having heard evidence, found it was  more  likely  than  not
    that the sponsor's employment was genuine employment and did  not  find
    that the respondent had established that false declarations were  made.
    The judge noted however that the employer's letter was not  within  the
    required timescale, being more than 28 days prior to the  date  of  the
    application.  The judge noted what was  said  in  the  IDIs  concerning
    evidential flexibility but did not accept that there had been a failure
    to comply with the evidential flexibility policy.  The document was not
    missing and it failed to comply with the  requirements  of  the  Rules.
    The appeal was hence dismissed on this basis.

4.   The appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal on the  basis
    that it was arguable that  the  respondent  had  failed  to  apply  her
    evidential flexibility policy to the employer's letter.

5.   Mr Mustafa relied on and developed the points made in the grounds.   He
    argued that, in line with paragraph 3.4.2 of the relevant IDI, the fact
    of the letter of the employer not being dated within  28  days  of  the
    application was a minor evidential problem of  the  kind  mentioned  in
    paragraph 3.4.2 in respect of which the decision maker was also able to
    grant  an  application  despite  such  a  problem.   In  addition   the
    respondent had failed to exercise discretion in respect of paragraph  D
    of Appendix FM-SE(d)(i) which  is  relevant  where  the  applicant  has
    submitted a document in the wrong format.  It would be permissible  for
    an application to be granted exceptionally provided the decision  maker
    was satisfied that the document was genuine and that the applicant  met
    the requirement to which the document related.  It was argued that  the
    letter was a document in the wrong format, and on the  basis  that  the
    judge had found that the job was genuine, it followed that  the  letter
    was genuine and also it complied with the Appendix FM-SE  requirements.
    There had therefore  been  a  complete  failure  on  the  part  of  the
    Secretary of State to exercise discretion and the judge  had  erred  in
    not so finding.

6.   As regards ground 2, there  was  a  conflict  between  the  Immigration
    Rules and ss.85 and 86 of the 2002 Act.  Section 85A did not prohibit a
    First-tier Tribunal Judge from considering post  application  evidence,
    as that provision had not been  amended,  and  this  was  confirmed  at
    paragraph 58 of SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387.  The appellant was  not
    trying to bring in an improvement in circumstances but asking the judge
    to consider evidence that was before the Secretary of State and  before
    her.  In light  of  this  it  was  argued  that  the  judge  had  erred
    materially in not considering evidence  appertaining  at  the  time  of
    decision to refuse and not discharging the obligation under Section 86.



7.   In his submissions Mr Bramble relied on and developed  points  made  in
    the Rule 24 response.  As regards ground  1,  it  was  not  a  case  of
    missing  evidence,  but  Appendix  FM-SE  specifically   required   the
    provision of an employment letter not dated more than  28  days  before
    the application.  It was not a minor evidential problem but a  specific
    requirement of evidence.  The judge had noted this at paragraph  24  of
    her decision.  With regard to evidential flexibility, what  was  quoted
    in the grounds failed to set out the preamble  which  referred  to  the
    specified evidence to be provided.  It was not a case of  the  document
    being in the wrong format but it was the case that the  letter  bore  a
    date more than 28 days before the application which was  a  requirement
    of the Rules.  He referred to the decision of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    Akhter [2014] UKUT 00297 (IAC).  This was a  reminder  that  it  was  a
    question of the clear and simple meaning of what was required and  that
    did not apply in this set of  circumstances.

8.   With regard to ground 2, the preamble to the Rule required evidence  to
    be provided including for salaried work and on that basis there  was  a
    specific historic time line in the Rules  which needed to be  satisfied
    and the evidence  provided  fell  short  of  the  requirements  of  the
    specified evidence.  Accordingly there were no errors  of  law  in  the
    decision.

9.   Mr Mustafa had no points to make by way of reply.

10.  I reserved my decision.

Discussion

11.  It is common ground that  the  application  did  not  comply  with  the
    requirement of paragraph EC-P.1.1(d) of Appendix FM of the  Immigration
    Rules (E-ECP.3.1), in that the employment letter provided  to  evidence
    the sponsor's employment was dated more  than  28  days  prior  to  the
    application.  On  behalf  of  the  applicant  it  is  argued  that  the
    application may be granted exceptionally, provided the  decision  maker
    is satisfied that the document is genuine and the applicant  meets  the
    requirement to which the document relates, under  paragraph  D  of  the
    Appendix FM-SED(d)(i) if the applicant has submitted a document in  the
    wrong format.  I do not however consider that this can be described  as
    a document in the wrong format.  There is nothing wrong with the format
    of the document, but it is the fact that its date is not within 28 days
    of the period prior to the application which is the  problem  with  the
    document.  I accept that it follows from the judge's finding  that  the
    document is genuine, but that does not alter the fact that it cannot be
    said to be a document in the wrong format and therefore cannot  benefit
    from the provisions of paragraph D.

12.  Nor do  I  agree  that  the  failure  to  comply  with  this  mandatory
    requirement of the Rules  is  properly  to  be  described  as  a  minor
    evidential problem. The requirement is a clear one, and it was not met.
     It is entirely open to the respondent to have a policy which  includes
    the strict requirements such as this, and albeit there is  the  IDI  to
    which I have referred above which enables the decision maker  to  grant
    an application despite minor evidential problems,  I  do  not  consider
    that this can be so characterised and as a consequence  the  judge  did
    not err in that regard either.

13.  As regards ground 2, the point here I think is  answered  by  whist  Mr
    Bramble said about the specific historic time line which  is  required.
    It is, as noted above, a mandatory requirement of the  Rules  that  the
    employment letter must not be dated more than 28 days prior to the date
    of the application.  It is quite separate from the  fact  that  Section
    83(5) of the 2002 Act allows a First-tier Judge  to  consider  evidence
    about the circumstances appertaining at the time  of  the  respondent's
    decision, and nor is the matter affected  by  s.86(2)  which  places  a
    positive obligation on the judge to determine  any  matter  which  s.85
    requires her to consider. The judge was not in  a  position  where  she
    could ignore the specific provision of  the  Immigration  Rule  setting
    this particular timeline that it does, on the basis  of  what  she  was
    empowered to do by s.85(5).  I do not see anything  in  SS  (Congo)  to
    assist the appellant in this regard. The remedy in  this  situation  to
    make a fresh application which complies with the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  Relief cannot be obtained by effectively seeking to
    have a provision of the Rules ignored as is sought to be done  in  this
    case.

Notice of Decision

14.  Accordingly I consider that no error of law  in  the  judge's  decision
    has been identified.   Her decision dismissing the appeal remains.

15.  No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen              18 October 2016


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen              18 October 2016
