


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/15437/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at  IAC Manchester                 |Decisions and Reasons Promulgated |
|On  1 April 2016                         |On 13 April 2016                  |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           syed afzan hussain shah
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Khan of Burrell Jenkins Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
   (SSHD). However, for the purposes of this decision, I shall refer to  the
   SSHD as the respondent and Mr Shah as  the  appellant,  reflecting  their
   positions as they were in the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan,  born  on  16  October  1985.  He
   applied for entry clearance to the  United  Kingdom  as  a  spouse  under
   paragraph  EC-P.1.1  of  Appendix  FM  of  the  immigration  rules.   His
   application was refused on 29 October 2014 on the grounds that  he  could
   not meet the financial requirements in paragraph E-ECP.3.3.1 since he had
   not provided the specified evidence required under Appendix FM-SE of  the
   immigration rules to demonstrate that his sponsor's gross  annual  income
   met the level required under the rules. The  respondent  noted  that  the
   sponsor worked for two employers but that  with  respect  to  the  second
   employer, the specified evidence had not been  produced  and  accordingly
   the income from that employment could not be included.

3. The appellant lodged an appeal against that decision. In response to  the
   appeal the respondent maintained the decision. The respondent noted, with
   respect to the sponsor's second place of employment, that her cash salary
   from that employment was  not  reflected  in  her  bank  statements.  The
   respondent did not consider that  the  decision  was  in  breach  of  the
   appellant's Article 8 rights.

4. The appellant's appeal came before the First-tier  Tribunal  on  26  June
   2015 and was allowed by Judge Hillis in a decision promulgated on 8  July
   2015. The judge noted that this was a case where the respondent  accepted
   that the sponsor met the  substantive  requirements  of  the  immigration
   rules regarding her income but where she had not paid the cash  into  her
   bank  account  and  had  therefore  failed  to  satisfy  the   evidential
   requirements in Appendix FM-SE. He therefore found that the  requirements
   of the immigration rules had not been met and  he  accordingly  dismissed
   the appeal under the immigration rules. However  the  judge  went  on  to
   allow the appeal on Article 8 grounds, on  the  basis  that  it  was  not
   proportionate to require the appellant to make a fresh  application  when
   it was accepted that  he  otherwise  met  all  the  requirements  of  the
   immigration rules.

5. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought by  the  respondent
   on the basis that the judge had in effect applied a "near miss" principle
   in his proportionality  assessment  and  that  this  did  not  constitute
   compelling circumstances as set out in the case of The Secretary of State
   for the Home Department v SS (Congo) & Ors [2015] EWCA Civ 387.

6. Permission to appeal was granted on 29 October 2015.

Appeal hearing and submissions

7. At the hearing Mr McVeety relied upon  the  grounds  of  appeal  and  the
   principles in SS (Congo).  He submitted that the judge had  implied  that
   the requirement in Appendix FM-SE was a  mere  technicality,  whereas  it
   clearly was not. The appellant, in order to succeed under Article 8,  had
   to demonstrate compelling circumstances, which he had failed  to  do.  He
   was best advised to make a fresh application.

8. Mr Khan submitted  that  there  were  compelling  circumstances  in  that
   sponsor had had to wait a long time  since  her  marriage  to  bring  her
   husband to the UK  and  that  the  delay  was  having  a  toll  on  their
   relationship. She had made the application without legal  advice  and  in
   ignorance of the requirements of the immigration rules. She was suffering
   from cysts on her ovaries but had delayed  having  an  operation  as  she
   would not be able to work and had hoped that she would be  successful  in
   bringing her husband to the UK so that he could support her. The lack  of
   legal advice, the sponsor's medical  condition  and  the  time  and  cost
   involved in the application so far were all compelling reasons justifying
   a grant of leave, when the appellant was able to meet all the substantive
   requirements of the rules.


Consideration and findings


9. As I advised the parties, the judge had, in my  view,  clearly  erred  in
   law  by  failing  to  identify  any  compelling  circumstances   in   the
   appellant's case for the purposes of Article 8. He  had  plainly  treated
   the requirements of Appendix FM-SE as little more than a technicality and
   had in effect considered the fact that the appellant was able to meet the
   substantive financial  requirements  in  Appendix  FM  as  sufficient  to
   justify the conclusion he  reached.  However  such  a  view  was  clearly
   contrary to the principles set out in SS (Congo), as relied upon  by  the
   respondent, where it was stated as follows:
   "51.   In our judgment, the approach to Article 8 in  the  light  of  the
       Rules in Appendix FM-SE should be the  same  as  in  respect  of  the
       substantive LTE and LTR Rules in Appendix FM.  In  other  words,  the
       same general position applies, that  compelling  circumstances  would
       have to apply to justify a grant of LTE or  LTR  where  the  evidence
       Rules are not complied with.
    1. This is for two principal reasons. First, the evidence rules have the
       same general objective as the substantive rules, namely to limit  the
       risk that someone is  admitted  into  the  United  Kingdom  and  then
       becomes a burden on public resources, and the Secretary of State  has
       the same primary function in relation to them, to assess the risk and
       put in place measures which are judged suitable to contain it  within
       acceptable bounds. Similar weight should be given to  her  assessment
       of what the public interest requires in both contexts."
10.  The  judge's  decision  did  not,  in  fact,  identify  any  compelling
   circumstances in the appellant's case and there is no indication that  he
   gave appropriate weight to the public interest. Accordingly his  decision
   is not sustainable and I set it aside.

11. In re-making the  decision,  I  find  that  the  weight  of  the  public
   interest is not in the  appellant's  favour.  Whilst  the  appellant  and
   sponsor may have been waiting for some time to be together, and whilst it
   may be that the sponsor has some medical issues, there  was  no  evidence
   before the ECO, and neither is there any evidence before me, to show that
   the sponsor's and appellant's circumstances were,  or  are,  such  as  to
   justify a departure from the requirement that she be able to support  the
   appellant financially to the level required under the rules. Indeed,  her
   income did meet the relevant threshold, but she  had  not  deposited  her
   earnings into the bank so as to  enable  her  to  produce  the  specified
   evidence required under Appendix FM. No satisfactory reason was given  as
   to why the appellant could not simply have made a  fresh  application  or
   why he could not now do  so,  ensuring  that  the  sponsor's  income  was
   deposited into her account and ensuring that the  required  evidence  was
   produced with the application.


12. Accordingly I find that the  appellant  has  failed  to  show  that  the
   respondent's decision was in any way disproportionate or that it amounted
   to a breach of his right to respect for his family life under  Article  8
   of the ECHR. In re-making the decision, I therefore dismiss the appeal on
   human rights grounds as well as under the immigration rules.

DECISION

13. The making of the decision  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
   making of an error on a point of law. The decision has been set aside and
   the SSHD's appeal is allowed. I re-make the  decision  and  substitute  a
   decision dismissing Mr Shah's appeal on all grounds.










                               Signed

                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
