
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA156282014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 April 2016                     |On 26 May 2016                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

                      Entry Clearance Officer, CHENNAI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MRS HAREKAL USHA PRABHU
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss A Prabhu


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The respondent (hereafter the claimant) is a citizen of India aged  66.
     She had previously been granted leave to enter the UK from 1974  until
    1982 where she lived with her  husband.   From  January  2009  she  was
    granted entry clearance  on  a  family  visit  basis  on  a  number  of
    occasions up to 2 June 2014.  On 27 August 2014 she applied  for  entry
    clearance as an adult dependent  relative  of  her  daughter  Sangeetha
    Prabhu, a British citizen.  Her application was  refused  by  an  Entry
    Clearance Officer (ECO) in Chennai on 6 November  2014.   That  refusal
    was reviewed by an Entry Clearance Manager  on  29  January  2015,  who
    maintained the refusal.  The appellant appealed.  On 25 September 2015,
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge R Cooper) dismissed her appeal under the
    Immigration Rules but allowed it on Article 8 ECHR grounds.  The thrust
    of the judge's reasons for allowing the appeal on Article 8 grounds are
    set out in [44] - [45] of the judge's determination:-

         "44. I  am  satisfied  that  the  Appellant's  mental  health  will
             continue to be adversely affected by the  on-going  separation
             from each of her family members.  Whilst she may  be  able  to
             receive counselling and be treated with anti-depressents,  her
             degree of social isolation in India is such that this does not
             constitute adequate care.  Although no evidence was  presented
             to confirm the claim made regarding the inadequacy,  and  even
             abuse suffered in care homes in India,  I  am  satisfied  that
             such provision would not usually  be  deemed  appropriate  for
             families from the subcontinent, either on religious or  social
             grounds.  I am satisfied that the decision will result in  the
             sponsor, who is a British citizen by birth,  having  to  leave
             the UK and her own children here in order to  look  after  her
             mother.  This will  result  in  the  loss  of  her  employment
             (including the  resultant  loss  of  tax  revenue),  but  more
             importantly will substantially interfere with her  own  family
             life with her husband and three children.  Her eldest child is
             now engaged and lives  independently,  but  the  two  youngest
             continue to live at home with the sponsor and her husband.  In
             particular I consider the position of Aditya, who at the  date
             of the decision was 17 years of age, and is therefore a child,
             whose interests must be a primary consideration (s55  Borders,
             Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009).  At  the  time  of  the
             decision he was at a crucial stage of his education  preparing
             to undertake A level examinations.  I consider that  the  loss
             of his mother if she had to move to live  in  India  would  be
             detrimental to his best interests.  When  considering  matters
             in the round I am not  satisfied  that  family  life  for  the
             Appellant,  her  daughter  and  grandchildren  can  reasonably
             continue in India, and nor can  it  be  maintained  adequately
             without  regular  personal  contact  between  all  the  family
             members.

         45.  In considering all of the evidence in  the  round  and  having
             made the findings of  fact  set  out  above,  particularly  in
             relation  to  the  Appellant's  deterioration  in  her  mental
             health, I am satisfied that compelling circumstances do  exist
             in this case and that  the  Appellant's  personal  and  family
             circumstances  are  such  that  the  decision  constitutes   a
             disproportionate interference  in  the  Appellant's  right  to
             family life and as such breaches the  UK's  obligations  under
             Article 8".

2.   The appellant (hereafter the ECO) was successful in obtaining  a  grant
    of permission to appeal.

3.    I  granted  permission  to  Miss  Prabhu,  the  granddaughter  of  the
    claimant, to represent her at the hearing before me.

4.   The grounds of appeal  were  essentially  four-headed.   First  it  was
    alleged that the judge had erred in jumping straight from consideration
    of the Immigration Rules to determining whether Article 8 was  engaged,
    thereby failing to adopt the approach enjoined by the Court  of  Appeal
    in SSHD v SS (Congo) and Others [2015] EWCA Civ 387 which was  to  deal
    with the Rules first, not just to see if its requirements were met  but
    also so as "to assess the force of the public interest given expression
    in those Rules" (SS (Congo) at [44].

5.   The second contention was that when finding that the claimant's  mental
    health had been adversely affected by social isolation  the  judge  had
    failed fully to consider the availability of social care in India.  The
    judge was said to have discounted such care and made a  finding  as  to
    the inadequacy of care homes in India that was not open to him  on  the
    evidence.

6.   The third contention was that the judge had erred in giving  weight  to
    an immaterial matter, namely "the unsupported view that  future  [visa]
    applications from the [claimant] will be viewed  with  suspicion  given
    that [she] had applied for settlement".  It was agreed  that  this  was
    "no more than mere speculation on the part of the  judge".   A  similar
    criticism was levelled at the judge's comment that the claimant will be
    less able to visit in any event due to age and frailty.

7.   The final ground of  challenge  was  that  the  judge  had  incorrectly
    concluded  that  the  ECO's  decision  was  an  interference  with  the
    claimant's family life because the  claimant's  personal  relationships
    were presently being maintained by indirect means and could  reasonably
    be continued in India.

8.   I am not persuaded that these grounds identify any legal error  on  the
    part of the judge.

9.   As regards the judge's approach to  the  Rules,  he  himself  cites  SS
    (Congo)  and  makes  very  clear  that  he  approaches  the  Article  8
    assessment through the lens of the Rules.  Thus at [6] - [7] the  judge
    identifies as "The issues for the Tribunal":-

         "6.  The Respondent's decision  of  6  November  2014  refused  the
             Appellant's application on a number of grounds;

             (i)  Firstly,  that  she  did  not  fulfill  the  relationship
                  requirements of paragraph E-ECDR.2.4 of Appendix FM of the
                  Immigration Rules (HC395 as amended) as the  ECO  was  not
                  satisfied that the Appellant required  long-term  personal
                  care to perform everyday tasks, due  to  age,  illness  or
                  disability.

             (ii)  Secondly,  that  the  application  does  not  raise  any
                  exceptional circumstances warranting consideration by  the
                  Secretary of State of a grant of entry  clearance  outside
                  the rules.

         7.   In her grounds of  appeal,  the  Appellant  submits  that  the
             Respondent  failed  to  adequately  consider  the  exceptional
             circumstances which I accept is an appeal on the grounds  that
             the decision is in contrary to s6(1) Human Rights Act 1998  as
             it is incompatible with the UK's international obligations  to
             respect and not interfere with the Appellant's protected right
             to family life (Article 8)".

    And at [40] the judge observes:-

         "In considering the balancing exercise,  and  whether  the  private
         wishes of the Appellant should outweigh  the  public  interest  for
         society as a whole in I consider, as I must, the matters set out in
         s117A-D Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.   I  accept
         that  weight  must  be  given  to  the  maintenance  of   effective
         immigration control, and I remind  myself  that  to  be  effective,
         immigration  control  must  be  fairly  applied  between  different
         applicants, and that contracting states have  a  right  to  control
         those to admit.  The Immigration Rules set out the UK  government's
         approach to the circumstances in which it considers the balance  is
         struck when allowing elderly relatives into the  UK,  namely  where
         relatives are dependent on the UK resident for physical  care  that
         cannot be met by any other means in the  country  of  origin.   The
         rules make no provision in relation to mental  health  needs  being
         met, only physical care.  In relation to considerations of cost  to
         the public purse, there was no documentary evidence submitted  with
         the application indicating that  the  Appellant  had  obtained  any
         private  health  insurance.   However,  I  am  satisfied  from  the
         evidence the sponsor gave to the Tribunal, that the Appellant  owns
         property in India, namely the flat in which she lives, and  another
         flat which is currently let out.  Discussions were underway  as  to
         those properties being sold in order to meet the financial costs of
         the Appellant in the UK and I am  satisfied  on  balance  that  the
         family would be able to afford private health insurance".

10.  What the judge says in [40] shows a  particularly  clear  understanding
    and application of the requirement emphasised in  [44]  of  SS  (Congo)
    (cited earlier) that the judge looks at the Rules first "to assess  the
    force of the public interest given expression in those Rules ...".

11.  It is also apparent  that  the  judge  very  precisely  identified  the
    correct legal test for considering whether an  Article  8  claim  could
    succeed outside the Rules, reminding himself at [42] that:-

         "I remind myself that in SS (Congo) the Court held that  the  state
         has a wider margin of appreciation in determining the conditions to
         be satisfied before  leave  to  enter  is  granted,  and  that  the
         Immigration Rules  maintain  a  reasonable  relationship  with  the
         requirements of  Article  8  (in  contrast  with  the  position  in
         relation to decisions regarding leave to remain for persons with  a
         non-precarious family life that is already established here in  the
         UK).  The Court confirmed that while there could be cases where the
         individual interests at stake are of a particularly pressing nature
         such that a good claim  for  leave  to  enter  can  be  established
         outside of the Rules,  to  do  so  the  Applicant  must  show  that
         compelling  circumstances  exist  (which   are   not   sufficiently
         recognised under the Rules)".

12.   In  submissions,  Ms  Brocklesby-Weller  argued   that   the   judge's
    assessment of the Article 8 viability of the relevant  Rules  was  one-
    sided because it wrongly assumed those Rules were only  concerned  with
    physical care rather than care understood  to  encompass  physical  and
    mental aspects.  She drew attention to  the  sentence  in  [40]  "[t]he
    Rules make no provision in relation to mental health needs  being  met,
    only physical care".

13.  It seems to me, however, that the judge sought to  undertake  precisely
    the assessment enjoined by SS (Congo) and whilst his reasoning may  not
    have been wholly precise about the concept of "care" in the  Rules,  it
    accurately identifies the limitation of the Rules when applied  to  the
    case of persons suffering  from  mental  health  issues  (as  was  this
    claimant).  In this regard it is pertinent  to  set  out  the  relevant
    requirements of Appendix FM at paragraphs EC-DR and E-ECDR:-

         "Adult dependent relative


         Section EC-DR: Entry clearance as an adult dependent relative


         EC-DR.1.1.    The requirements to be met for entry clearance as  an
                    adult dependent relative are that -

                    (a)    the applicant must be outside the UK;

                    (b)    the applicant must have made a valid  application
                        for entry clearance as an adult dependent relative;



                    (c)    the applicant must not fall for refusal under any
                        of the grounds in  Section  S-EC:  Suitability  for
                        entry clearance; and

                    (d)    the applicant must meet all of  the  requirements
                        of Section E-ECDR: Eligibility for entry  clearance
                        as an adult dependent relative.

         Section  E-ECDR:  Eligibility  for  entry  clearance  as  an  adult
         dependent relative


         E-ECDR.1.1.    To  meet  the  eligibility  requirements  for  entry
                    clearance as an adult  dependent  relative  all  of  the
                    requirements in paragraphs E-ECDR.2.1. to 3.2.  must  be
                    met.

         Relationship requirements


         E-ECDR.2.1.   The applicant must be the -

                    (a)    parent aged 18 years or over;

                    (b)    grandparent;

                    (c)    brother or sister aged 18 years or over; or

                    (d)    son or daughter aged 18 years or over of a person
                        ('the sponsor') who is in the UK.

         E-ECDR.2.2.    If  the  applicant  is  the  sponsor's   parent   or
                    grandparent  they  must   not   be   in   a   subsisting
                    relationship with a partner unless that partner is  also
                    the sponsor's parent or grandparent and is applying  for
                    entry clearance at the same time as the applicant.

         E-ECDR.2.3.   The sponsor must at the date of application be -

                    (a)    aged 18 years or over; and

                    (b)    (i)  a British Citizen in the UK; or

                        (ii)   present and settled in the UK; or

                        (iii)  in the UK with refugee leave or humanitarian
                             protection.

         E-ECDR.2.4.   The applicant or, if the applicant and their  partner
                    are  the  sponsor's   parents   or   grandparents,   the
                    applicant's partner, must as a result of age, illness or
                    disability require long-term personal  care  to  perform
                    everyday tasks.

         E-ECDR.2.5.   The applicant or, if the applicant and their  partner
                    are  the  sponsor's   parents   or   grandparents,   the
                    applicant's partner,  must  be  unable,  even  with  the
                    practical and financial help of the sponsor,  to  obtain
                    the required level of care in the country where they are
                    living, because -

                    (a)    it is not available and there  is  no  person  in
                        that country who can reasonably provide it; or

                    (b)    it is not affordable.

         ..."

14.  Whilst Ms Brocklesby-Weller may well be  right  that  the  term  "care"
    encompasses mental as well as physical aspects,  it  is  equally  clear
    that the Rules at E-ECDR.2.2 impose on an applicant  the  necessity  to
    show that they "require long-term personal  care  to  perform  everyday
    tasks".  At an abstract level, it is easy to  imagine  cases  where  an
    applicant may have acute mental health problems but still  be  able  to
    "perform everyday tasks"; indeed it is  within  my  judicial  knowledge
    that mental health experts have said of patients who have severe mental
    health problems that they can perform everyday tasks as a way of coping
    with their traumas.  Certainly it was within the  range  of  reasonable
    responses for the  judge  to  find  that  these  Rules  did  not  cater
    specifically for persons with mental health issues  that  were  closely
    connected with their isolation from close family members.   Further  in
    the particular circumstances of  the  claimant's  case  the  judge  was
    clearly entitled to attach particular importance to the fact  that  the
    claimant had very strong links with her grandchildren.   As  the  judge
    noted at [34] - [35]:-

         "34. I am satisfied on the basis of my findings set out above  that
             there is a degree of dependency that goes beyond normal family
             ties  of  a  daughter  and  mother,   or   grandchildren   and
             grandmother.   I  am  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  has   a
             particular bond with  her  daughter  and  grandchildren  as  a
             result of the social isolation and  stigma  they  faced  as  a
             family in India and  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  was  the
             primary carer for her three  grandchildren  between  2005  and
             2007 when Sangeetha and her husband came  to  the  UK.   I  am
             satisfied, from the weeks or months  that  the  Appellant  has
             visited her family in the UK on visit visas, and the  evidence
             of  the  grandchildren  to  the  Tribunal,  that  those  close
             relationships have continued to date despite the  sponsor  and
             her family coming to  settle  in  the  UK  in  2005  and  2007
             respectively.  I am also satisfied from the  medical  evidence
             that there is dependency in the  relationship,  and  that  the
             Appellant, in relation to her mental health, is reliant on the
             contact with and support from her family members in the UK.

         35.  I find that the Appellant has played a substantial role in her
             grandchildren's lives between 1998 until 2005,  and  had  sole
             responsibility for their  upbringing  for  at  least  2  years
             between 2005 and 2007.  I am satisfied from  the  evidence  of
             Aditya and Divya (which was not challenged by Miss  Jones)  of
             the closeness of their bond with the Appellant.   For  example
             Divya  had  chosen  to  spend  her  20th  birthday  with   her
             grandmother in India due to the Appellant's loneliness  rather
             than celebrating with her family and friends in the UK.   Both
             grandchildren provide credible accounts of a close and  loving
             relationship akin to that between a child  and  parent,  their
             need to have contact with the Appellant and their feelings  of
             loss when she returns to India.  I am satisfied from her  oral
             evidence that the sponsor has telephone and skype contact with
             the Appellant three or four times a week, with  calls  lasting
             up to an hour,  and  that  there  is  also  telephone  contact
             between the grandchildren and the Appellant on a very  regular
             basis.  I find that there has continued to be regular  contact
             in the form of the Appellant's visits to the UK since at least
             2009, and that the Appellant  has  stayed  often  for  several
             months a year with her family in the UK, and she has  her  own
             room in the family home.  I accept also that the  sponsor  and
             her children in addition visit the Appellant in India.   I  am
             satisfied  on  balance  that  this  evidence  demonstrates   a
             closeness of ties and dependency between the Appellant and her
             grand-children which goes beyond the normal.  I am  satisfied,
             based on my findings of fact, that the purposes of  Article  8
             family life does exist between the Appellant and her  daughter
             and grandchildren in the UK".

15.  Ms Brocklesby-Weller is certainly right to  highlight  that  the  judge
    made  very  clear  findings  that  the  claimant  did  not   meet   the
    requirements of the Rules.  The judge emphasised at [30] that  she  did
    not require long-term personal care to undertake daily tasks.  But that
    finding was complemented by well-reasoned findings on Article 8 outside
    the Rules.

16.  Turning to the second ground, I agree with Miss Prabhu that  the  issue
    of the inadequacy of social care in India was a red  herring.   It  had
    never been suggested by the claimant or the ECO that the claimant could
    overcome the deficit in her private and family life in India  by  going
    into a care home.  She was able to perform everyday tasks  and  do  her
    own shopping etc.  Her case has always been about her personal need  to
    be with her family in India.  To the extent that the judge became drawn
    into a discussion of care homes, he might be said to  have  erred,  but
    any such error was clearly not material.  What the judge found at  [44]
    was clearly congruent with the evidence he accepted,  namely  that  the
    claimant's social isolation had given rise to  mental  health  problems
    and these could only reasonably be assuaged by her being able to settle
    with the family in the UK.

17.  As regards the  third  ground,  I  see  nothing  immaterial  about  the
    judge's decision to weigh in the balance the prospects for the claimant
    being able to apply in the future for a  visit  under  the  Rules.   By
    applying for settlement the claimant had evinced a  firm  intention  to
    stay in the  UK  permanently,  an  intention  flatly  contrary  to  the
    requirements for visitors.  It is true that in cases where a person has
    been refused settlement and then applies for a  visit,  an  ECO  cannot
    reject such an application out of hand.  At the same time, it would  be
    entirely remiss of an ECO not to treat such a person as someone who had
    a significant evidential burden to overcome, in explanation for why his
    or her intentions could have  changed.   Indeed,  albeit  it  is  post-
    decision and not therefore a matter I can take into  account  directly,
    an extremely good illustration of the  difficulties  facing  applicants
    who seek to apply for a visit shortly after applying for settlement  to
    consider is what actually happened to the claimant when she  sought  to
    come to the UK for a family wedding while her appeal -  this  appeal  -
    was still pending.  In rejecting her application the  ECO  wrote  on  7
    April 2016:-

         "You have stated you intend a visit  of  six  months  in  order  to
         attend your granddaughters wedding.  Applicants are advised of  the
         types of  document  to  consider  providing  in  support  of  their
         application for a visa.  This is in order to assess your  intention
         in visiting the United Kingdom and to consider your  own  situation
         in India by taking into account not only the  statements  you  have
         made in the visa  application  form  but  also  the  evidence  that
         supports these statements.

           . You have provided only limited evidence  in  support  of  your
             visa application that  does  not  satisfactorily  explain  the
             intention of your visit to the United  Kingdom.   You  applied
             under paragraph EC-DR.1.1 of Appendix FM  of  the  Immigration
             Rules in order to join your daughter in the United Kingdom  as
             an adult dependent relative (Chennai/1696607).   However  that
             application was refused on  06/01/14.   You  have  stated  you
             appealed against the decision and that the First Tier Tribunal
             found in your favour but the Home Office sought permission  to
             appeal to the Upper Tribunal which was granted in March  2016.
             You added you had since  instructed  your  representatives  to
             withdraw your appeal.  Finally you stated that  you  lived  in
             the  United  Kingdom  between  1974  and   1982.    In   these
             circumstances, although you have stated you now wish  only  to
             visit your family, you have not explained satisfactorily  your
             present circumstances in India to the extent you would  intend
             to return to the country or why you only  intend  a  visit  on
             this occasion and not to join your daughter permanently in the
             United Kingdom as you originally intended.  Because of this  I
             am not able to adequately consider the purpose of your  visit.
             As a result I have not been able to reach a position where, on
             a balance of probabilities, I can be satisfied your  intention
             with regard to the visit is as stated in the visa  application
             form.

         I am therefore not satisfied  you  have  presented  a  satisfactory
         explanation of your present circumstances in India and your  future
         intention about where you will live which leads me  to  doubt  your
         intention whilst in the United Kingdom.  In view of the foregoing I
         am not satisfied you are genuinely seeking entry as a  visitor  and
         that you will leave the United Kingdom at  the  end  of  the  visit
         (paragraph V4.2).

         Future Applications

         Any future UK visa applications you  make  will  be  considered  on
         their individual merits; however  you  are  likely  to  be  refused
         unless the circumstances of your application change".

18.  Coming to the ECO's fourth and  final  ground,  I  can  be  very  brief
    because Ms Brocklesby-Weller did not seek to pursue it.  She accepted -
    as seemingly had the ECO in the refusal decision under  appeal  -  that
    the claimant had established  a  family  life  with  her  daughter  and
    grandchildren in the UK.  She  also  accepted  that  the  decision  did
    amount to an interference with the  claimant's  right  to  respect  for
    family life.  Insofar as  the  ground  might  be  understood  to  be  a
    challenge to the judge's findings on the disproportionate nature of the
    interference, it is clear that the essence of those findings  was  that
    in the particular circumstances of  the  claimant's  case  family  life
    could not be properly continued by other means such as visits by her UK
    family members to India.  In this regard what the judge  said  at  [41]
    was especially pertinent:-

         "I am satisfied, from the letter provided by the sponsor in support
         of the application, that she has been employed by Coral as a senior
         management accountant since 2012 and is a strong and crucial member
         of the finance team.  She is described as 'an outstanding employee'
         who the Director wishes to retain.   I  accept  Sangeetha  Prabhu's
         evidence  that  she  earns  around  �50,000  per  annum,  that  the
         Appellant has her own room in their 4  bedroomed  house,  that  her
         husband is also a Senior Manager in the IT sector, and on balance I
         am satisfied the Appellant would not be a burden on  the  state  if
         she were to be admitted to the UK.  I give weight also to the  fact
         that the Appellant speaks English, which is an  indication  of  her
         ability to integrate into British society.  I am satisfied that the
         Appellant has previously lived in the UK and  had  settled  status,
         and had she not had to return to India in order to care for her own
         elderly and ill mother she may well have retained that  status.   I
         also take into consideration that her husband worked for the NHS in
         the past when they resided here".

19.  For the above reasons I conclude that the ECO's  grounds  of  challenge
    do not withstand scrutiny.  The judge's decision  is  not  vitiated  by
    legal error.  Accordingly his decision to allow the appeal on Article 8
    grounds must stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 26th April 2016

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
