

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/15874/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                     |                   Determination     |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On  3 March 2015                      |                   On 11 March 2015  |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before


                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                              ESTHER TUMUSIIME


                                                                   Appellant
                                     And


                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:  Mr Mbaziria, friend.
For the Respondent: Mrs Pettersen, HOPO.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This appeal came before Judge Jones on 31 October  2014  at  Bradford.
      The sponsor could not attend the hearing because he was unable to  get
      leave from his work, and produced a letter which said that  he  risked
      dismissal if he took unauthorised leave.
   2.  The  judge  dismissed  the  appeal  agreeing  with  the  respondent's
      position,  which  is  that  the  couple  are  not  in   a   subsisting
      relationship.
   3. The sponsor had produced a 40 page bundle  of  documents,  seeking  to
      address the concerns of  the  entry  clearance  officer.  However  Mrs
      Pettersen accepted that the judge did not engage with  that  evidence,
      to which he only referred in brief summary form.
   4. The judge was in a difficult position, since he was not able to assess
      the oral evidence of the sponsor,  and  that  may  have  coloured  his
      approach to the case as a whole. Nevertheless he erred in law  because
      he failed to take into account relevant matters, namely  that  in  the
      sponsor's bundle.
   5. Accordingly the decision of Judge Jones is set  aside.  It  should  be
      remade by a judge other than Judge Jones  at  Bradford  to  be  listed
      after 1 April, by which time the sponsor should be in  a  position  to
      obtain leave from his work and to attend the hearing.




Signed                                  Date



D E Taylor
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
