
[pic]
SELF-TYPED

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Oa/15679/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 April 2016                      |On 20th April 2016                   |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON



                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (NEW DELHI)


                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              mrs fahmida ahmed
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S. Sreeraman, Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Kamal, Legal Representative, Immigration
Solutions Ltd


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Specialist Appeal Team has appealed to the Upper Tribunal from  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Haria  sitting  at  Hatton
    Cross on 10 October 2015) allowing the claimant's  appeal  against  the
    decision to refuse to grant him entry clearance as a  Tier  2  migrant.
    The ground of refusal was the sponsor  had  not  followed  the  correct
    procedure for conducting a resident labour market  test  for  her  job,
    which was that of a web designer, and so she did not have a valid  CoS.
    The ground of appeal to the Upper Tribunal is that the  FtT  Judge  was
    wrong to allow the appeal under the Rules, as the claimant's  right  of
    appeal is limited to contending that the decision  was  unlawful  under
    section 6 of the HRA 1998. Permission to  appeal  on  this  ground  was
    granted on 24 March 2016. The  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an
    anonymity direction, and I do not consider that the claimant should  be
    accorded anonymity for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The application was made on 3  November  2014,  and  the  claimant  was
    interviewed in English about her application on 18  November  2014.  On
    the same day her application was refused. She  was  informed  that  she
    could apply for Administrative Review if she believed the  decision  to
    be incorrect, and that her statutory appeal right was  limited  to  the
    grounds contained in section 84(1)(c) of the 2002 Act.

 3. The claimant exercised her right  of  appeal  and  also  asked  for  an
    administrative review. On 29 December 2015 an Entry  Clearance  Manager
    gave  his  reasons  for   maintaining   the   decision   following   an
    administrative review.

 4. Both parties were legally represented before Judge  Haria.  He  allowed
    the appeal under the Rules as he was satisfied,  from  the  documentary
    evidence provided inter alia by way of appeal, that the  job  had  been
    advertised as required by the rules so  that  it  passed  the  Resident
    Labour Market  test.  Accordingly,  the  CoS  was  valid.  However,  he
    dismissed the appeal under  Article  8  ECHR  as  the  parties  to  the
    marriage (the claimant in India and the claimant's husband in  the  UK,
    who had only limited leave to remain in the UK as a student) had chosen
    to live apart since their marriage in 2012,  and  so  the  interference
    with family and private life consequential upon the (incorrect) refusal
    decision was not disproportionate.

The Error of Law Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 5. At the outset of the hearing, Ms Sreeraman announced that she  was  not
    pursuing the  appeal  because,  having  investigated  the  matter,  she
    believed that the FtT Judge had jurisdiction to allow the appeal  under
    the Rules. Accordingly, I did not call upon Mr Kamal to respond.

Discussion

 6. As stated in  a  Home  Office  guidance  document  "Rights  of  appeal"
    (Version 3.0) in a  section  headed  "Transitional  appeals",  the  new
    framework for appeals established by the Immigration Act  2014  against
    the refusal of protection and human rights claims came fully into force
    on 6 April 2015. However there  were  saving  provisions  made  in  the
    Immigration  Act  2014  (Commencement  No  4  Transitional  and  Saving
    Provisions and Amendment) Order to  protect  certain  persons  who  had
    rights of appeal at the time they applied for leave to enter or remain.

 7. Under the pre-Immigration Act 2014 appeals regime, PBS  applicants  had
    full appeal rights for PBS refusals. These appeal  rights  continue  to
    exist for decisions made on or after 6 April 2015 where:

     - An application was made before 20 October 2014 for leave  to  remain
       as a Tier 4 Migrant or their family member

     - An application was made before 2 March 2015 for leave to remain as a
       Tier 1 Migrant, Tier 2 Migrant or Tier 5  Migrant  or  their  family
       member

     - Any other application was made before 6 April 2015  the  outcome  of
       which was an appealable decision under the pre-Immigration Act  2014
       regime, unless the decision was a refusal  of  an  asylum  or  human
       rights claim.

 8. Ms Sreeraman relied on the 2 March 2015 deadline. However, the guidance
    refers to applications for leave to remain  by  Tier  2  Migrants,  not
    applications for entry clearance by Tier 2 Migrants. On the other hand,
    the claimant's application meets  the  criteria  of  being  "any  other
    application made before 6  April  2015"  which  is  (a)  an  appealable
    decision under the pre-Immigration  Act  2014  regime  and  (b)  not  a
    decision which constitutes a refusal  of  an  asylum  or  human  rights
    claim.

Notice of Decision

 9. The appellant orally withdrew the case that the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal contained  an  error  of  law,  and  the  Upper  Tribunal
    consents to the withdrawal. The Entry Clearance Officer's appeal to the
    Upper Tribunal is thereby dismissed, and the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal allowing the claimant's appeal stands.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

