
[pic]
IAC-AH-SC-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/15413/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 18th December 2015                |On 13th January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                                 Isra Younis
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer - ISLAMABAD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Azmi, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a female citizen of Pakistan born on 2nd  March  1993.
    She applied on  13th  August  2014  to  the  British  High  Commission,
    Islamabad, for entry clearance to the UK as the wife  of  the  Sponsor,
    Mohammed Younis.  That application was refused for the reasons given in
    a Notice of Refusal dated 6th November 2014.  The  Appellant  appealed,
    and her appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Moan (the  Judge)
    sitting at Birmingham on 28th May  2015.   She  decided  to  allow  the
    appeal for the reasons set out in her Decision  dated  1st  June  2015.
    The Respondent sought leave to appeal that Decision, and on 13th August
    2015 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the Decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.  The sole  issue  before
    the  Judge  was  whether  the  Appellant  met  the   English   language
    requirement set out in paragraph E.ECP.4.1(b) of  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules HC 395.   The  Judge  allowed
    the appeal because there was before her a certificate from ETS  current
    for the period from 10th June 2013 to 10th June  2015  indicating  that
    the Appellant had achieved the required level of proficiency  for  both
    speaking and listening 2 English.  The original  application  had  been
    refused because whereas ETS was an approved test provider at  the  time
    when the Appellant took her test in April 2014, by the  time  she  made
    her application for entry clearance in August 2014 ETS was no longer an
    authorised provider.  However, as the Judge decided that there were  no
    transitional provisions in the Rules to deal with this  situation,  she
    was entitled to find that the Appellant satisfied the English  language
    requirement at the time of her application.

 3. At the hearing, Mr Mills argued that the Judge  had  erred  in  law  in
    coming to that conclusion.  The Judge had erred in  deciding  the  sole
    issue in the appeal on  the  basis  that  there  were  no  transitional
    provisions relating to the situation where a test provider ceased to be
    an authorised test provider during the  period  between  the  Appellant
    taking her test and making her application for entry  clearance.   That
    transitional provision was that:
         "Anyone who has taken a previously approved test on or  before  5th
         April 2015 may still use it in a UK immigration  application  until
         5th November 2015 providing the test is one of  those  detailed  in
         the transitional approved tests list."

    Mr Mills produced the relevant transitional approved tests  list  which
    revealed that it did not include ETS.   Therefore  when  she  made  her
    application  for  entry  clearance  the  Appellant  did  not   have   a
    certificate from an authorised test provider showing that the Appellant
    had passed the English language test.

 4. In response, Mr Azmi referred to the Decision of the Judge  and  argued
    that there had been no such error of law without explaining why.

 5. I do find an error of law in the Decision  of  the  Judge  so  that  it
    should be set aside.  The Judge based her Decision on her  belief  that
    there were no transitional provisions  relating  to  the  circumstances
    where a test provider had become an unauthorised test  provider  during
    the period between the taking of  an  English  language  test  and  the
    submission of an application  for  entry  clearance.   There  are  such
    transitional provisions which exclude a test certificate issued by  ETS
    being relied upon.  The Judge therefore erred in law.

Remade Decision

 6. I decided to proceed to remake the Decision  of  the  Judge.   In  this
    respect I heard further submissions from the representatives.  Mr  Azmi
    addressed me first.  He did  not  argue  that  the  Appellant  met  the
    requirements of Appendix FM, but informed me  that  the  Appellant  had
    obtained a further certificate from an authorised test provider showing
    that she was proficient  to  the  required  standard  in  speaking  and
    listening 2 English as had been stated  by  the  previous  certificate.
    Therefore  the   Decision   to   refuse   her   entry   clearance   was
    disproportionate.

 7. In response, Mr Mills submitted that the  Decision  was  proportionate.
    It was in the public interest to impose an English language requirement
    on those seeking to come to the  UK  for  settlement  from  abroad.   A
    certificate of success in an English language test post the application
    for  entry  clearance  was  irrelevant.   There  were   no   compelling
    circumstances allowing the Appellant's Article  8  ECHR  rights  to  be
    considered.  She would have to apply for entry  clearance  from  abroad
    again.  This was in accordance with the Decision in SSHD v  SS  (Congo)
    and Others [2015] EWCA Civ 387.

 8. Mr Azmi did not argue that the Appellant qualified for leave  to  enter
    under Appendix FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  I  so  find.   The
    Appellant has failed to meet the requirements of paragraph E.ECP.4.1 of
    Appendix FM of HC 395 and therefore her appeal must be dismissed  under
    the Immigration Rules.

 9. Mr Azmi argued that as the Appellant  subsequently  passed  an  English
    language test carried out by an authorised test provider it would be  a
    disproportionate breach of her rights under Article 8  ECHR  to  refuse
    her entry clearance.  Her case was put on no wider basis than that.   I
    find that this alone is insufficient for me to conclude that there  are
    compelling circumstances which might outweigh the  public  interest  in
    excluding those who are unable  to  produce  at  the  relevant  time  a
    certificate of proficiency in English language and therefore  following
    the Decision in SS Congo I am not satisfied that the Decision to refuse
    entry clearance was disproportionate.  The appeal is also dismissed  on
    human rights grounds.

Notice of Decision

The making of the Decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside that Decision.

I remake the Decision in the appeal by dismissing it under  the  Immigration
Rules and also on human rights grounds.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for anonymity and  I  find  no
reason to do so.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Renton



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

In the light of my  Decision  to  remake  the  Decision  in  the  appeal  by
dismissing it, there can be no fee award and the Decision of the  First-tier
Tribunal in this respect is remade accordingly.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

