

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

Immigration and Asylum Chamber                   Appeal Number:
OA/15440/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                        |Promulgated:    |
|On 17 October 2014                          |On 22nd Oct 2014|
|                                            |                |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?


                                   Between

                                Anish Gurung
                                  Appellant
                                     and

                           Entry Clearance Officer
                                  New Delhi

                                                           Respondent

                          Determination and Reasons

Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms A Jaja, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Details of appellant and basis of claim

   1.       This appeal comes before me following the grant of permission to
      the Entry Clearance Officer on 3 September 2014 by First-tier Tribunal
      Judge Andrew in respect of the determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Kamara which allowed the appeal following a  hearing  at  Taylor
      House by way of a  determination  promulgated  on  7  July  2014.  For
      convenience, I continue to refer to the Entry Clearance Officer as the
      respondent and to the applicant as the appellant.

   2.       The applicant is a Nepalese national born on 7  September  1990.
      He challenges the decision of the respondent on 27 June 2013 to refuse
      to grant him entry clearance to join his father in the UK. His  mother
      and sister's applications were successful. His was refused because  he
      was over 18 and did not  meet  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
      Rules. The ECO was also not satisfied  that  there  were  any  factors
      which warranted a grant of  leave  outside  the  rules  on  Article  8
      grounds.

   3.       Judge Kamara found that the rules did  not  fully  consider  the
      appellant's circumstances. She took  the  view  that  the  appellant's
      father, an ex-Gurkha, had been prevented from applying for  settlement
      in the UK following his discharge by an historic  injustice  and  that
      had he been able to do so, he would have made an application  and  his
      son would either have been born in the UK or would have been  a  minor
      on arrival. The judge also  considered  that  there  was  family  life
      between the appellant and the rest of his family, that  he  had  never
      lived independently, was unmarried, and was financially  supported  by
      his father. Relying on the weight to be given to the historic wrong as
      per Ghising (Gurkhas/BOCs: historic wrong: weight) UKUT  00567  (IAC),
      she allowed the appeal.

   4.       Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the judge had
      failed to identify any compelling factors not identified by the rules,
      had not considered whether there was family life between the appellant
      and his father or whether had it not been for the  historic  injustice
      the appellant's father would have  made  an  earlier  application  for
      settlement.

   5.        The  appeal  came  before  me  on  17  October  2014.  I  heard
      submissions from the parties and at  the  conclusion  of  the  hearing
      reserved my determination which I now give.

Findings and Reasons

   6.       I have considered the submissions made,  the  determination  and
      the evidence I was referred to.

   7.       I note that  the  judge  fully  accepted  the  evidence  of  the
      sponsor. That included the assertion that he would  have  applied  for
      settlement after  his  discharge  from  military  service  on  medical
      grounds but was prevented from doing so by the rules in force  at  the
      time. The written response from the appellant's representatives to the
      Secretary of State's grounds argues that the  sponsor  was  unable  to
      apply for settlement until 2004, at which time I  note  the  appellant
      would have still been a minor. No explanation had been offered for why
      the sponsor  waited  until  2012/2013  to  make  his  application  for
      settlement. I queried this with Ms Jaja but she was helpfully able  to
      clarify from the evidence that it was  not  until  2009  that  he,  as
      someone discharged before 1997  and  with  less  than  four  years  of
      service,  would  have  been  able  to  apply.  Although  there  is  no
      explanation for why he then waited  even  longer,  the  appellant  was
      already over age in 2009. Having accepted the sponsor's evidence,  the
      judge found that the  historic  injustice  which  prevented  him  from
      making an application for settlement after his military discharge  was
      a compelling factor not covered by the  rules.  Contrary  to  what  is
      argued in the grounds, therefore, she did in fact  identify  what  led
      her to consider the appeal outside the rules and she did find that the
      sponsor would have made an earlier application if he had been able to.



   8.       It is also argued that the judge  failed  to  make  findings  on
      whether there was family life between the appellant  and  his  father.
      That is incorrect. As can be seen from the  determination,  the  judge
      made a clear finding, for reasons which Mr  Walker  did  not  seek  to
      challenge, that there was family life between them, having full regard
      to the appellant's majority and circumstances. That  being  the  case,
      this ground falls away.

   9.       For these reasons, I am satisfied  that  the  judge  gave  clear
      reasons for her  decision  and  properly  followed  the  law  and  the
      jurisprudence. It may be that  another  judge  would  have  reached  a
      different decision but that is not the test here. The grounds fail  to
      establish that an error of law was made. The entry clearance officer's
      challenge fails and the decision of the judge is upheld.

Decision

  10.       The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  error  of  law.  The
      decision to allow the appeal under article 8 is upheld. The appeal  is
      dismissed under the Immigration Rules.

Anonymity

  11.       The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity order  and  no
      request for one was made to me.

      Signed:


      Dr R Keki?
      Judge of the Upper Tribunal
      20 October 2014
