
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/15129/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 19th April 2016                       |On 28th April 2016                |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE



                                   Between

                         The Entry Clearance officer
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               TAHIRA SADDIQA
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms King, counsel instructed by Dean Manson
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, HOPO

                            DECISION AND REASONS
                             EXTEMPORE JUDGEMENT

 1. The Appellant in the proceedings before me was the  Respondent  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal and for convenience I shall refer to the parties as
    they were known in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Respondent complains that First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Iqbal  in  a
    decision promulgated on 1st October 2015 erred in law when allowing the
    appeal of this female Pakistani Appellant who  had  applied  for  entry
    clearance as a partner of her husband, Mr Zahir Ahmed,  under  Appendix
    FM of the Immigration Rules.

 3. The grounds of the Respondent's appeal assert that the judge was  wrong
    in finding that at Appendix FM-SE there was discretion available to the
    Respondent to forgive the Appellant her failure to meet the substantive
    requirements of the Rules in respect  of  finances:  in  particular  at
    Appendix FM-SE documents to support self-employment must cover a twelve
    month period. The Appellant in this case relied on the Sponsor's  self-
    employment of only six months.

 4. I am satisfied that the  ground  is  made  out  in  that  regard.   The
    position is set out at Appendix FM-SE where a discretion is allowed  to
    consider  additional  documentation  to  supplement  evidence   already
    submitted with the application. The Specified Evidence  Rule  sets  out
    the timeline of the window that an Appellant has to provide documentary
    evidence for. Evidential flexibility goes to an opportunity to  amplify
    the  evidence  submitted  with  the  application  referencing  to  that
    particular period.  There is nothing in the evidential flexibility Rule
    which would allow for the Respondent to take a view  that  a  different
    window should be applied in a particular circumstance. No circumstances
    appertaining to the family life position of the couple were relied  on,
    so as to show that the Respondent should have taken a  different  view,
    outside of the requirements of the rule. The simple point is  that  the
    Appellant did not meet the evidential requirements of the rules and her
    application was bound to fail.

 5. The judge was concerned that the Respondent  had  failed  to  make  any
    decision  for  a  year  after  the  application  had  been   submitted,
    apparently awaiting the outcome of the Court of Appeal case  in  MM,  a
    case which both representatives acknowledged before me was unlikely  to
    have any material impact on her position, and was not  relied  upon  by
    her.

 6. The Respondent's grounds challenge  the  judge's  conclusion  that  the
    requirements of fairness  dictated  that  because  of  this  delay  the
    Respondent should have extended the window to  include  the  subsequent
    continuing self employment, so that the Appellant did not need to  make
    a fresh application.   The Respondent argued before me  that  that  the
    delay did not cause any procedural unfairness for the Appellant.

 7. I find merit in that submission.  The Appellant was unable  to  provide
    the specified evidence when she applied. At the point when her  husband
    had been in self employment for 12 months, the unchallenged evidence is
    that the Appellant would  have  had  the  required  specified  evidence
    necessary to support an  application.  The  fact  that  the  Respondent
    waited did not prevent, as the  judge  appears  to  have  thought,  the
    Appellant taking steps to regularise her position  by  making  a  fresh
    application. The Appellant was not bound to wait, not least, as this is
    an out of country application the Appellant had the option of making  a
    fresh application. In short her  application  was  premature,  but  the
    Respondent putting the case on hold pending the outcome of MM, did  not
    result in any gross procedural unfairness.

 8. It follows from my consideration that I am satisfied that the judge has
    fallen into an error of law such that the decision must  be  set  aside
    and remade.

 9. For all the reasons that I have set out above I am satisfied  that  the
    Entry Clearance Officer's refusal is correct and the Appellant's  rules
    based appeal is without merit and is dismissed.

10. The Appellant submitted before me today that even if  the  Respondent's
    challenge on error of law from misdirection in  respect  of  evidential
    flexibility was made out, the unfairness of delay meant that the appeal
    could succeed on my remaking the decision   under Article  8.  For  the
    reasons I have already set out I find no merit in that  submission,  to
    the point that the Appellant's appeal is also dismissed  on  Article  8
    ECHR grounds.

Notice of Decision

11. The Entry Clearance Officer's  Appeal  is  allowed.   I  have  set  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal aside and remade the  decision  and
    dismissed the Appellant's Appeal on Immigration  Rules  and  Article  8
    grounds.

12. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

On remaking the  decision  I  have  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  and
therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge

