

                                        [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/15088/2013


                                  THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House             |Determination Promulgated |
|On September 17, 2014            |On September 18, 2014     |
|                                 |                          |
|                                 |                          |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MRS SHOPNA BEGUM

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Everett (Home Office Presenting
      Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr Rees, Counsel, instructed by Novells
      Legal Practice


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. Whereas the  respondent  is  the  appealing  party,  I  shall,  in  the
    interests of convenience and consistency, replicate the nomenclature of
    the decision at first instance.


 2. The appellant, born July  3,  1985  is  a  citizen  of  Bangladesh.  On
    February 20, 2013 she applied for entry clearance as  a  partner  under
    the Immigration Rules. The respondent refused this application on  June
    111, 2013 as  she  was  not  satisfied  she  met  the  requirements  of
    Paragraph EC-P1.1 of the Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.

 3. On July 11, 2013 the appellant appealed  under  Section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 arguing she did  meet  the
    Rules.

 4. The respondent reviewed the grounds of  appeal  on  June  3,  2014  and
    maintained that the appellant was not exempt from Appendix  FM-SE(1)(b)
    and (c). The respondent  maintained  her  concerns  about  the  English
    language test and reminded the appellant and any future Tribunal that a
    free re-test was offered.

 5. The matter was listed before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Phillips
    (hereinafter referred to  as  "the  FtTJ")  on  June  25,  2014.  In  a
    determination promulgated on July 9, 2014 she allowed the appeal to the
    limited extent that it was referred  back  to  the  respondent  with  a
    direction that the appellant be given a reasonable opportunity  to  re-
    take the English test.

 6. The respondent appealed that decision on July 16, 2014.  Permission  to
    appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Grant-Hutchinson
    on July 28, 2014. She found the FtTJ may have erred by failing to  have
    regard to the Immigration Rules on third party sponsorship.

    ERROR OF LAW ARGUMENTS


 7. Ms Everett relied on the grounds of appeal and  submitted  that  whilst
    her colleague had conceded a legal point  in  the  first-tier  Tribunal
    this did not absolve the FtTJ from dealing with the law correctly.  The
    decision in Mahad [2009] UKSC 16 pre-dated the new  Immigration  Rules.
    These Rules clearly set out what third party sponsorship is permissible
    and she submitted that Mahad had to be read in light of those Rules. If
    her submission was accepted it would  be  inappropriate  to  remit  the
    matter back to the respondent because the application would be  refused
    for failing  to  comply  with  the  sponsorship  and  English  language
    requirements. The sponsorship issue was not  a  matter  that  could  be
    rectified under the evidential flexibility provisions because the Rules
    were not capable of being met at the date of decision.

 8. Mr Rees argued the respondent had conceded the issue on maintenance and
    that was the end of the  matter.  The  FtTJ  was  fully  aware  of  the
    financial circumstances and had allowed the evidence as the  Rules  are
    not as strict as statute. To allow the respondent to raise  this  issue
    was giving them "a second bite of the cherry".

    ERROR OF LAW ASSESSMENT


 9. I was helped greatly by both representatives in  this  appeal.  At  the
    original hearing the original representatives (Mr Rees  and  Mr  Singh)
    relied  on  the  decision  of  Majad  and  made  no  reference  to  the
    Immigration Rules and in particular Paragraph A1.1(b) of  Appendix  FM-
    SE.

10. Both representatives  today  agreed  that  the  Rules  on  third  party
    sponsorship are set out in the Rules and both recognised that Majad pre-
    dated the new Immigration Rules.

11. Mr Rees accepted that at the date of decision the appellant  could  not
    meet the maintenance requirements of paragraph A1.1(b) of Appendix  FM-
    SE. I indicated that the ftTJ could not simply overlook these Rules  as
    they are Rules that govern immigration applications.

12. I am satisfied that where a judge erroneously applies the law it is for
    the Upper Tribunal to correct the  position.  I  therefore  uphold  the
    respondent's submission that the FtTJ erred  in  her  approach  to  the
    issue of maintenance.

13. The FtTJ required the respondent to review the decision and  allow  the
    appellant time to take a further test. I am satisfied that as both  the
    English language and maintenance requirements were  not  met  then  the
    decision to return the case to the respondent should also be set aside.



14. I asked Mr Rees whether he wished to argue article 8 before me in light
    of my findings and having regard to the Immigration Act 2014.  After  a
    brief adjournment he confirmed he did not and indicated  the  appellant
    would submit a fresh application as it seemed she would  now  meet  the
    Rules once the English language test had been secured.

15. Mr Rees did indicate that the appellant  had  experienced  difficulties
    taking the test in Bangladesh and had been told to go to Delhi,  India.
    I found this an extraordinary set of circumstances but advised this was
    not something I had any jurisdiction over.



    DECISION


16. There is a material error of law and I set aside the original decision.



17. I dismiss the appeal under the Immigration Rules.


18. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended) the  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    order has been made and no request for an order was submitted to me.


Signed:                           Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis


TO THE RESPONDENT

I do not make a fee award as the appeal is dismissed.

Signed:                           Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
