
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/15702/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 17th November 2017               |On 18th December 2017                   |
|                                    |                                        |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                    [z a]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms D Revill (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan and a minor born  on  24th  July
    2012.  Consequently at the date of this hearing the Appellant is aged 5
    and she lives with a carer in  Pakistan.   The  Appellant  had  applied
    under the Immigration Rules to enter the United  Kingdom  either  under
    paragraph  316  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  namely  with  a  view  to
    settlement as the adopted child of a parent or  parents  given  limited
    leave to enter or remain in the UK with a view to settlement and/or  in
    the alternative under paragraph 297 of the  Immigration  Rules,  namely
    seeking indefinite leave to enter the UK as  the  child  of  a  parent,
    parents or a  relative  present  and  settled  or  being  admitted  for
    settlement in the UK.  In this instance the  Appellant's  Sponsors  are
    her aunt and uncle, [SH] and [AZ].  The  Appellant  is  the  biological
    daughter  of  the  male  Sponsor's  brother   and   sister-in-law   and
    responsibility was passed to  the  Sponsors  when,  shortly  after  the
    birth, her mother developed postnatal depression and was unable to bond
    with her.  The Sponsors have been granted a  guardianship  order  by  a
    Pakistani court and are approved as  adopters  in  the  UK.   They  are
    currently paying for  a  neighbour  to  look  after  the  Appellant  in
    Pakistan.

 2. The original application was refused by the Entry Clearance Officer  on
    12th November 2014.  That decision was appealed and came before  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal S Taylor sitting at  Taylor  House  on  16th
    September 2015.  In a decision and reasons promulgated on 15th  October
    2015 the Appellant's appeal was dismissed.  Following permission  being
    granted to appeal to the Upper Tribunal the matter  came  before  Upper
    Tribunal Judge King sitting at Field House on 10th May 2015.  UTJ  King
    found that there was a material error of law in  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal and set aside the decision to be remade upon  a  de
    novo hearing and directed that such hearing should  focus  particularly
    upon paragraph 297 of the Immigration  Rules  but  should  not  exclude
    other considerations.

 3. The remitted appeal came before Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  A  W
    Khan sitting at Taylor House on 4th November 2016.  In a  decision  and
    reasons promulgated on 2nd December 2016 the  Appellant's  appeal  was
    again dismissed under both the Immigration Rules and  on  human  rights
    grounds.

 4. On 22nd December 2016 a further application was made for permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  The Grounds of Appeal contended:-

      a) the judge erred in focusing on the circumstances as of the date  of
         hearing, rather than the date of decision;

      b) the judge failed to give adequate reasons for  finding  that  there
         had been a genuine  transfer  of  parental  responsibility  to  the
         Sponsors;

      c) that the judge erred in finding that  paragraph  316A(vi)  required
         that the neighbour currently caring for the Appellant be unable  to
         care for her;

      d) the judge erred in his treatment of the witness statements from the
         Appellant's biological parents and neighbour; and/or

      e) the judge erred in his approach to paragraph 297(i)(f).

 5. On 26th June 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge Shimmin granted  permission
    to appeal.

 6. On 10th July 2017 the Secretary of State responded to  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  The relevant paragraph therein  is  paragraph  2
    whereby the Secretary of State submits  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's decision  did  not  contain  a  material  error  and  that  the
    determination contained significant reasoning for the findings  between
    paragraphs 17 to 20.  It was contended  that  the  Appellant's  grounds
    amount to a disagreement with the First-tier Tribunal Judge's findings.



 7. It was on that basis that  the  appeal  came  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there was a material error of law in the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge on 14th August 2017.   It  was  agreed  after
    discussion by both legal representatives that in the event that I found
    that there was a material error of law that bearing in mind the lengthy
    history of this matter, age of Appellant and the time it takes to get a
    matter reheard on remittal to the First-tier Tribunal that the  correct
    approach would be that I would  retain  the  matter  within  the  Upper
    Tribunal and rehear it at the soonest available date.

 8. For the reasons set out in paragraphs 20 to  22  of  my  error  of  law
    decision I found that I was satisfied that there were  material  errors
    of law and gave a direction that none of the findings of fact  were  to
    stand and that the matter be reheard before me.  It is  on  that  basis
    that the  appeal  comes  back  before  me  for  rehearing.   The  legal
    representatives  who  attended  before  me  on  error  of  law  hearing
    reappear.  That is  helpful.   The  Appellant  is  represented  by  her
    instructed Counsel Ms Revill and the Secretary of  State  by  her  Home
    Office Presenting Officer Mr Duffy.

 9. The appeal centres on the application made by the Appellant's aunt  and
    uncle to bring her in to the UK.  They rely on two  paragraphs  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  Firstly paragraph 316A(f) whereby they seek limited
    leave for the Appellant to enter  the  UK  for  the  purpose  of  being
    adopted when one of the prospective parents is settled  in  the  United
    Kingdom or is being admitted for settlement on the same  occasion  that
    the child is seeking admission and  has  sole  responsibility  for  the
    child's upbringing and in the  alternative  under  paragraph  297(i)(f)
    namely that seeking indefinite leave to enter as the child of a parent,
    parents or relative present and settled in the UK or being admitted for
    settlement in the UK that one parent  or  a  relative  is  present  and
    settled in the United Kingdom or being admitted on  the  same  occasion
    for settlement  and  there  are  serious  compelling  family  or  other
    considerations which  make  exclusion  of  the  child  undesirable  and
    suitable arrangements have been made for the child's care.

10. The arguments put forward on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  in
    refusing the application originally were  due  to  the  Respondent  not
    being satisfied that the Appellant's biological parents were unable  to
    care for her or that there had been  a  genuine  transfer  of  parental
    responsibility because the application referred to her  being  "gifted"
    to the Sponsors and that the Respondent  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant had lost or broken ties with her family of origin or that she
    intended to do so given the relationship between the Sponsors  and  her
    biological parents.  Further the Secretary of State was  not  satisfied
    that there were serious and compelling family or  other  considerations
    making the Appellant's exclusion  undesirable  because  her  biological
    parents remained in Pakistan and that the Respondent did  not  consider
    refusing entry clearance breached Article 8 of the European  Convention
    of Human Rights.

11. Mr Duffy contends that the Entry Clearance Officer's position was  that
    the way the Rules were drafted the application did not quite  meet  the
    Rules particularly as to proof and evidence that the biological  mother
    could not look after the child and he pointed out that there was  still
    a father around.  He comments  that  it  was  the  view  of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer that the Appellant had  been  given  by  her  natural
    father to his uncle.  He accepts however that there is now a  lot  more
    evidence but I acknowledge that the question is how much of this can be
    taken into account.  This is a pre-2015 decision and I have to look  at
    the evidence as would have been available  at  the  date  of  decision.
    Though I acknowledge that following the authority of DR (Morocco) it is
    open for me to look at later evidence.  A lot turns on the  genuineness
    of the transfer of the Appellant to her proposed adoptive parents.   It
    is agreed by both legal representatives that the current carer  of  the
    Appellant can be disregarded.

Evidence

12. There are two witnesses in this matter and  they  are  the  Appellant's
    proposed adoptive parents.  Principal evidence  is  provided  by  [SH].
    [SH] confirms and adopts her witness statement of 16th  September  2015
    as her evidence-in-chief.  She is  the  wife  of  [AZ].   [AZ]  is  the
    brother of the Appellant's natural father.  However  [AZ]  speaks  only
    limited English, [SH] speaks fluent English.  She is a reception  class
    teacher and  gives  her  evidence  clearly  and  forcefully.   She  has
    provided the principal witness statement in this  appeal  amounting  to
    some fifteen pages and 37 paragraphs.  Her evidence and  demeanour  are
    impressive.  I have given due consideration to all  paragraphs  of  her
    witness statement.  In essence her evidence is that following the birth
    of two daughters a third daughter was born to her sister-in-law  namely
    the Appellant.  She was abandoned  by  her  mother  who  suffered  from
    postnatal depression and by her natural father  in  the  village  where
    they live in Pakistan.  It is the wish of [SH] and [AZ]  to  adopt  the
    Appellant and to provide her with a home secure family life in the  UK.
    It is I consider of extreme importance within these proceedings that it
    is acknowledged  and  accepted  that  [SH]  and  [AZ]  firstly  hold  a
    guardianship order issued by  the  High  Court  in  Pakistan  over  the
    Appellant and secondly they have been approved by Kent Social  Services
    as suitable parents for adoption specifically for the adoption of [ZA].

13. [SH] advises that they speak to [ZA] daily by Skype and that they  have
    recently seen her in the summer holidays for  two  and  a  half  weeks.
    They went to Pakistan and she stayed with them at  her  parents'  home.
    Apparently her  parents  have  a  quite  substantial  holiday  home  in
    Pakistan.  She lives with a nanny in the local village who looks  after
    her and the nanny brought her  to  the  house.   All  funding  for  the
    Appellant including the private schooling that she has now  started  is
    met for by the prospective adoptive parents.

14. [SH] advises that her current circumstances are that [ZA]  lives  in  a
    house with a nanny and that they fund her completely and  if  they  did
    not do so then the Appellant would be in an  orphanage.   She  confirms
    that [ZA] has no contact  with  her  biological  parents  although  she
    accepts that living in the same village there may  be  passing  contact
    with  her  biological  parents,  her  two  elder   siblings   and   her
    grandmother.  She emphasises any contact is not planned and that she is
    not treated as part of their family and that she calls her and [AZ] mum
    and dad.

15. She points out that [ZA] has now started at reception class  at  school
    and has introduced them as her  mummy  and  daddy.   She  has  been  in
    reception class for about a year and they fund her education.

16. Under cross-examination from Mr Duffy [SH] confirms that [ZA]'s natural
    mother suffered from postnatal depression and when asked as to  whether
    that is continuing responds by saying that she does seem to be down all
    the time.  She indicates that she believes  it  was  heartbreaking  for
    [ZA] when she and [AZ] had to leave Pakistan after their last visit and
    that she has no bond whatsoever with her natural parents or  family  in
    Pakistan.  [ZA] is now aged 5.  She was 2 when the application in  this
    matter was made.  The prospective parents have been to Pakistan  on  at
    least six or seven occasions and  she  confirms  no  member  of  [ZA]'s
    biological family other than her husband shows  any  affection  to  her
    whatsoever.

17. [AZ] gave evidence through an interpreter  although  he  does  speak  a
    limited amount of English.  He made a witness statement in October 2016
    which basically does no more than adopt the witness statement of  [SH].
    He adopts it before me and confirms that he is married to [SH], that he
    is the joint Sponsor and that he is a British national.  He works in  a
    shop.  He believes his sister-in-law  gave  [ZA]  up  because  she  was
    suffering from postnatal depression and that  she  still  suffers  from
    this condition and is receiving treatment.  He confirms  that  he  does
    speak to his brother and sister-in-law although he has not had a  great
    deal of contact with them and that he and [SH] have made many visits to
    Pakistan to see her.  He confirms the evidence of [SH]  that  on  their
    last visit they stayed for about two weeks and that they go  more  than
    once a year.  He confirms that the nanny is one who has been  in  place
    for some considerable period of  time  and  that  they  fund  her.   He
    further confirms [ZA] attends an English speaking school.

Submissions/Discussion

18. Mr Duffy relies on the Entry Clearance Officer's Grounds of Refusal and
    that paragraphs 316 and 297 of the Immigration Rules raise the bone  of
    contention namely whether or not this is a manufactured situation.   He
    indicates that if I find the  Appellant's  prospective  parents  to  be
    credible then it is a matter for me to  decide  under  the  Rules.   He
    makes no further submissions.

19. Ms Revill relies as her starting point on the submissions she makes  in
    her skeleton argument which were before the First-tier  Tribunal.   She
    contends that the Appellant meets the terms of  the  Immigration  Rules
    although the primary thrust is pursuant to paragraph  297(i)(f)  purely
    because it is less restrictive  in  its  grant  under  the  Rules  than
    paragraph  316A.   She  submits  that  the  paragraph  297(i)(f)   test
    inevitably involves an assessment of what the child's welfare and  best
    interests require and that there  are  herein  serious  and  compelling
    family reasons why this appeal should be allowed.

20. She submits that the Entry Clearance Officer  and  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge were wrong to refuse the appeal under paragraph 316A and that  it
    has been consistently stated that [ZA]'s natural  mother  has  suffered
    from postnatal depression and that there  was  produced  to  the  court
    (referring me to page 47  of  the  original  bundle)  evidence  of  her
    depression.  She submits that the correct approach is  to  accept  that
    evidence and that the witness statement of [SH] refers to  the  natural
    father's inability to support [ZA].

21. In the alternative she relies on paragraph 297(i)(f) pointing out  that
    [SH] and [AZ] have been appraised as adoptive parents by Kent  Council,
    that they are relatives, that this is not "a  set  up"  and  that  [ZA]
    regards [SH] and [AZ] as her parents,  that  they  meet  her  emotional
    needs and that the nanny was in any event only ever intended  to  be  a
    temporary solution.  She asked me to allow the appeal  under  paragraph
    297(i)(f) and under Article 8  pointing  out  that  the  considerations
    under 297 are the same under Article 8 and that there  is  family  life
    enjoyed between [ZA] and her prospective parents.  Clearly she contends
    it is not realistic to expect them to move to Pakistan and it  will  be
    disproportionate for them to do so.

Findings

22. It is understandable in a case of this nature  that  the  Secretary  of
    State initially adopted a cynical approach to the application that  has
    been made.  It would not be the first case  where  attempts  have  been
    made to bring children under false pretences into the  United  Kingdom.
    However it is essential that I consider the credibility of the  witness
    evidence.  [SH] is a very credible witness.  She has given her evidence
    clearly and succinctly.  Her family and  social  background  are  fully
    disclosed within her witness statement.  Of considerable importance  in
    this matter is that the suitability and genuineness of  both  [SH]  and
    [AZ] have been considered by both the court in Pakistan in granting the
    guardianship order and  following  a  thorough  investigation  by  Kent
    Social  Services  adoption  department.   I  find  their  findings   in
    obtaining  the  guardianship  order  and  in  being  in  receipt  of  a
    recommendation of suitability for adoption to be compelling.

23. It is understandable that there is only limited evidence  available  as
    to [ZA]'s natural mother's postnatal depression.  Further she  has  two
    female children already and living in poor conditions  it  does  appear
    that the weight of having a third female child was too much for her and
    for her husband.  The evidence is not challenged that in the  event  of
    this appeal not succeeding [ZA] will be condemned to life  in  a  rural
    village in an orphanage.  That I am satisfied would be a tragedy.

24. These are prospective parents who are not merely paying lip service  to
    the application.  [SH] has a professional very well educated  son  from
    her former marriage.  Both she and [AZ] indicate that they  are  unable
    to have  children  from  their  union.   They  are  both  in  full-time
    employment, they  fully  support  [ZA]'s  development  financially  and
    emotionally.  They speak to her daily and they have visited her  on  as
    many occasions as is practical for them to do so.  Those visits are not
    challenged by the Secretary of State.  They fund a nanny.  They pay for
    [ZA] to be privately educated at a school  where  she  speaks  English.
    Due to modern technology they are able to Skype [ZA] on a  daily  basis
    and Mr Duffy does not seek to challenge such contact.

25. Similar issues have been considered in  a  number  of  cases.   General
    principles were set out in  Mundeba  (Section  55  and  para  297(i)(f)
    [2013] UKUT 00077 (IAC).  That case  is  authority  for  the  following
    principles:

         "Serious  and  compelling"  considerations  are  those   that   are
         "persuasive and powerful"; the test requiring more than the parties
         simple  desiring  a  state  of  affairs  to  obtain  and  the  test
         inevitably involves an assessment of what the child's  welfare  and
         best interests require.

         "Family considerations"  relate  to  an  evaluation  of  a  child's
         emotional needs, and other considerations, which may include  cases
         where  a  child  is  in  "an  unacceptable  social   and   economic
         environment".

         The focus should be on the circumstances of the child in  light  of
         their age, social background  and  development  history,  including
         enquiry as to whether there is evidence  of  neglect  or  abuse  of
         unmet needs that should be catered for or  of  stable  arrangements
         for the child's physical care.

         As a starting point a child's best interests are usually served  by
         being with both or at least one of their  parents.   Continuity  of
         residence is also important "where a  child  has  grown  up  for  a
         number of years when socially aware".

26. I am satisfied having looked at this case in the round of the following
    factors.  Firstly that the respective parents are  credible  witnesses.
    Secondly that it would be in the best interests for [ZA] to  live  with
    her Sponsors who are able to meet her emotional and physical needs  and
    have visited regularly and that thirdly she is young enough to adapt to
    a new country without  problems.   That  conclusion  is  based  because
    clearly that would have been an issue that has been given very thorough
    consideration by the adoption  agency  in  Kent.   Fourthly  there  are
    consequently serious and compelling family  considerations  which  make
    exclusion  of  [ZA]  undesirable  and  I  am  satisfied  that  suitable
    arrangements have been made for her care.  The  Appellant  consequently
    meets the requirements of paragraph 297(i)(f) of the Immigration Rules.
     In addition the Appellant also meets the conditions of paragraph 316A.

27. In such circumstances the appeal is allowed both under the  Immigration
    Rules and on human rights grounds.

Notice of Decision

The Appellant's appeal is allowed under the Immigration Rules and  on  human
rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 13th December 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date: 13th December 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

