
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/15353/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 2nd September 2014                           |On 10th September 2014     |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                            MRS CALISTA EBERE ONU
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr V Onipede, Counsel, instructed by Fountain Gate
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria whose appeal to  be  allowed  to
    enter the United Kingdom as the spouse of a person with  limited  leave
    to remain here was allowed by the First-tier Tribunal Judge Devittie in
    a determination promulgated on 9th May 2014.  The judge found that  the
    Appellant was in a genuine and subsisting  marriage  relationship  with
    the sponsor.

 2. There is no challenge to that finding but grounds of  application  were
    lodged on the basis that the Appellant made her application  more  than
    30 days after the Sponsor's Tier 4 residence permit was issued, a point
    which had been raised by the Respondent in the refusal notice.  It  was
    said  that  the  judge  had  not  considered  this  issue  within   the
    determination and it was submitted that he had erred in law by omitting
    to do so.  Permission to appeal was granted  on  the  basis  that  this
    point was arguable.

 3. Thus the matter came before me on the above date.

 4. I explained to the parties that I had not been able to  find  any  such
    time limit contained within the Immigration Rules.   As  it  transpired
    both parties said to me that despite their own research into the matter
    they could not point to any provision in the Immigration Rules  either.



 5. I formally reserved my decision.

Conclusions

 6. As the judge put it, the respondent had said  that  the  Appellant  was
    required to apply for a visa within 30 days of the Sponsor's  residence
    permit being issued.  It did not seem to me to be very logical to think
    that there would be a time limit of this nature in such an application.

 7. Given what the parties said to me about the lack of  any  provision  in
    the Immigration Rules allied to my own research, I am bound to conclude
    that the time limit point is not one that is well made.  The foundation
    of it remains unclear.

 8. There is no challenge to any other part of the determination and  there
    therefore appears to me  to  be  no  error  in  it.   Accordingly  this
    decision must stand.

Decision

 9. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

10. I do not set aside the decision.





Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald
