
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/15613/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On the 19th September 2014                      |On 6th October 2014        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER tribunal JUDGE KELLY

                                   Between

                   The entry clearance officer - NEW DEHLI
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and



                              miss chinu gurung

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:     Mr R Jesurum, Counsel instructed by Howe and Co


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction


1. The respondent to this appeal is a citizen of Nepal who was born  on  the
   2nd January 1981. The Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) appeals  against  the
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Parker,  sitting  at  Taylor
   House) who  allowed  her  appeal  against  the  decision  to  refuse  her
   application for entry clearance as the  adult  dependent  daughter  of  a
   retired Gukha soldier who is settled in the United Kingdom.


2. In refusing the respondent's application,  the  ECO  concluded  that  the
   appellant could not meet  the  requirements  for  entry  clearance  under
   Section EC-DR of Appendix FM of to the Immigration Rules because, (i) she
   did not, as a result of age, illness  or  disability,  require  long-term
   personal care to perform everyday tasks [EC-ECDR.2.1] and, (ii) there was
   no evidence that she could be  adequately  maintained,  accommodated  and
   cared for in the UK by her father without recourse to public  funds  [EC-
   ECDR.3.1]. The ECO therefore turned to consider the Secretary of  State's
   policy concerning adult dependent relatives of Foreign  and  Commonwealth
   and HAM Forces (Immigration Directorate Instructions: Chapter 15, Section
   2A). However, s/he concluded that there were no exceptional circumstances
   in the respondent's case. In particular, the ECO noted that the appellant
   was aged 32 years and, that whilst she was being financially supported by
   her father, this was only because she  was  still  undertaking  full-time
   study. S/he thus concluded that  there  was  nothing  beyond  the  normal
   relationship of parent and adult child. Whilst the military covenant  was
   a relevant consideration, it did not override  the  requirements  of  the
   Immigration Rules. Her father had not had any expectation that  he  would
   be entitled to settle in the United Kingdom  when  he  retired,  and  the
   decision to allow him to  do  so  was  in  recognition  of  his  military
   service. Her father  was  not  however  obliged  to  reside  in  the  UK.
   Therefore, if the respondent wished to join him  in  the  UK,  she  would
   either have to meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules  or  bring
   herself within the ambit of the published policy.


3. Although he did not expressly say so, the judge appears to have  accepted
   that the respondent could not meet the requirements  of  the  Immigration
   Rules, for the reasons given by the ECO. He did however consider  whether
   the decision to refuse her application for entry clearance was compatible
   with her right to respect of for private and family life under Article  8
   of the 1950 European Convention for the Protection of  Human  Rights  and
   Fundamental  Freedoms.  He  concluded  that  it  was  not.  The  ECO  now
   challenges that conclusion on a number of grounds, to which I now turn.


4. Paragraphs 4 to 10 of the grounds argue that the Judge's approach to  the
   Article 8 assessment was fundamentally flawed, in that he failed to adopt
   the approach in Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013]
   UKUT 00640 by asking whether there were "compelling  circumstances"  that
   were not recognised by the Immigration Rules, before considering the case
   under Article 8. The grounds further argue that,  had  he  asked  himself
   that question, the judge would have been bound  to  conclude  that  there
   were no such  circumstances  and  thus  to  have  realised  that  it  was
   unnecessary to consider Article 8 at all. However, Mr  Whitwell  did  not
   pursue this argument. He instead  accepted  the  force  of  Mr  Jesurum's
   argument; namely, that the Immigration Rules do not provide  any  express
   mechanism for taking account of  the  'historic  injustice'  suffered  by
   veterans of the Brigade of Gukhas who were  discharged  before  1997  and
   thus deprived of an opportunity to settle  in  the  United  Kingdom.   Mr
   Whitwell did however maintain the other grounds, to which I now turn.


5. The remaining 11 substantive paragraphs of  the  grounds  of  appeal  can
   effectively be distilled into  three  discrete  arguments.  Firstly,  the
   judge erred in finding that there was family life at all. Secondly, there
   was no evidence  to  support  the  judge's  finding  that  the  'historic
   injustice' suffered by the respondent's father was what had  led  to  her
   remaining in Nepal following her father's move to and settlement  in  the
   United Kingdom. Thirdly, even if the judge was right  to  make  the  link
   between the historic injustice and the respondent's current situation, he
   was wrong to treat that factor as being determinative of  the  appeal.  I
   will consider these arguments in turn.


6.  The argument that the judge erred in finding that  family  life  existed
   between the adult respondent and her father is  founded  upon  the  well-
   known decision of the Court of Appeal in Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA  Civ
   31. It was held in that  case that family life is not established between
   an adult child and a surviving parent or sibling  unless  something  more
   exists than normal emotional ties. However,  I  am  satisfied  that  this
   argument amounts to nothing more than a disagreement  with  a  conclusion
   that was reasonably open to the judge upon evidence that  was  undisputed
   in the First-tier Tribunal. It was an accepted fact that  the  respondent
   had remained financially dependent upon her father due to her  continuing
   to be in full-time education. Moreover, the Court of Appeal  in  Kugathas
   recognised that family ties might exist "if the appellant were  dependent
   on his family or vice versa" [emphasis added]. The grounds are thus wrong
   to suggest that the Court "felt that it was clearly necessary to  confine
   Article 8 to situations where a genuine situation  of  mutual  dependency
   exists" [emphasis added]. I am thus satisfied that  the  judge's  finding
   that family life existed in the circumstances of this  particular  appeal
   was one that fell within a spectrum of reasonable conclusions  that  were
   open to him on the evidence, and that it was not therefore  founded  upon
   an error of law.


7. On the face of the determination, the ECO's second argument might  appear
   to be stronger than the terms in which it is asserted in the  grounds  of
   appeal may suggest. Thus, the grounds merely assert that  there  was  "no
   evidence that [the respondent's father] intended  to  settle  in  the  UK
   prior to her turning 18 years of age". At first blush, however, the judge
   may be thought to have found that her father's desire to  settle  in  the
   United Kingdom had only arisen after the respondent had turned  18  years
   of age. Thus, at paragraph 27, the judge said this:


    The evidence of sponsor (a man of positive good character) is  that  he
    would have applied in 2004 if he could have.


   However, it is clear that the sponsor must have  been  referring  to  the
   first occasion upon which it had been theoretically open to him to  apply
   for  settlement,  following  the  introduction  (in  2004)  of  a  highly
   restrictive policy (subsequently held to be unlawful) that  purported  to
   rectify the historic injustice perpetrated in respect of members  of  the
   Brigade of Ghurkhas who had been discharged prior  to  1997.  The  reason
   that I have reached this conclusion is because, in his witness  statement
   dated the 19th May 2014, the sponsor expressly stated that if he had  had
   the opportunity to settle in the UK after his  army  discharge  in  1970,
   then he and his young family would  surely  have  done  so.  It  was  not
   therefore the case, as the grounds assert, that the Tribunal did not have
   any evidential basis for the finding that the sponsor's desire to  settle
   in the United Kingdom pre-dated the respondent's age of majority.


8. It would be correct to say that an historic injustice is not  necessarily
   determinative of an appeal that is brought on Article 8 grounds. However,
   the ECO's grounds are wrong to assert that it was not determinative of on
   the  facts  of  this  particular  appeal.  Thus,  in  Ghising  and  other
   (Ghurkas/BOCs: historic wrong; weight) [2013] UKUT (IAC) 00567, the Upper
   Tribunal held that -


    ... where it is found that Article  8  is  engaged  and,  but  for  the
    historic wrong, the Appellant would have been settled in  the  UK  long
    ago, this will ordinarily  determine  the  outcome  of  the  Article  8
    proportionality assessment in an Appellant's favour, where the  matters
    relied upon by the Secretary of State/ECO consist solely of the  public
    interest in maintaining a firm immigration policy.


   I have previously held that, contrary to the arguments  advanced  by  the
   ECO, the Tribunal was entitled to conclude that the  decision  to  refuse
   entry clearance interfered with existing family life,  and  thus  engaged
   the potential operation  of  Article  8.  As  I  noted  in  the  previous
   paragraph, there was evidence before  the  Tribunal  that  justified  its
   finding that but for the historic wrong, the respondent would  have  been
   settled in the UK long ago. The only public policy consideration that the
   ECO advanced in opposition to the respondent's application was the public
   interest in maintaining a  firm  policy  of  immigration  control.  These
   factors therefore justified the  Tribunal's  decision  to  determine  the
   Article 8 proportionality assessment  in  the  respondent's  favour.  Its
   decision to do so cannot therefore be said to amount to an error of law.


Decision


9. The appeal is dismissed


Anonymity not directed.



Signed                                  Date

David Kelly



Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



