
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/15893/2010


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 16th July 2013                               |On 17th July 2013          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                           miss KANOKWAN BUASANIT
                                                                    Claimant

                                     and

                      Entry Clearance Officer - BANGKOK

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Claimant:         Mr F Khan (instructed by ZSN Immigration
Services)
For the Respondent:        Mr P Nath (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is a  resumed  hearing  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  following  a
    decision by me on 12th October 2011, on the Entry  Clearance  Officer's
    application, that the First-tier Tribunal had made an error of law  and
    setting aside its determination.

 2. In my decision of October 2011 I found that the Judge had erred in  her
    assessment of paragraph 320(7A) of the Immigration Rules. I noted  that
    that was the only live ground challenging the decision. The question of
    sole responsibility was not an issue as  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    found in the Entry Clearance Officer's favour on that point. However  I
    said that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  failure  to  take  all  the
    evidence into account in her assessment of  paragraph  320(7A)  tainted
    her other findings and set aside the  determination  in  its  entirety.
    Thus the matter came back before me.

 3. It is appropriate at this stage to set out the  facts  and  history  of
    this case.

 4. On 1st April  2010  application  was  made  by  Chailai  Buasinet,  the
    Claimant's mother, on her behalf for entry clearance  with  a  view  to
    settlement as the child of a parent present and settled in  the  United
    Kingdom. The Entry Clearance Officer  refused  that  application  in  a
    decision dated 27th May 2010.

 5. The Claimant was born on 5th January 2005 and was thus 4 years  of  age
    at the date of application, five years  of  age  at  the  date  of  the
    decision and almost  6  years  of  age  when  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    promulgated its determination. She is now eight years of age.

 6. The Sponsor, the Claimant's mother married  the  Claimant's  father  in
    Thailand on 30th  September  2005  after  the  Claimant's  birth.  They
    divorced on 1st June 2007 and in the divorce proceedings custody of the
    Claimant was awarded to her father.

 7. The Claimant's mother moved to Phuket. She met her  second  husband,  a
    British citizen and they married in the UK on  20th  June  2009.  Their
    son, the Claimant's half brother was born in the UK on 24th July 2009.

 8. The Sponsor spent six months in the UK as a visitor from 1st July  2008
    and she was then given leave to enter to marry her husband  valid  from
    20th March 2009 to 20th September 2009. She was  then  given  leave  to
    remain as a  spouse  in  November  2009  until  October  2011  and  was
    thereafter given indefinite leave to remain in January  2012.  She  has
    thus been more or less full time in the UK since July 2008.

 9. The Sponsor's passport shows that her habit has been to spend six weeks
    at the beginning of each year in Thailand visiting her daughter.

10. When application was made for the Claimant to join the Sponsor a letter
    was included from the Claimant's father indicating  his  consent.  That
    letter  also  indicated  that  the  Sponsor   has   always   had   sole
    responsibility for the Claimant, that he had never taken  care  of  her
    and worked as a labourer in different places receiving a  small  income
    insufficient to support her. It indicated that he was pleased that  she
    was to live with her mother in the UK and that the mother was a  better
    parent than he.

11. That letter caused the Entry Clearance Officer to contact the father by
    telephone and that telephone  call  revealed  a  different  version  of
    events. Father told the Embassy that the Claimant lived  with  him  and
    her paternal grandmother and that they cared for  all  her  needs.  Her
    grandmother looked after her during the  day  and  her  father  in  the
    evenings when he returned from work. He told the Embassy  that  he  had
    never missed a single day seeing her every morning and every night.  He
    said that he had divorced the Claimant's mother at her request and that
    he had taken over custody on the day of the divorce. She had always and
    remained living with her father and since her mother had come to the UK
    she continued to live with him and his mother.

12. As a result of that conflicting evidence the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    invoked paragraph 320(7A).  The Entry Clearance Officer also relied  on
    paragraph  297  on  the  basis  that  the  Sponsor  had  not  had  sole
    responsibility  for  the  Claimant  and  there  were  no  serious   and
    compelling family or other considerations making her exclusion from the
    UK undesirable.

13. By the time the matter came before me in April

14. 2012 there was a letter from the Claimant's father giving  his  consent
    to her applying for a passport and travelling to England. It was agreed
    that given the sensitive  nature  of  the  case  and  child  protection
    considerations it  was  important  that  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    should have an opportunity to go back  to  the  Claimant's  father  and
    interview him again in the light of the second letter.

15. That took place as a telephone interview on  11th  June  2012  and  the
    typed transcript of the interview is contained in my  bundle.  In  that
    interview the Claimant's father said (question 8) that he had written a
    letter to the Embassy a long time ago, about two years  previously  and
    that his next letter was his second letter. When asked the  purpose  of
    the second letter he said that he would like his daughter to live  with
    her mother as in Thailand her future is  uncertain  and  she  would  be
    better living with her  mother.  He  pointed  out  that  he  could  not
    "totally look after his daughter as much" because he is now a monk.  He
    said that his daughter is "big now" and he wanted her to  have  a  good
    future. He said he was told that she would get a better  education  and
    that he was certain she would have a better future in the UK  and  that
    as a monk and could not really look after her. He told the Embassy that
    she lived with her maternal grandmother and grandfather  now  and  that
    she had done so since she was aged  4  or  5.  He  said  that  he  been
    ordained as a monk since 24th April  2011  and  explained  that  before
    becoming a monk it was more convenient for the Claimant  to  live  with
    her maternal grandparents  given  where  he  worked  and  it  was  more
    convenient for school.

16. That contradicts the evidence of his first interview given in 2010 that
    his daughter lived with him.

17. He said that he had been aware of  the  application  in  2010  for  his
    daughter to settle in the UK and he explained that his former wife  and
    her mother had gone to see him in Thailand informing him that they were
    going to apply for the Claimant  to  move  to  England.  He  said  that
    initially he had agreed with the proposal but then changed his mind but
    has now changed his mind again on the basis that she "is big  now"  and
    it would be better for her.

18. He was asked about the letter that he had written to  the  Embassy  and
    whether he had written it himself. He said he that he  had  only  given
    the main idea and someone else  wrote  it;  he  thought  his  ex-wife's
    solicitor. He had gone to the temple  with  his  ex-wife  to  see  him.
    Initially he asked a lot of questions and made notes and then came back
    with a letter that he asked him to read and then sign. It  was  pointed
    out to him that part of the letter said that he  had  relinquished  his
    duties and responsibilities for his daughter and left all burden to her
    mother and her extended family and that she had lived with  her  mother
    and maternal grandparents ever since she had been born.  He  then  said
    that part was not true and that he must not have paid much attention to
    what the letter said.

19. The father was asked where the family had  been  living  prior  to  the
    divorce and he said they had lived at the maternal grandmother's. After
    the divorce he left the family and then brought his  daughter  to  stay
    with him and his mother although he occasionally took her to stay  with
    her maternal grandmother as well. He said that his ex wife had gone  to
    Phuket where she met the man who is now her husband. He was  asked  why
    he was granted custody of his daughter on the divorce and said  it  was
    because she did not have a job, did not have a lot of  things  and  was
    living in Phuket with her new partner. He was asked where his  daughter
    had been living after his ex-wife came to the UK until  he  joined  the
    monastery and he said between his own house and that  of  the  paternal
    grandmother.

20. Following that interview  the  Entry  Clearance  Manager  reviewed  the
    original decision and a copy of that review is also in the bundle.  The
    Entry Clearance Manager points out that it was  quite  clear  from  the
    first interview with the Claimant's father, conducted in May 2010  that
    he was wholly unaware of the contents of the letter purportedly  signed
    by him or of his daughter's application for settlement. It  points  out
    that with the appeal a further letter was  submitted  also  purportedly
    written by him but that in the recent  interview  he  had  contradicted
    himself on whether he had written it or not,  suggesting  someone  else
    had written it; but again he seemed ignorant of its contents. The Entry
    Clearance Manager indicates the letter appeared to have been written by
    mother's legal representative and suggests that the letters  sought  to
    fabricate the Claimant's previous circumstances in Thailand. The  Entry
    Clearance Manager points out that the father  had  repeatedly  asserted
    during both the interviews that the Claimant had lived  with  him,  his
    parents and later with her  maternal  grandparents  since  he  and  his
    former wife divorced. He had been consistent in that  and  thus  mother
    had  signally  failed  to  demonstrate  sole  responsibility  for   her
    daughter.

21. The Entry Clearance Manager  acknowledges  that  father's  most  recent
    responses  indicate  a  change  of  heart  as  regards  his  daughter's
    emigration to the UK but that was not the  test.  It  was  not  just  a
    question of where she may achieve a better  education  or  standard  of
    living.

22. Mother, in her statement refers to her former husband (statement of 4th
    October 2011, paragraph 8) as someone with drinking, drugs and gambling
    addictions. I simply do not accept that to be  the  case;  particularly
    given that the mother did not dispute the father having custody of  her
    two-year-old daughter on divorce and came to the UK to start a new life
    leaving her in his care. If her former husband had  been  the  type  of
    person she now portrays him, as a caring mother she would have acted to
    have her returned to her care  years  ago.  Furthermore,  the  evidence
    adduced; the only evidence adduced attacking father's  character  is  a
    document from the police in Thailand of May 2010 indicating that father
    had been arrested in possession of one tablet of Methamphetamine. There
    is no evidence that he was charged, convicted or imprisoned.  There  is
    no evidence that he was a drug addict nor is there any evidence that he
    has a drink or gambling problem. Thailand is not known for its  lenient
    treatment of drug offenders. It is true that the father himself  refers
    to the drugs issue in  his  most  recent  interview  with  the  Embassy
    suggesting that he was told to obtain medical treatment and that he has
    become ordained as a monk for his mother's sake.

23. There is no evidence that he  has  ceased  contact  with  his  daughter
    notwithstanding his being in a monastery  and  no  evidence  suggesting
    that is to be permanent.

24. That then is the background.

25. On mother's behalf Mr Khan argued that, so far as paragraph 320(7A)  is
    concerned, given that the Claimant is a child she should  not  be  held
    accountable for the actions of the adults in the case and that  in  any
    event mother was unaware because it was her  legal  representative  who
    prepared the letter.

26. I accept of course that a young child cannot be  held  responsible  for
    the actions of its parents or other adults. However, I do find that the
    Sponsor was aware and knowingly put forward a letter  accompanying  the
    application which misstated the background facts. Given  that  her  ex-
    husband was granted and indeed still retains custody  of  the  Claimant
    and his reaction during the first interview, it is quite clear that the
    letter was put in for the sole purpose of seeking to show to the  Entry
    Clearance Officer that mother had sole responsibility for her  daughter
    when quite clearly the evidence is she did not. I have no difficulty in
    finding that this was a deliberate attempt at deception by  the  mother
    and that father was ignorant of it. The first interview with the father
    I find to be the most revealing, unexpected as  it  was.  It  is  quite
    clear that mother, members of her family and indeed her representatives
    met with her former husband since and I  have  no  doubt  pressure  was
    brought to bear upon him to change his attitude.

27. Paragraph 320(7A) does  not  require  the  Claimant  to  be  personally
    responsible  for  any  deception  practised.  There  does  have  to  be
    deliberate intent on the part of someone and that clearly was the  case
    here, that person being her mother.  Paragraph  320(7A)  requires  only
    that false representations are made or information submitted whether or
    not material to the application and whether or not to  the  applicant's
    knowledge. The applicant's knowledge in this case is of  course  absent
    due to her age. However, there was  clearly  a  deliberate  attempt  to
    mislead the Entry Clearance Officer  into believing  the  situation  in
    Thailand was other than what it was and for that reason the application
    falls to be refused under paragraph 320(7A).

28. However, as I indicated at the hearing that  is  not  the  end  of  the
    matter. Even if I had not dismissed the appeal under paragraph 320(7A),
    having found mother did not have sole responsibility for her daughter I
    would still have to consider whether there were serious and  compelling
    family or other  considerations  which  make  exclusion  of  the  child
    undesirable and suitable arrangements have been made for the her care n
    accordance with paragraph 297(i)(f). That encompasses many of the  same
    principles as consideration of Article 8.

29. The evidence makes clear that mother has not  had  sole  responsibility
    for her daughter.

30. I find this case far from  easy  as  I  have  been  given  very  little
    evidence as to the situation in  Thailand.  The  argument  on  mother's
    behalf seems to be no more than that she is the child's mother, she has
    maintained contact with her since her divorce and has visited the child
    annually in Thailand and that she  would  be  better  living  with  her
    mother. She now adds the evidence that father is unwilling or incapable
    of looking after her, something which I view with reservation.  So  far
    as serious and compelling family or other considerations are concerned,
    it seems clear that the child is well looked after, she  is  well  fed,
    clothed and nurtured and is in education. She has good  relations  with
    both sets of grandparents and her father and lives in  the  country  of
    her nationality, the country in which she has lived all her  life.  Her
    culture and heritage is in Thailand, her first language is not  English
    and I am given no reason to find that there is anything untoward in her
    situation in Thailand such as to  allow  me  to  find  that  there  are
    serious and  compelling  family  or  other  considerations  making  her
    exclusion from the UK undesirable.

31. In considering Article 8 I have to consider as a primary  consideration
    the Claimant's best interests. For the same  reasons  I  recite  at  29
    above, I am  given  very  little  information  to  assist  me  in  that
    decision. However in the absence of any evidence that  she  is  in  any
    difficulties or is anything other than well  cared  for  and  happy  in
    Thailand I cannot find that it would be in her best interests to  wrest
    her from the only life she has known and move her  halfway  across  the
    world to live with her mother whom she has only seen for six weeks each
    year since the age of two, a stepfather who she has only met  the  same
    number of times and a half brother who she  hardly  knows.  That  would
    prevent regular face-to-face contact with all the other members of  her
    family with whom she has had a close relationship thus far, namely both
    sets of grandparents and her father and no doubt other extended  family
    also.

32. It is clear from  the  fact  that  this  couple  went  through  divorce
    proceedings in which custody of  the  Claimant  was  dealt  with,  that
    Thailand has an established family and divorce law. The fact  that  the
    Sponsor and her husband went through that process indicates  that  they
    are prepared to use the law. There is  no  reason  therefore  why  they
    could not properly go back to the court in Thailand for a  transfer  of
    custody on a legal basis from father to mother. They have chosen not to
    do so. As it is, on the evidence I have before me I am unable  to  find
    it in the child's best interests to remove her  from  her  settled  and
    established life. As I have indicated, there is no evidence that she is
    suffering either physically or emotionally  and  she  can  continue  to
    enjoy the family life that she currently enjoys with her mother and her
    half-brother in the form of the annual visits. The fact that mother has
    formed this regular pattern of visits and  the  absence  of  any  other
    visits at short notice suggests that mother has no  concerns  over  the
    welfare of her daughter in Thailand.  Accordingly refusing the Claimant
    entry to the UK for settlement does not  represent  a  disproportionate
    breach of her right to a family life.  Indeed to allow it would do  so.
    I do not find any merit in a consideration of  her  half-brothers  best
    interests.  The two are virtual strangers, he is very young and in  any
    event his best interests must be a secondary consideration behind those
    of the Claimant.

33. Having previously found that the First-tier Tribunal made an  error  of
    law in its determination and having set that determination aside I  now
    remake the decision and allow the Entry Clearance Officer's  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal which means that the Claimant's appeal  against  the
    Entry Clearance Officer's decision is dismissed.





Signed                              Date 17th July 2013







Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
