
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/15287/2011
     OA/15291/2011
     OA/15303/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 1 September 2014                             |On 24 September 2014       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE



                                   Between

                                TRISHNA THAPA
                                TRIPTI THAPA
                         SAURAV (AKA SHAURAV) THAPA
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer - NEW DELHI


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Wilford, instructed by Howe & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants are citizens of Nepal and were born respectively 13 June
    1988, 28 August 1989 and 4  March  1991.   They  had  appealed  against
    decisions of the Entry Clearance Officer, New  Delhi,  dated  27  April
    2011 refusing their applications for entry clearance as  the  over  age
    dependent children of Ram  Bahadur  Thapa,  a  former  Ghurkha  soldier
    (hereafter Mr Ram Thapa).  Mr Thapa had been granted settlement in  the
    United Kingdom on 9 November 2009.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal (Judge Whalan), in a determination  promulgated
    on 2 November 2011, allowed the appeal of the appellants' mother  (Bhim
    Kala Thapa) but dismissed the appeals of the appellants. They  appealed
    to  the  Upper  Tribunal  (Judge  Storey)  which,  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 25 July 2012, dismissed the appeal. Permission to appeal
    to the Court of Appeal was refused by  Judge  Storey  but  subsequently
    granted by Laws LJ.  A consent order was  sealed  on  2  December  2013
    providing for Judge Storey's determination to  be  set  aside  and  the
    appeal remitted to the Upper Tribunal for rehearing. The material  part
    of the Statement of Reasons reads as follows:

         (v) For the purposes of this appeal, the respondent agrees that the
             determination of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Storey  contained  a
             material error of law in light of R (Gurung)  v  Secretary  of
             State for the Home Department [2013] 1WLR 2546 (in consequence
             of which that part of Ghising which relates  to  Article  8(2)
             was set aside).

         (vi)     The  parties  therefore  agree  that  this  amounts  to  a
             sufficiently material error of law to warrant the appeal being
             allowed and the case  remitted  back  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
             (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) for a rehearing on the  issue
             of Article 8(2) in line with R (Gurung).

 3. At the Upper Tribunal hearing at Field House on  1  September  2014,  I
    admitted the witness statement of Mr Ram Thapa dated 1 September  2014.
    Mr Thapa was in court and adopted the statement as  his  evidence.   He
    was not cross-examined and Mr Wilding did not  seek  to  challenge  any
    part of his evidence in submissions.  I accept the  evidence  contained
    in that statement that Mr Ram Thapa had no opportunity of applying  for
    settlement together with his dependent family after his discharge  from
    the British Army in July 1991 and also that he would have  applied  for
    settlement  together  with  his  dependant  family  had  he   had   the
    opportunity to do so at that time.

 4. Mr Wilding, for the respondent, accepted that the respondent  had  made
    no challenge whatever to the factual matrix in this  case  and  further
    accepted that the respondent's  only  ground  for  asserting  that  the
    refusal of the applications was proportionate by reference  to  Article
    8(2) of the ECHR was that concerned with the maintenance of immigration
    control (as part of a wider aim in protecting the economic wellbeing of
    the United Kingdom).  He made no further submissions.

 5. Mr Wilford, for the appellants, referred me to the determination of the
    Upper Tribunal in Ghising and Others (Ghurkhas /BOCs,  historic  wrong;
    weight) [2013] UKUT 00567 (IAC):

         (1) In finding that the weight to be accorded to the historic wrong
         in Ghurkha ex-servicemen cases was not to be regarded as less  than
         that to be accorded the historic wrong suffered by British Overseas
         citizens, the Court of Appeal in Gurung and others [2013] EWCA  Civ
         8 did not hold that, in either Gurkha or BOC cases, the  effect  of
         the historic wrong is to reverse or otherwise alter the  burden  of
         proof that applies in Article 8 proportionality assessments.

         (2) When an Appellant has shown that there is  family/private  life
         and the decision made by the Respondent amounts to an  interference
         with it, the burden  lies  with  the  Respondent  to  show  that  a
         decision to remove is proportionate (although Appellants  will,  in
         practice, bear the responsibility of adducing  evidence  that  lies
         within their remit and about which the Respondent may be  unaware).



         (3) What concerned the Court in  Gurung  and  others  was  not  the
         burden  of  proof  but,  rather,  the  issue   of   weight   in   a
         proportionality assessment. The Court held that, as in the case  of
         BOCs, the historic wrong suffered by Gurkha ex-servicemen should be
         given substantial weight.

         (4) Accordingly, where it is found that Article 8 is  engaged  and,
         but for the historic wrong, the Appellant would have  been  settled
         in the UK long ago, this will ordinarily determine the  outcome  of
         the Article 8 proportionality assessment in an Appellant's  favour,
         where the matters relied  on  by  the  Secretary  of  State/  entry
         clearance  officer  consist  solely  of  the  public  interest   in
         maintaining a firm immigration policy.

         (5)  It can therefore be seen that Appellants in Gurkha  (and  BOC)
         cases will not necessarily succeed, even though  (i)  their  family
         life engages Article 8(1); and (ii) the evidence shows  they  would
         have come to the United Kingdom with  their  father,  but  for  the
         injustice that prevented the latter from settling here earlier.  If
         the Respondent can point to  matters  over  and  above  the  public
         interest in maintaining a firm immigration policy, which  argue  in
         favour of removal or the refusal of leave to enter,  these  matters
         must be given appropriate weight in the balance in the Respondent's
         favour. Thus, a bad immigration history and/or  criminal  behaviour
         may still be sufficient to outweigh the powerful factors bearing on
         the Appellant's side of the balance.

 6. Mr Wilford alsio relied upon the determination at [60]:

         Once this point is grasped, it can immediately be appreciated  that
         there may be cases  where  Appellants  in  Gurkha  cases  will  not
         succeed, even though their family life engages Article 8(1) and the
         evidence shows they would have come  to  the  United  Kingdom  with
         their father, but for the injustice that prevented the latter  from
         settling here on  completion  of  his  military  service.   If  the
         Respondent can point to matters over and above the "public interest
         in maintaining of a firm immigration policy", which argue in favour
         of removal or the refusal of leave to enter, these  must  be  given
         appropriate weight in the balance in the Respondent's favour. Thus,
         a bad immigration history and/or criminal behaviour  may  still  be
         sufficient  to  outweigh  the  powerful  factors  bearing  on   the
         Appellant's side. Being an adult child of a UK settled  Gurkha  ex-
         serviceman is, therefore, not a "trump card", in the sense that not
         every application by such a person will inevitably succeed.    But,
         if  the  Respondent  is  relying  only  upon  the  public  interest
         described by the Court of Appeal at paragraph 41  of  Gurung,  then
         the weight to be given to  the  historic  injustice  will  normally
         require a decision in the Appellant's favour.

 7. Having accepted the evidence in Mr Ram Thapa's most recent statement, I
    am drawn to the inevitable conclusion  that  these  appeals  should  be
    allowed.   The  respondent  relies  only  upon   the   maintenance   of
    immigration policy as proportionate justification  to  the  refusal  of
    these applications; there is no evidence at all of  criminal  behaviour
    or a bad immigration history attaching  to  any  of  these  appellants.
    Applying the ratio of Ghising to the agreed facts in these  appeals,  I
    find that they should be allowed.  I note, however,  that  the  consent
    order in the Court of Appeal is somewhat ambiguous.  The order provides
    at [1] that the "determination of the Upper Tribunal ... promulgated on
    2 November 2011 be set aside ..." the determination of 2 November  2011
    and that of the First-tier Tribunal, not the Upper Tribunal.  I assume,
    therefore, that the consent order purported to set aside Judge Storey's
    determination promulgated on 25 July 2012.  I therefore set  aside  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal  dated  2  November  2011  and
    remake the  decision.   The  appeals  of  the  appellants  against  the
    decisions of the Entry Clearance Officer and which are dated  27  April
    2011 are allowed on human rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR).

THE DECISION

 8. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 2  November
    2011 is set aside.  I remake  the  decisions.   The  appeals  of  these
    appellants against the decisions of the Entry Clearance  Officer  dated
    27 April 2011 are allowed on human rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR).





Signed                              Date 10 September 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

