


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/15531/2012
     OA/15533/2012



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 4 July 2013                              |On : 8 July 2013             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                         Vijayarajine Ravintharadas
                         Muhirththanaa Ravintharadas
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Hena, instructed by Krish Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellants, mother and daughter, are citizens of Sri  Lanka  born  on
   15 March 1965 and  21  June  1996  respectively.  They  have  been  given
   permission to appeal against the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Rhys-Davies  dismissing  their  appeals  against  the  respondent's
   decision to refuse them entry clearance.

2. The appellants applied for  entry  clearance  to  settle  in  the  United
   Kingdom  as  the  spouse  and  child  of   the   sponsor,   Ravintharadas
   Kathiravelu, a British national. The first  appellant's  application  was
   refused on the grounds that she was unable to meet  the  requirements  of
   paragraph 281 of HC  395  and  the  second  appellant's  application  was
   refused as a consequence of that  decision.  With  regard  to  the  first
   appellant, the respondent noted that she had married  the  sponsor  on  8
   September 1982 and had not seen him since July 1997. He had come  to  the
   United  Kingdom  in  November  1999.  It  was  not  accepted  that  their
   relationship was subsisting or that that they intended to  live  together
   as husband and wife, in view of the lack of evidence of  contact  between
   them. In addition, the  appellant  had  failed  to  provide  an  original
   English language test certificate from an approved English language  test
   provider.

3. The appellants appealed against the  decisions  and  their  appeals  were
   heard in the First-tier Tribunal on 3 April 2013. Judge Rhys-Davies heard
   from the sponsor and found him to be a credible witness. He accepted  his
   evidence of regular contact and financial support and accepted  that  the
   first appellant's and sponsor's marriage was  subsisting  and  that  they
   intended to live together permanently  as  spouses,  despite  their  many
   years apart. However he did not accept that the first appellant  had  met
   the English language requirement of the rules.

4. It was argued before the judge that the first appellant fell  within  the
   exceptions at paragraph 281(i)(a)(ii)(b) and (c) since she was  medically
   unfit to pass the test. Two  letters  from  doctors  at  Jaffna  Teaching
   Hospital were produced concluding that she had a low IQ and a mental  age
   of 11 years and six months. The sponsor also gave evidence that  she  had
   never been well-educated and had always had difficulties and had  started
   seeking medical treatment when she began to develop headaches from trying
   to study for the English language  test.  The  judge  found  the  medical
   evidence to be entirely unreliable and attached no weight to it,  but  in
   any event noted the limitations of the single IQ test and noted that  the
   medical evidence did not state that  her  condition  prevented  her  from
   meeting the English  language  requirement.  He  accepted  the  sponsor's
   evidence that his wife was "slow" and got headaches  from  studying,  but
   found that that was not  sufficient  to  prove  that  she  had  a  mental
   condition  that  prevented  her  from  meeting   the   English   language
   requirements  or  that  that  amounted   to   exceptional   compassionate
   circumstances. He accordingly dismissed the appeals under the immigration
   rules and on Article 8 grounds.

5. Permission to appeal against the decision was sought  on  behalf  of  the
   appellants on the ground that the judge had failed to have proper  regard
   to the medical evidence and to the case  of  Chapti  &  Ors,  R  (on  the
   application of) v Secretary of State for the Home Department & Ors [2011]
   EWHC 3370 and had erroneously applied the test under the exception to  be
   higher than it should be. It was asserted that the appellant's background
   and her IQ led her to fall within both exceptions.

6. Permission was granted on 30 May 2013 on all grounds

Appeal hearing

7. At the hearing I heard submissions on the error of law.

8. Ms Hena agreed that the judge's determination was detailed and looked  at
   the relevant issues, but she submitted that the judge had failed to apply
   the principles in Chapti to  the  first  appellant's  circumstances.  She
   referred to paragraph 37 of the judgment in regard  to  the  consultation
   paper leading to the introduction of  the  English  language  requirement
   into the rules, which had stated a need to take into account the literacy
   level of spouses, and to the factors set out at paragraph  143  affecting
   the  ability  to  comply  with  the  English  language  requirement.  She
   submitted that, in view  of  the  judge's  acceptance  of  the  sponsor's
   evidence about his wife's difficulties, namely her  headaches,  the  fact
   that she came from the rural areas and the fact  that  she  had  made  an
   attempt to study for the test, there was sufficient to  show  exceptional
   compassionate circumstances. With regard to  the  medical  evidence,  the
   judge had failed to give adequate consideration to the limited facilities
   available to the doctors to test the appellant's IQ and to the fact  that
   the physician may have got the diagnosis wrong. Ms  Hena  submitted  that
   the purpose of the English language requirement  was  to  benefit  people
   moving to the United Kingdom by assisting in their  integration,  and  it
   was not intended to punish people and  to  keep  them  apart  from  their
   families. The judge ought to  have  considered  the  appellant's  limited
   financial resources in regard to taking further tests.

9. Ms Pal submitted that the judge had not erred in  law.  He  had  properly
   approached the evidence and had  given  sound  reasons  for  finding  the
   medical evidence unreliable. There was no evidence  before  him  to  show
   that the appellant's medical condition or learning difficulties prevented
   her from doing the English test. He had given proper consideration to the
   issues identified in Chapti.

10. In response, Ms Hena reiterated her  previous  arguments  and  submitted
   that the judge ought to have taken account of the fact that the appellant
   was admitted into hospital in 2011 and took  an  IQ  test.  The  doctors'
   opinions ought to have carried weight.

Consideration and findings.

11.  It is asserted in the grounds that the  judge  failed  to  give  proper
   consideration to the guidance in Chapti and that, had he  considered  the
   first appellant's circumstances in  the  light  of  that  guidance,  with
   particular reference to the factors set  out  at  paragraph  143  of  the
   judgment, he ought to have concluded that the exceptions to  the  English
   language requirement applied to her.

12. However the judge did consider the appellant's circumstances within  the
   guidance in Chapti. At paragraph 11 of his determination he  referred  to
   the judgment having been submitted before him and at paragraph  25(h)  he
   recorded in detail the submissions made on behalf  of  the  appellant  in
   regard to the guidance at paragraph 111 of the judgment.  Whilst  he  did
   not go on specifically to refer to it in his findings, it is  clear  that
   he had the case in mind and the findings that  he  made  were  consistent
   with the guidance and principles therein.

13. The judge gave careful consideration to the medical evidence before  him
   and concluded, at paragraph 33, that it  was  "entirely  unreliable".  He
   gave clear and cogent reasons for so concluding and was fully entitled to
   make the findings that he did and to attach the weight that he did to the
   two letters, given the discrepancies they contained.  It  was  Ms  Hena's
   submission that he ought to have  considered  the  possibility  that  the
   physician had got the diagnosis wrong and that weight should be given  to
   the fact that the appellant had had to see the doctors  in  hospital  and
   had undergone an IQ test. However, it was not for the judge to  speculate
   as to reasons for the discrepancies arising in the  letters  and  he  was
   entitled to place no weight upon the information they contained  for  the
   reasons properly given. It is, furthermore,  relevant  to  note  that  at
   paragraph 15 of his determination  he  recorded  the  sponsor's  lack  of
   direct knowledge about the letters. Of further relevance is the sponsor's
   evidence, as  recorded  in  that  paragraph,  which  indicated  that  his
   understanding was that his wife had only  started  seeking  treatment  in
   February 2012 after developing headaches when trying  to  study  for  the
   English language test, whilst the two doctors' letters  referred  to  her
   attending their clinic in December 2011 and commencing treatment at  that
   time.

14.  Thus the only evidence before the  judge  that  he  was  prepared,  for
   reasons properly given, to accept as  reliable  was  the  sponsor's  oral
   evidence about the first appellant's difficulties. That evidence  is  set
   out at paragraphs 15 and 16 of the determination and his findings  on  it
   appear at paragraph 32 and have not been challenged. There  has  been  no
   suggestion that the evidence at paragraph 5 of  the  sponsor's  statement
   was anything other than  an  adoption  of  the  information  in  the  two
   doctors' letters and thus not  within  the  sponsor's  direct  knowledge.
   Accordingly, what was accepted by the judge was that the first  appellant
   was not well-educated,  that  she  was  "slow"  and  that  she  developed
   headaches when attempting to study for the English language test.

15. Ms Hena, in her submissions, proceeded  on  the  basis  that  the  first
   appellant was illiterate, and relied on the guidance in  Chapti  in  that
   respect, referring  in  particular  to  paragraphs  37  and  111  of  the
   judgment. However, there does not appear to be anything in  the  evidence
   that was before the judge to suggest that she was illiterate or even semi-
   illiterate and the only reference to illiteracy, at  paragraph  25(h)  of
   the determination, was by way of general submissions on the  findings  at
   paragraph 111 of Chapti. On the contrary, the evidence was that she would
   get headaches when reading, the sponsor referred in his evidence  at  the
   hearing to correspondence, albeit limited, from the first  appellant  and
   the documentary evidence included envelopes for letters  sent  from  her.
   Furthermore, with reference to paragraph  37  of  Chapti,  there  was  no
   suggestion  that  the  appellant  had  attempted  but  failed  the  test.
   Accordingly I find that Ms Hena's reliance upon  such  circumstances  was
   somewhat misconceived.

16. It seems to me  that  there  is  nothing  in  the  judge's  findings  at
   paragraph 32, 35 and 41  that  was  inconsistent  with  the  guidance  in
   Chapti. At paragraph 143 of the judgment in that case, Mr Justice Beatson
   referred to various factors that could have an impact upon the ability of
   certain applicants in taking the English language test.  However,  as  Ms
   Pal submitted, those were simply suggested factors  and  did  not  set  a
   benchmark that had to be applied in every case. In any event it is  clear
   that those were matters that the judge took into  account  when  reaching
   his conclusions. Ms Hena submitted that he erred by failing  to  consider
   the financial constraints of attempting further English  language  tests.
   However that was never raised as an issue before him and it was  not  for
   him to speculate as to such circumstances. He gave consideration  to  the
   matters relevant to the first appellant,  as  accepted  on  the  evidence
   before him, and concluded that the fact that  she  was  slow,  not  well-
   educated and got headaches from attempting to study was not sufficient to
   demonstrate  that  she  had  a  mental  condition  or  that  there   were
   exceptional compassionate circumstances preventing her from  meeting  the
   English language requirement. He found, at paragraph  41,  that  she  was
   able to pass the test and that it was open to her to attempt it or to put
   forward proper evidence to show that she could not be expected to do  so.
   As such  he  concluded  that  requiring  her  to  do  the  test  was  not
   disproportionate or in breach of Article 8. That was  a  conclusion  that
   was open to him on the  evidence  before  him  and  which  he  was  fully
   entitled to reach. Any suggestion to the  contrary  is  no  more  than  a
   disagreement with that conclusion.

17. Accordingly I find that the judge did not make any errors of law in  his
   decision.

DECISION

18. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve
   the making of an error of law. I do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
   decision to dismiss the appeal therefore stands.












                               Signed                                  Date
                               Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
