
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/15906/2012
     OA/15905/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 30 October 2013                              |On 28 November 2013        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON

                                   Between

                   Ishwor Bahadur Gurung (first appellant)
                      Bishal Gurung (second appellant)
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer - NEW DELHI

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr M Blundell of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss A Holmes, Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The first appellant is the  father  of  the  second  appellant.   They
      applied on 28 March 2012 for leave to enter  the  United  Kingdom  for
      settlement.  Their applications were refused  by  decisions  dated  30
      July  2012.   They  appealed  but  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Bryant
      dismissed their appeals in a determination promulgated on 13 May 2013.

   2. The appellants sought permission to appeal but that was refused as the
      judge found that the application was received out  of  time.   Upon  a
      renewed application an Upper Tribunal Judge  found  that  the  appeals
      were made in time and granted permission. In so doing he had  this  to
      say:-

         "The grounds of appeal claim  that  the  Judge  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal was wrong to find that the appellants were caught  by  the
         provisions of  paragraph  320(7A).   That  Rule  had  been  invoked
         because the ECO believed that the appellants  had  submitted  false
         evidence in relation to the claim that  the  second  appellant  was
         under 18.

         The conclusions of the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal are set out
         in paragraphs 46 onwards.  He finds that both appellants are caught
         by the provisions of paragraph 320(7A) although the first appellant
         meets the requirements of paragraphs 281.

         While I consider that the grounds of appeal as drafted  are,  just,
         arguable I am concerned  that  as  a  claimed  false  documentation
         benefits only the second  (appellant)  there  is  an  issue  as  to
         whether or not the first appellant is caught by  the  provision  of
         paragraph 320(7A)."

Documentation

   3. I had before me all the documentation that was before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge which comprised  an  original  bundle,  a  supplemental
      bundle and skeleton argument and also the respondent's refusal bundle.

Mr Blundell's submissions

   4. Mr Blundell representing  the  appellants  submitted  that  the  judge
      failed to balance all the evidence before him.  He took one  piece  of
      evidence as a  fixed  point  -  the  discharge  papers  of  the  first
      appellant from the Indian Army - and from there viewed all  the  other
      evidence from that fixed point.

   5. The starting point regarding the discharge certificate  was  that  all
      the dates  of  birth  of  the  first  appellant  and  his  family  are
      incorrectly recorded.  The first appellant was obliged  to  give  some
      dates at the time of discharge and did his best to do so and there was
      no reason to attempt to mislead. (I comment that it is unclear  to  me
      what  evidence,  if  any,  there  was  before  the  judge  about  this
      assertion).  The judge at paragraph 40 refers to the first appellant's
      service record  as  being  the  only  documentary  evidence  which  is
      indisputable and at paragraph 41 that accepting the service record  as
      a correct document has the effect of casting doubt on  all  the  other
      documents relied upon as giving  the  date  of  birth  of  the  second
      appellant as 7 October 1994.  The service record was the prism through
      which the judge viewed all the other evidence.

   6. There were  other  documents  available  to  the  judge  such  as  the
      passport, birth certificate and letters from  the  second  appellant's
      school to which the judge failed to give weight.  Consideration of the
      second letter from the school that  confirms  the  second  appellant's
      date of birth could have been highly persuasive. The judge  also  took
      notice of the fact that the appellant's brother did not give  evidence
      and seems to have held  that  against  the  appellant.   However,  any
      evidence that the appellant's brother could have given would have been
      marginal.

Miss Holmes's submissions

   7. Miss Holmes on behalf of the respondent submitted that the  judge  had
      not placed undue weight on  the  army  discharge  record.   The  first
      appellant signed the service record which was endorsed to  the  effect
      that the entries on that record were correct.  Therefore the judge was
      entitled to place weight on that document.  The judge commented on the
      sponsor's evidence that her details and the second appellant's details
      are incorrectly recorded in the  service  sheet  and  found  that  the
      sponsor has been consistent with  her  own  date  of  birth  as  being
      different to that on the army record.  The judge also had before him a
      Document Verification  Report  ("DVR")  relating  to  the  educational
      certificate that was produced in  support  of  the  applications.  The
      findings made by the judge were open to him on the evidence  produced.



My Deliberations

   8. Although not comprising an exhaustive list of evidence the  judge  had
      before him  the  certificate  of  army  service,  the  district  level
      examination sheet and DVR, the second appellant's  birth  certificate,
      letters from the second appellant's school and the  sponsor's  witness
      statement. In addition the judge heard oral evidence from the sponsor.

   9. What is not in issue is that the details of family members'  dates  of
      birth shown in the army service record, or at least some of them,  are
      incorrect.  The second appellant's  date  of  birth  is  given  as  28
      January 1988 which is many years earlier than the  purported  date  of
      birth  of  7  October  1994.   The  judge  in  paragraph  37  of   the
      determination makes the comment that  the  information  given  to  the
      Indian Army about the first appellant's family members can  only  have
      come from him.  The judge states that either the  dates  of  birth  on
      that record are correct, as certified by the first  appellant  by  his
      signature on 1 April 2003 or, for some reason, they are incorrect. The
      judge then considers the possible  explanations.  Later  in  the  same
      paragraph he says that  certainly  if  the  army  record  details  are
      correct the  sponsor  (the  first  appellant's  wife  and  the  second
      appellant's mother) would have used an incorrect date  of  birth,  for
      whatever reason, during her time in the United Kingdom.

  10. From  that  record  the  judge  understands  why  the  respondent  was
      concerned as to the claimed date of birth of the second appellant. The
      judge comments earlier in  that  paragraph  that  the  incorrect  army
      record caused the respondent to doubt the second appellant's  date  of
      birth as given in the submitted Nepali birth certificate and as  shown
      in the district level examination mark sheet.   I  see  nothing  wrong
      with the judge's approach. He looked at  the  examination  mark  sheet
      numbered 57007 in the name of the second  appellant  which  gives  the
      date of birth (from the Nepali calendar) that equates to  the  claimed
      date of birth as 7  October  1994.   The  examination  mark  sheet  is
      clearly an important document and it is that document that is verified
      as false, leading to  the  mandatory  refusal  under  320(7A)  of  the
      Immigration Rules.

  11.  The  judge  was  entitled  to  comment  that  the  only  indisputable
      documentary evidence before him was a copy of  the  first  appellant's
      service record.  I find that he is saying no more or less than that it
      is not in issue that that document was signed by the first  appellant,
      has been produced to the Tribunal and contains incorrect details.

  12. Furthermore the judge was entitled to say that  he  did  not  find  it
      credible that there  was  no  evidence  from  the  second  appellant's
      brother and to comment further as he did earlier in the  paragraph  in
      relation to the sort of evidence that the brother  could  have  given.
      That comment of itself is not damaging to the appellants' appeals  and
      appears to be nothing more than  stating  that  additional  supporting
      evidence was not before him that might have persuaded him to come to a
      different conclusion. The birth certificate produced was of  extremely
      limited weight because it was not issued  contemporaneously  with  the
      birth of the second appellant. Although  this  is  usual  practice,  I
      understand, in Nepal it is bound to affect the weight the judge  would
      be able to give to it as evidence of a date of birth.

  13.  In paragraph 41 the judge fully reasons why he finds  proved  to  the
      necessary standard - reminding himself that it is for  the  respondent
      to prove forgery - that the  district  level  examination  mark  sheet
      produced is false.  He makes a further finding that it would have been
      known to both appellants to have been false when  submitted  with  the
      applications and that they were therefore dishonest in so doing.

  14.  Also in paragraph 41 the judge has taken into account the contents of
      the letter purporting to be from the school accepting the error in the
      certificate in giving a different name of the pupil but the judge does
      not accept the explanation and gives reasons.

  15. The judge has looked at all the evidence in the round and decided that
      other documentation produced in an attempt to  avoid  the  finding  of
      forgery cannot be relied upon.

  16. Viewed overall the judge's findings were open to him and were not made
      through  the  prism  of  the  army  records.   There  has  been   full
      consideration of the other evidence before him.

Conclusion

  17. The judge did not err in the ways submitted and  he  was  entitled  to
      conclude that it would have been known to  both  appellants  that  the
      district level examination mark sheet produced was false and that they
      were therefore dishonest in so doing.  His  decision  to  dismiss  the
      appeals of both appellants is therefore upheld.

  18. There was no  application  for  an  anonymity  direction  and  in  the
      circumstances of these appeals I can see no good  reason  why  such  a
      direction should be made.



Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton
