

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                     Appeal
Number: OA/15326/2013




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7 November 2014                            |On 2 December 2014           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                           DEPUTY JUDGE DRABU CBE

                                   Between

                   THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, NEW DELHI


                                                                   Appellant

                                   And


                                NEERAJ SHARMA


                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)


                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Afolake Jaja of counsel.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This appeal has been brought by the Entry Clearance Officer, New  Delhi
  against the decision of Judge Miller, a Judge of the First Tier  Tribunal
  who, following a hearing at Taylor House on 19  June  2014,  allowed  the
  appeal of those Neeraj Sharma, named as respondent in this determination.
  The Entry  Clearance  Officer  had  refused  his  application  for  entry
  clearance to settle in the United Kingdom as the  dependent  so  of  Guru
  Bahadur Thapa, an ex-Gurkha soldier in the United Kingdom, on  the  basis
  of their rights under human rights law. Neeraj Sharma is  a  national  of
  Nepal and his date of birth is 1st July 1982. Permission to appeal to the
  Upper Tribunal was granted by Judge Ransley, a Judge of  the  First  tier
  Tribunal on 2 September 2014.


2.   At the hearing before me Mr Whitwell, representing the Entry  Clearance
  Officer said that the only point he wished to take against  the  decision
  of Judge Miller to allow the appeal is that  he  had  failed  to  make  a
  finding on the existence of family life between the  respondent  and  his
  parents, the sponsors and as a consequence of that failure he had made  a
  material error in law.

3.   In response Ms Jaja for the respondent argued that it  was  clear  from
  the determination that the Judge had found that family life  between  the
  respondent and his parents was in existence. She said that in determining
  the appeal the Judge had considered all the material facts and  had  made
  clear and reasoned findings of fact. In  so  doing  the  Judge  had  been
  properly guided by relevant case law as was obvious from perusal  of  the
  determination. She  drew  attention  to  paragraphs  31  and  33  of  the
  determination. She asked me to have a careful study of all  the  relevant
  case law, which  had  been  submitted  in  the  respondent's  authorities
  bundle.

4.   Mr Whitwell in response said  that  the  Judge  should  have  at  least
  mentioned the authority of Kugathas given the age of the  respondent.  He
  accepted  though  that  the  evidence  of  historic  wrong   is   "indeed
  exceptional".

5.   In my opinion, the application for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
  Tribunal, in this case has no merit. The Judge had  heard  oral  evidence
  from the parents of the respondent and had accepted its  credibility.  He
  properly referred to the legal principles set  out  in  the  decision  of
  Ghising /BOCs: Historic Wrong; (weight) (2013) UKUT 567 (IAC) and married
  these with the facts established in this  case.  The  decision  of  Judge
  Miller does not suffer from any material error of law.  His  decision  to
  allow the appeal for the reasons he has  given  is  perfectly  sound  and
  accord with legal authorities relevant to the facts.

6. I dismiss this application and see no reason to interfere  with  the  fee
  award made by Judge Miller.








K Drabu CBE
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal.
30 November 2014





