
[pic]

|Upper Tribunal                       |Appeal numbers: OA / 15699 / 2012    |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)     |OA / 15706 / 2012                    |
|                                     |OA / 15710 / 2012                    |
|                                     |OA / 15716 / 2012                    |
|                                     |OA / 15719 / 2012                    |
|                  |                      |                |                  |
|the immigration Acts                                                        |
|                  |                      |               |                   |
|Heard at:|Field House               |        |Determination promulgated    |
|On       |20 June 2013              |                   |21 august 2013     |
|         |                          |On                 |                   |
|         |                          |                   |                   |
|                                                                            |
|Lord Burns                                                                  |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Gill                                                   |
|Between                                                                     |
|           |                                               |                |
|           |Miss Thackshajini Sooriyacumar                 |First appellant |
|           |Miss Saranjajini Sooriyacumar                  |Second appellant|
|           |Master Premkumar Sooriyacumar                  |                |
|           |Master Arunkumar Sooriyacumar                  |Third appellant |
|           |Miss Vithyajini Sooriyacumar                   |                |
|           |                                               |Fourth appellant|
|           |                                               |                |
|           |                                               |Fifth appellant |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|           |                                                   |           |
|           |Entry Clearance Officer, Chennai                   |Respondent |

Representation:
For  the  appellants:     Ms.  S.  Jegarajah,  of  Counsel,  instructed   by
                       Wimbledon Solicitors
For the respondent:          Mr. D. Hayes,  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS





1.    The  appellants  are  siblings,  all  nationals  of  Sri  Lanka,  born
      (respectively) on 19 August 1989, 18 December 1992, 6  April  1994,  9
      July 1996 and 12 June 1991.  On 29 March 2012, they applied for  entry
      clearance in order to join their father, Mr.  Kumarasamy  Sooriyacumar
      (the sponsor), who is settled in the United  Kingdom.  The  respondent
      refused their applications on  3  July  2012.  The  third  and  fourth
      appeals were below 18 years of age at the date of their  applications.
      We will hereafter refer to  them  as  the  minor  appellants  and  the
      remaining appellants as the adult appellants, whose  ages  as  at  the
      date of the refusals of entry clearance were 22 (first appellant),  19
      (second appellant) and 20 (fifth appellant).

2.    At the time of their applications and as at the date of the  refusals,
      the appellants were all living in India with their mother. She did not
      apply for entry clearance with the appellants apparently because of an
      issue as to the English language  requirement  under  the  Immigration
      Rules. The grounds of appeal lodged with the appeals of the appellants
      state that, at the time of  the  appellants'  applications  for  entry
      clearance in March 2012, their mother had been  "undergoing  attempts"
      to pass the English language test and that she had since  passed  that
      test. The grounds of appeal also stressed that it had been made  clear
      at all times that it was the  intention  of  the  appellants  and  the
      mother that all would travel to the United Kingdom together.

      The determination of the First-tier Tribunal

3.    The appellants' appeals were dismissed by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Prior under para 297 in relation to the minor appellants and para  317
      in relation to the adult appellants of the Statement of Changes in the
      Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended)  (the  Immigration  Rules).  The
      judge also dismissed  their  appeals  under  Article  8  of  the  1950
      European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental
      Freedoms (ECHR).

4.    Judge Prior found that there would be adequate accommodation  for  all
      of the five appellants and adequate maintenance  for  them  and  their
      mother, under  paras  297  and  317.  He  found  that  the  two  minor
      appellants did not satisfy para 297(i) of the  Immigration  Rules  for
      the following reasons:


      i.    The appellants' mother made her application for entry  clearance
           in August 2012. The explanation given to the judge for the delay
           in  her  application  was  that,  until   shortly   before   her
           application, she  had  not  managed  successfully  to  pass  her
           English language test. The judge considered that, as at the date
           of the respondent's decision on 3 July 2012, there could  be  no
           assurance that  the  minor  appellants  "would  accompany  their
           parent in India for the purpose  of  settlement  in  the  United
           Kingdom".


             It  is  evident  that  the  judge  was  here  considering   the
           requirement in para 297(i)(c), that: "one parent is present  and
           settled in the United Kingdom and the other is being admitted on
           the same occasion for settlement".


      ii.   The minor appellants did not satisfy the  requirement  that  the
           sponsor had had sole responsibility for their upbringing. It  is
           evident that the judge was here considering the  requirement  in
           para 297(i)(e), that "one parent is present and settled  in  the
           United Kingdom or being admitted on the same occasion and as had
           sole responsibility for the child's upbringing"). The judge said
           that it  was  not  contended  that  the  sponsor  had  had  sole
           responsibility for their upbringing and he noted  that,  indeed,
           it was the sponsor's evidence that the  appellants'  mother  had
           primary responsibility for their care.


5.     The  appeals  of  the  adult  appellants  were  dismissed  under  the
      Immigration Rules  for the following reasons:


      i.    There was no evidence whatsoever that they were living alone  in
           India. That is, they did not satisfy para 317(i)(f),  that  they
           were "living alone  outside  the  United  Kingdom  in  the  most
           exceptional compassionate circumstances".


      ii.   Moreover, there was evidence that they had an aunt in Sri Lanka.
           There was no evidence that their aunt was not a  close  relative
           in their country of origin and nationality to  whom  they  could
           not look for financial support. That is, they  did  not  satisfy
           para 317(v), that they had "no other close  relatives  in  their
           own country to whom they could turn for financial support".

6.    The appeals of all the appellants were dismissed under Article  8  for
      the reasons the judge gave at para 9 and paras 14 to 17. At para 9, he
      said that as at the date of the respondent's decision, there could  no
      assurance that the appellants' mother would pass her English  language
      test and thus likely to be  leaving  India  and  the  five  appellants
      without a mother. At paras 14 to 17, he said:

      "14.  There was no documentary evidence before me as to the status  of
           the  Appellants  together  with  their  mother,  in  India.  The
           evidence of the mother and the sponsor was that  the  Appellants
           did not have any legal status in India  or  Indian  nationality.
           The sponsor testified that the Appellants were  registered  with
           the  police  and  had  notified  the  police  of  a  change   of
           residential address. The Appellants had been in India for almost
           thirteen years and there was no evidence that  they   could  not
           continue to live there or, for that matter, to work  there.  One
           of the Appellants was qualified as a physiotherapist and another
           Appellant was not far short of qualifying as  a  dentist.  There
           was no evidence relating to the ability of the sponsor  to  join
           the Appellants and his wife in India and to  live  and  work  in
           that country. There was evidence before me  that  certainly  the
           sponsor's wife had, at least in the past, worked   in  India  in
           the provision of private tuition. There  was  no  evidence,  and
           indeed no submissions, before me that even began to  satisfy  me
           that it would be unreasonable for the sponsor to join his family
           in India and thus pursue family life in that country.

      15.   It was the sponsor's evidence that his claim for asylum had  not
           only been refused by the  Home  Office  but  been  dismissed  on
           appeal. I was not satisfied, on the evidence before me (of which
           there was very little), that the Appellants  and  their  parents
           could not pursue their family life in the country of which  they
           are nationals, namely Sri Lanka. The sponsor does have a  sister
           in that country and lived in that country for forty years before
           leaving for the United Kingdom. In Sri Lanka the sponsor  worked
           as an art teacher, political cartoonist and journalist.

      16.   I was not satisfied that Articled 8 was engaged.

      17.   I have not overlooked  the  evidence  that  the  sponsor  had  a
           stroke in March 2010 however I do not regard that fact as having
           any significance in the context of the issues that I have had to
           consider in this appeal. The effect of the stroke, according  to
           a medical report of 29 January, 2013, was to cause no more  than
           a residual altered sensation to the sponsor's  right  side.  The
           report makes reference to the sponsor's diabetes and  adds  that
           it is "fairly well controlled with medication".

      The grounds

7.    The grounds of application for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal did not challenge the decision of Judge Prior to dismiss  the
      appeals under the Immigration Rules. They only sought to challenge his
      decision to dismiss the appeals under Article 8,  contending  that  he
      erred in law as follows:

      (i)   in stating, at para 16 of the determination, that:  "I  was  not
           satisfied that Article 8 was engaged",  whereas  the  respondent
           had accepted that Article 8 was engaged;

      (ii)  in failing to apply "relevant law" in  relation  to  Article  8.
           The grounds refer to various cases,  including  Razgar  v.  SSHD
           [2004] UKHL 27, Beoku-Betts v. SSHD [2008] UKHL 39, VW  (Uganda)
           and AB (Somalia) v. SSHD  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  5.  The  particular
           points made in the grounds were that:

            (a)  the judge had failed to consider the best interests of  the
                 minor appellants; and

            (b)  in making his  finding  that  it  would  be  reasonable  to
                 expect the minor appellants to live in India, the judge had
                 failed to have regard to  the  fact  that  neither  of  the
                 appellants had any right to live  lawfully  in  India.  The
                 grounds contend that the only country where the family  can
                 enjoy their family was in the United Kingdom.

      It is also to be noted that para 36 of the  grounds  makes  the  point
      that the appellants' mother had had her visa application  refused  and
      was then appealing. At the hearing  before  us,  Miss  Jegarajah  took
      issue with this, stating that her instructions were that the mother is
      awaiting a decision in her case.

8.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Fisher granted permission to appeal  to  the
      Upper Tribunal on 16 April 2013. The only point in  the  grounds  that
      impressed him was the point at our para 7 (i) above, although  he  did
      not refuse permission on the remaining grounds. He  said,  in  general
      terms, that it was "at least arguable that the Judge made an error  of
      law in  his extremely short analysis under Article 8".

      Submissions

9.    Despite the fact that the grounds of application  for  permission  did
      not seek to challenge the decision  of  Judge  Prior  to  dismiss  the
      appeals under the Immigration Rules,  Miss  Jegarajah  challenged  the
      decision to dismiss the appeals under the Immigration Rules, giving no
      notice  to  the  respondent  and  having  made  no   application   for
      permission. We say more about this at para 15  below.  We  decided  to
      hear her submissions de bene esse.

10.   In relation to the Judge's decision to dismiss the appeals  under  the
      Immigration Rules, Miss Jegarajah submitted that the correct date  for
      determining whether the requirements under the Immigration Rules  were
      satisfied was not the date of  the  refusal  by  the  Entry  Clearance
      Officer (ECO) (3 July 2012) but the date on which the decision of  the
      ECO in each case was reviewed by the Entry Clearance Manager (ECM) (22
      November 2012). By the date  of  the  ECM's  review,  the  appellants'
      mother had applied for entry clearance (she applied on 24 August 2012)
      and she had passed her English language  test.  This,  taken  together
      with the finding of Judge Prior that the accommodation and maintenance
      requirements were satisfied means that it should be assumed  that  she
      would have succeeded in her application  for  entry  clearance  on  22
      November 2012 and thus that the appellants satisfied the  requirements
      of the Immigration Rules as at the date  of  the  ECM's  review.   The
      ECM's decision should be seen as an extension of the  ECO's  decision,
      especially given that  the  ECM  corrected  the  error  of  the  Entry
      Clearance Officer, in that, the ECM  acknowledged  the  error  in  the
      Refusal Notices and accepted that Article 8(1) was engaged.

11.   Alternatively, if the appeals fell to be decided on the basis  of  the
      circumstances as at 3 July 2012, the date of the decisions of the ECO,
      the appellants satisfied the requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules
      because:

      (a)   The document dated 29 March 2012 on page 226 of the  appellants'
           bundle shows that the appellants' mother had in fact passed  her
           English  language  test  as  at  the  date  of  the  appellants'
           applications for entry clearance (29 March 2012).

            Miss Jegarajah  submitted  that  this  document  was  admissible
           pursuant to E & R [2004] EWCA Civ 49.

            We pointed out that it  is  stated  on  the  document  that  the
           document "was not a certificate" but  Miss  Jegarajah  submitted
           that it was nevertheless  some  evidence  that  the  appellants'
           mother had passed her English language test.  She  asked  us  to
           find an error of law and re-open the whole case.

      (b)   The appellants' applications under the Immigration Rules had  to
           be decided on the basis of the following two assumptions: First,
           that their mother had made an entry clearance application on the
           same occasion (29 March 2012). Second, that, if she had made  an
           entry clearance application on the same occasion, she "will have
           succeeded".


            It was necessary to make  these  assumptions  for  two  reasons:
           First,  because  Judge  Prior  found  that  there  was  adequate
           accommodation and maintenance for all five appellants and  their
           mother. Second, because of the need to read paras 297 and 317 so
           that they were consistent with the rights of the child  pursuant
           to the United Nations Convention on  the  Rights  of  the  Child
           (UNCRC). It was explicitly stated in the grounds of appeal  that
           it was the intention that all of  the  appellants  would  travel
           together as one family unit.  She  submitted  that  this  was  a
           "Robinson  obvious"  point.  Applying  the  "Robinson   obvious"
           principle in this  case  meant  that  Judge  Prior  should  have
           assumed that  the  appellants'  mother  had  applied  for  entry
           clearance when they did and that, if she had done so, she  would
           have succeeded.


      (c)   Accordingly, she  submitted, the minor appellants satisfied  the
           requirement in para  297(i)(c)  and  the  adult  appellants  the
           requirement in para  317(ii),  that  they  were  accompanying  a
           parent/person (as the case may be) (i.e. their  mother)  who  is
           "being admitted on the same occasion for  settlement".   It  was
           important that these assumptions were made because leave that is
           granted under the Immigration Rules is different from the  leave
           that is granted until Article 8.

12.   Miss Jegarajah submitted that the exercise  of  discretion  should  be
      informed by the best interests of the minor  appellants,  pursuant  to
      the UNCRC. The best interests of the minor appellants include the need
      to create stability. The judge did  not  consider  the  individualised
      circumstances of  each  appellant.  Miss  Jegarajah  did  not  explain
      whether the discretion that she was referring to was to  be  found  in
      paras 297 and 317 of the Immigration Rules or in relation to Article 8
      or whether she was referring to the  general  discretion  outside  the
      rules.

13.   Miss Jegarajah submitted that  the  judge  had  erred  in  failing  to
      address the best interests of the minor appellants. It is an error for
      the Tribunal not to deal with the best interests of a child,  even  if
      not raised in argument before it: para 17 of  SS  (Sri  Lanka)  [2012]
      EWCA Civ 945. The requirement to consider  the  best  interests  of  a
      child is not an optional extra. She also relied upon paras 44 to 48 of
      Mundeba (s.55 and para 297(i)(f) [2013] UKUT 00088 (IAC).

14.   Mr. Hayes submitted that it was not clear why the  appellants'  mother
      applied in August 2012 on the basis of the document in March 2012  and
      why she had not made the application in March 2012 if she was going to
      rely upon this document. Judge Prior was told that she had not  passed
      her test, which calls into question any suggestion that she had passed
      her test in March 2012. The document itself states that it  is  not  a
      certificate. He submitted that there was no legal basis  for  much  of
      Miss Jegarajah's submissions and the remainder were  largely  premised
      on speculation. There was no authority for the  proposition  that  one
      should speculate on the success or otherwise of a future  application,
      as this would necessitate an assumption that there would be no  change
      in circumstances between the two date.

      Discussion

15.    Almost  the  entire  hearing  was  taken  up  with  Miss  Jegarajah's
      submissions on grounds in respect of which no notice was given to  the
      respondent and no application was made in writing. It  was  not  until
      well into her submissions that she applied for permission. This is not
      an insignificant point in this case, given that the respondent is  the
      ECO. Indeed, if an application had been made in writing to  amend  the
      grounds, we are in no doubt that permission would have  been  refused,
      as we satisfied that Miss Jegarajah's submissions were lacking in  any
      substance and ought not properly  to  have  been  made.  We  give  our
      reasons below. Miss Jegarajah relied upon  paras  10  and  11  of  the
      Practice Statement, neither of which, in our view, assist her. Para 10
      refers  to  unrepresented  appellants,  whereas  the  appellants  were
      represented  when  the  grounds  were  submitted  in  support  of  the
      application for permission to appeal. Para 11 concerns  the  variation
      of grounds in  the  second  or  renewed  application  for  permission,
      whereas the point we made was precisely that she had  given  no  prior
      notice at all of the new grounds upon which she wished to rely.

16.   In essence, Miss Jegarajah left us with no  choice  but  to  hear  her
      submissions de bene esse  in  order  to  reach  any  decision  on  her
      application  for  permission,  by  which  time  she  had   effectively
      ventilated all the points she wished to make  and  achieved  the  same
      result whether or not we decided to grant  permission  in  the  event.
      Although we said we would reserve our position as to whether to  grant
      permission to appeal, she in effect deprived Mr.  Hayes  of  a  proper
      opportunity of responding to her points.

17.   We turn to deal  with  the  arguments  advanced  in  relation  to  the
      decision of Judge Prior to dismiss the appeals under  the  Immigration
      Rules.

18.   Miss Jegarajah referred us to no authority for  the  proposition  that
      the fact that the ECM reviewed the decision of the ECO  and  corrected
      an error within it meant that the relevant date for  the  purposes  of
      s.85A(2) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002
      Act) was the date of the review by the ECM. We reject this submission.
      The general rule is stated at s.85(4), that the Tribunal may  consider
      evidence about any matter which it thinks relevant to the substance of
      the decision, including evidence about a matter arising after the date
      of the decision.  However, s.85(4) is subject to  the  exceptions  set
      out in s.85A. S.85A(2) sets out exception 1, in the following terms:

      "Exception 1 is that in relation to  an  appeal  under  section  82(1)
           against an immigration decision of a kind specified  in  section
           82(2)(b) or (c) the Tribunal may only consider the circumstances
           appertaining as the time of the decision".

19.   A decision  to  refuse  entry  clearance  is  a  decision  of  a  kind
      specified in s.82(2)(b). To succeed in her argument that  the  appeals
      should be determined by reference to the date  of  the  ECM's  review,
      Miss Jegarajah would need to persuade us that the "decision"  referred
      to the phrase: "the circumstances appertaining  as  the  time  of  the
      decision" in s.85A(2) should be interpreted to include the decision of
      the ECM. However, the difficulty is that the "decision"  mentioned  in
      this phrase is a reference to the "immigration decision" mentioned  in
      the first part of s.85A(2) and "immigration decision"  is  defined  in
      s.82(2) as including a "refusal  of  entry  clearance".  There  is  no
      mention of the definition including a review by the  ECM,  nor  is  it
      possible to construe "refusal of entry  clearance"  as  including  the
      review by the ECM.  We are satisfied that the ECO's decision  was  the
      refusal of entry clearance. All  the  ECM  did  was  to  maintain  the
      refusal decision. The ECM's  decision  was  not  a  refusal  of  entry
      clearance, notwithstanding the fact that he corrected the error of the
      ECO in stating that Article 8(1) was not engaged.

20.   This means that we do not need to  deal  with  the  remainder  of  the
      arguments described at our para 10 above. In any event,  there  is  no
      authority for the proposition that  the  Tribunal  should  enter  into
      speculation about the outcome of a hypothetical application. We reject
      the submission.

21.   We turn to the arguments summarised at our para 11.

22.   Reliance upon E & R is misconceived and ignores two  points.  Firstly,
      it is not only the case that this was not argued before  Judge  Prior,
      the evidence he was given was that  the  reason  why  the  appellants'
      mother did not apply for entry clearance on the same occasion  as  the
      appellants was because she had not passed her  English  language  test
      and that she only passed her test shortly  before  she  made  her  own
      application for entry clearance in August 2012. Secondly, there are  a
      few issues that arise  in  connection  with  the  reliability  of  the
      document at paged 226 as evidence that she had passed  the  test,  not
      least  because  the  document  specifically  states  it   is   not   a
      certificate. In addition, there is some question  as  to  whether  her
      entry clearance application in August 2012 was refused or whether  she
      is awaiting a decision. Miss Jegarajah took issue with the accuracy of
      para 36 of the grounds. However, the  grounds  were  also  settled  by
      Counsel (Mr. Paul Turner of Tooks Chambers).  Neither the  submissions
      of Counsel nor the grounds of application for  permission  settled  by
      another Counsel are evidence in the case. In any  event,  whether  the
      appellants' mother is awaiting a decision or appealing a  decision  is
      not material to the issues before us in these appeals. Suffice  it  to
      say that there is a sufficient lack of clarity about the  document  at
      page 226 for it to be said that the document establishes  an  existing
      fact. Thus, a basic requirement for  the  application  of  E  &  R  is
      absent.

23.   This means that, strictly speaking, we do not need to  deal  with  the
      arguments summarised at our para 11 (b) and (c). However, we  will  do
      so. These submissions only require a brief response, as  it  is  self-
      evident in our view that the submissions lack any  substance.  In  the
      first place, and as we  have  said  above,  the  submission  that  the
      appellants' mother must be assumed to have  made  an  entry  clearance
      application on the same occasion as the  appellant  and  she  must  be
      assumed to have succeeded  is  based  on  pure  speculation.  It  also
      ignores the fact that there was no certificate to show  that  she  had
      passed her English language test.

24.   Furthermore, there is  no  authority  for  the  proposition  that  the
      obligations of the United Kingdom pursuant to the  UNCRC  require  the
      Tribunal, in this particular case, to enter into such speculation.

25.   Miss Jegarajah's reliance upon the  "Robinson  obvious"  principle  is
      also misconceived. As is well known, the term  "Robinson  obvious"  is
      derived from the case in which the principle was first  enunciated,  R
      v. SSHD, ex parte Robinson [1998] QB 929, where,  at  page  946,  Lord
      Woolf M.R. made clear in delivering  the  decision  of  the  Court  of
      Appeal that an obvious point is one which has  a  strong  prospect  of
      success if it is argued. We are very clear that the arguments advanced
      by Miss Jegarajah stand no prospect of success.

26.   Finally, we agree with Mr. Hayes that the requirement "being  admitted
      on the same occasion for settlement" should be construed according  to
      its ordinary meaning and cannot possibly apply to someone who had  not
      made an application for entry clearance and had not succeeded.

27.   We turn  to  the  argument  (summarised  at  our  para  12)  that  the
      discretion  should  have  been  exercised  differently.  There  is  no
      discretion in paras 297 and 317 of the Immigration Rules:  either  the
      requirements set out therein are satisfied or they are not. Similarly,
      there is no question of discretion in relation to  Article  8.  Either
      the decision amounts to a breach of Article 8  or  it  does  not.  The
      respondent's refusal to exercise the general  discretion  outwith  the
      Immigration Rules and Article 8 was a matter for him.  In  any  event,
      this point was not argued before Judge Prior and it was not  explained
      to him or to us why any refusal to exercise the general discretion was
      not in accordance with the law even if the decision does not amount to
      a breach of Article 8.

28.   We therefore refuse permission to amend the grounds.

29.   We turn to the grounds upon which permission was  granted  (summarised
      at our paras 7 and 13.

30.   It is to be noted that Miss Jegarajah did not address  us  at  all  on
      the alleged error at para 16 of the judge's determination, although we
      will deal with the point made in the  grounds.  Determinations  should
      not be read in a strict or restrictive way. Whilst it is true that the
      language used by Judge Prior at para 16 reflects the language  of  the
      second of the five-step approach explained at para 17  of  R  (on  the
      application of Razgar) v SSHD (2004) UKHL 27,  it  is  plain  that  he
      considered proportionality and that he in fact meant that the decision
      was not disproportionate. We are satisfied that there  is  nothing  at
      all in this point.

31.   The exception described in s.85A(2) of the 2002 Act applies  not  only
      to any assessment as to whether the requirements  of  the  Immigration
      Rules are satisfied but also the assessment of Article 8.  This  point
      was established in AS (Somalia) v. SSHD [2008] EWCA  Civ  149  and  AS
      (Somalia) v. SSHD [2009] UKHL  32  in  relation  to  the  versions  of
      ss.85(4) and (5) of the 2002 Act that existed then. In relation to the
      issue we are considering here, there  is  no  material  difference  in
      wording between the earlier  versions  and  the  current  versions  of
      ss.85(4) and 85(5) (and 85A) which came into force on 23 May 2011.  We
      therefore reject Miss Jegarajah's submission that Article 8 claims  in
      entry clearance cases are  to  be  considered  on  the  basis  of  the
      circumstances appertaining as at the date of the hearing.

32.   As to the question whether Judge Prior had erred in law by failing  to
      consider the best interests of the minor children, we acknowledge that
      paras 9 to 17 of the determination do not make any  reference  to  the
      best interests of the children or to s.55 of the Borders,  Citizenship
      & Immigration Act 2009. We accept that the Tribunal is regarded as  an
      extension of the decision-making process and has a  duty  to  consider
      the best interests of children even if not raised (SS (Sri Lanka)).

33.   At para 38 of its determination in Mundeba, the Tribunal said:

            "As a starting point the best interests of a child  are  usually
        best served by being with both or at least one  of  their  parents.
        Continuity of residence is another factor; change in the  place  of
        residence where a child has grown up for a  number  of  years  when
        socially aware is important: see also SG  (child  of  a  polygamous
        marriage) Nepal [2012] UKUT 265 (IAC); [2012] Imm AR 939."

34.   At the date of the decision, the minor appellants were living with  at
      least one parent, their mother. They had  been  living  in  India  for
      thirteen years.  That  was  a  factor  which  pointed  to  their  best
      interests being with their mother who Judge Prior correctly said could
      not be assured to pass her English language test.  There  was  nothing
      in the circumstances of the minor appellants that  gave  rise  to  any
      real issue in relation to their welfare or needs in  living  in  India
      with their mother. It was not said that their essential needs were not
      being provided for.

35.   The duty of the Tribunal to consider the best interests of  the  minor
      appellants does not require the Tribunal to embark upon  enquiries  of
      its own in an attempt to establish their  best  interests,  especially
      given that the evidence presented did not give  any  reason  for  such
      enquiries to  be  conducted  and,  furthermore,  the  appellants  were
      physically outside of the jurisdiction and they  were  represented  in
      the United Kingdom.

36.   Accordingly, we are satisfied that  the  failure  of  Judge  Prior  to
      consider the best  interests  of  the  minor  appellants  cannot  have
      affected the outcome of the  appeals.  Any  error  he  made  does  not
      justify setting aside his decision to dismiss all of these appeals  on
      immigration grounds and under Article 8.




Signed:

Upper Tribunal Judge Gill               Date: 14 August 2013
