

                                    [pic]

The Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal number: OA/15536/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Determination Promulgated   |
|On December 11, 2014                 |On December 15, 2014        |
|                                     |                            |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MISS FATOU GUEI
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr McVeety (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr McIndoe (Legal Representative)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Whereas the original respondent is the appealing party, I shall, in the
    interests of convenience and consistency, replicate the nomenclature of
    the decision at first instance.

 2. The appellant, born December 27, 2002 is a citizen of the Ivory  Coast.
    On April 26, 2013 she submitted an application for  settlement  as  the
    child of a person settled in the United Kingdom. The respondent refused
    her application under the Immigration  Rules  on  July  9,  2013  under
    paragraph 297 HC 395.

 3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal under  Section  82(1)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on July  23,  2013.
    On April 9, 2014 Judge of the First Tier Tribunal  Devlin  (hereinafter
    referred to as the "FtTJ") heard her  appeal.  He  refused  the  appeal
    under paragraph 297 HC 395 but allowed the appeal under article 8 ECHR.



 4. The respondent lodged grounds of appeal on May 12, 2014 and on June 10,
    2014 Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Denson  granted  permission  to
    appeal finding it arguable the FtTJ may have erred by dealing with  the
    claim under article 8 ECHR without any reference to  the  approach  set
    out in Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640 and Nagre [2013] EWHC 720.

    PRELIMINARY ISSUE

 5. Mr McIndoe had submitted a bundle of document and  included  with  this
    bundle was a cross application for permission to appeal.  Contained  on
    the court file was a letter dated June 17, 2014 from Latitude Law  that
    referred to a cross application and indicated a decision was awaited on
    that application.


 6. I checked the court file and there was no application on the file.  The
    Tribunal in EG and NG (UT rule 17: withdrawal; rule 24: scope) Ethiopia
    [2013] UKUT 00143(IAC) confirmed at paragraph [46]-

         "If a respondent wants to argue that the First-tier Tribunal should
         have reached a materially different conclusion then the  respondent
         needs permission to appeal."


 7. As there was no cross appeal before me I indicated to Mr McIndoe that I
    was unable to consider his appeal as permission to appeal had not  been
    granted.


 8. The only appeal before me was the respondent's appeal and I invited  Mr
    McVeety to address me on why he felt there had been an error.

    ERROR OF LAW SUBMISSIONS


 9. Mr McVeety adopted the grounds of appeal and the grant  of  permission.
    He submitted that  whilst  the  Immigration  Rules  are  not  always  a
    complete code he submitted that in light of the FtTJ's  findings  there
    should have been no consideration of the claim  under  article  8.  The
    FtTJ had erred because:


      a. There had been no assessment under  either  paragraph  276  ADE  or
         Appendix FM.


      b. There was no need to consider  the  appeal  outside  of  the  Rules
         because of the FtTJ's finding on sole-responsibility and there were
         no  countervailing  circumstances  that   justified   consideration
         outside of the Rules.


      c. Even if the FtTJ could have considered the application  outside  of
         the Rules he failed to have regard to the non-compliance  with  the
         Rules.


      d. in light of the fact firstly there had been no  assessment  outside
         the Rules and secondly the findings on the substantive  application
         meant that there was no need to consider the appeal outside of  the
         Rules. Alternatively, the FtTJ had erred by not considering the non-
         compliance with the Rules when considering proportionality and


10. Mr McIndoe adopted a  Rule  24  statement  that  he  submitted  at  the
    hearing.  He  maintained  the  FtTJ  was  entitled  to   consider   the
    application outside of the Rules following decisions  of  Ganesbalan  v
    SSHD [2014] EWHC 2712 (Admin), R (on the application of Aliyu)  v  SSHD
    [2014] EWHC 3919 (Admin) and R (on the application of Oludoyi and  Ors)
    v SSHD (Article 8-MM (Lebanon) and Nagre) IJR [2014] UKUT  00539  (IAC)
    the approach in  Gulshan  was  wrong  and  a  FtTJ  should  consider  a
    standalone article 8 claim. Paragraph 297 HC 395 did not have regard to
    article 8 ECHR and the  argument  that  a  parent  has  to  prove  sole
    responsibility has no echo in the article 8 enquiry. He submitted there
    was no error in law.


    ERROR OF LAW ASSESSMENT


11. In considering whether there has been an error in law I have considered
    the FtTJ's determination and the grounds  of  appeal.  The  grounds  of
    appeal maintained the Immigration Rules were met, the decision was  not
    in accordance with the law and in the alternative refusal would  amount
    to an interference with private and family life under article 8 ECHR.


12. The FtTJ's determination is detailed and the submissions  are  set  out
    between paragraphs [14] and [34]. I have also referred  to  the  FtTJ's
    notes of evidence on the Court file. The Presenting  Officer  submitted
    the  appellant's  mother  had  failed  to  demonstrate  she  had   sole
    responsibility  of  the  appellant  and  there   was   no   exceptional
    circumstances or good arguable case to consider  under  article  8.  Mr
    McIndoe argued the sole responsibility point and submitted the oral and
    written evidence addressed the concerns raised by the respondent and he
    submitted the sponsor did have sole responsibility. On article  8  ECHR
    he relied  on  his  skeleton  argument  and  oral  submissions  and  he
    submitted the child's immediate carer was not her closest relative  and
    the appeal should be allowed under article 8 ECHR.

13. I have considered Mr McIndoe's skeleton argument and the  FtTJ's  notes
    of his submissions and nowhere in those two documents does  Mr  McIndoe
    address the approach to be taken on a family/private  life  claim.  The
    skeleton argument set out his article 8 submissions from paragraph [13]
    onwards and commences "In the event that it  is  not  accepted  that  A
    meets the requirements of the Immigration Rules it is argued  that  she
    should be admitted entry to the UK under article 8 ECHR...."  There  is
    nothing additional in his oral submissions.

14. Mr McIndoe's approach has to be compared  with  that  of  the  original
    Presenting Officer who whilst not quoting Gulshan  or  Nagre  submitted
    that there had to be exceptional circumstances or a good arguable  case
    to consider this appeal outside of the Rules.

15. When the FtTJ heard this appeal the decision of Gulshan  was  good  law
    but Mr McIndoe now argues that the grounds of appeal no longer identify
    an error in light of the recent cases in the Administrative Court.

16. I will refer to these cases in a little more detail in due  course  but
    the starting position must be how did the  FtTJ  approach  this  issue.
    Until anyone says otherwise the FtTJ concluded at paragraph  [123]  the
    appellant did not have sole responsibility and therefore did  not  meet
    paragraph 297(i)(e) HC 395 and he further recorded at  paragraph  [125]
    that "no point was taken in regard to paragraph 297(i)(f) HC 35 nor  on
    the evidence available to me could any point have been properly taken."
    He dismissed the appeal under the Immigration  Rules  having  concluded
    the appellant's aunt and grandmother had day to day control of her  and
    had done so since the sponsor left home with her other son.

17. The FtTJ then immediately recited a variety of case law  on  article  8
    ECHR. He did not approach the  case  from  the  perspective  could  the
    appellant satisfy Appendix FM or paragraph  276  ADE  HC  395.  Between
    paragraphs [143] and [177] the FtTJ considered article 8 outside of the
    Rules. He found at paragraph [148] there was family  life  between  the
    sponsor and appellant because although they were apart they were  still
    mother and daughter. The FtTJ was also conscious  of  the  relationship
    between the appellant and her aunt who had  been  responsible  for  her
    since 2007 and concluded this relationship must  be  a  key  factor  in
    determining what was in the child's best interests albeit that  had  to
    be balanced against the fact the child's best interest is  to  be  with
    her parents. The FtTJ considered from paragraph [166] the needs of  the
    child and he concluded at paragraph [169]  her  best  interest  lay  in
    being reunited with her mother and sibling in the United Kingdom.

18. The FtTJ at paragraph [171] did have regard to the public interest  and
    noted the appellant did not meet the Immigration  Rules.  He  concluded
    this assessment at paragraph [176] that refusing entry would breach the
    appellant's human rights.

19. In approaching the issue of whether the FtTJ erred in his  approach  to
    the appellant's family/private life clam  I  have  had  regard  to  the
    following matters:

      a. Section 86 of the 2002 Act places a responsibility on the judge  to
         deal with every ground of appeal.  The  grounds  of  appeal  raised
         article 8 ECHR  and  it  is  arguable  that  by  dealing  with  the
         appellant's article 8 claims the  FtTJ  complied  with  his  duties
         under the 2002 Act although it is also  arguable  that  since  July
         2012 article 8 is enshrined within the Rules.


      b. In Ganesbalan Michael Fordham QC sitting as  a  Deputy  High  Court
         Judge stated:


             "10(i) Unlike other Rules which  have  a  built-in  discretion
             based  on   exceptional   circumstances,   Appendix   FM   and
             Rule 276ADE are not a "complete code" so  far  as  Article  8
             compatibility is concerned.


             11.  Appendix  FM  and  Rule   276ADE   have   no   equivalent
             "exceptional circumstances" provision. "Plainly", as was  held
             in Amin at paragraph 26, they are not "exhaustive"; but  there
             is "always a residual discretion" (see paragraph 42).  As  the
             Court of Appeal explained in MM (Lebanon) (paragraph  134):  "
             ... if the relevant group of [Immigration Rules] is not ...  a
             'complete code' then the proportionality test will be more  at
             large, albeit guided by the Huang tests and UK and  Strasbourg
             case law".


             12. The Immigration Rules are the important  first  stage  and
             the focus of Article 8 assessments. Indeed it will be an error
             of law not to address Article 8 by reference to the Rules....


      c. Judge Grubb sitting as a Deputy High  Court  Judge  in  R  (on  the
         application of Aliyu) v SSHD [2014] EWHC 3919 (Admin) stated:


             "59. In my  judgment,  the  Secretary  of  State  (apart  from
             'complete code' situations) always has a discretion  to  grant
             leave outside the Rules. That discretion must be exercised  on
             the basis of Article 8 considerations, in particular assessing
             all relevant factors in  determining  whether  a  decision  is
             proportionate under Article 8.2. There is,  in  principle,  no
             "threshold" criterion of "arguability". I  respectfully  agree
             with what Aikens LJ said in this  regard  in  MM  (at  [128]).
             However that factor, taken together with other factors such as
             the extent to which the  Rules  have  taken  into  account  an
             individual's  circumstances  relevant  to  Article   8,   will
             condition the nature and extent of the consideration  required
             as  a  matter  of  law  by  the  Secretary  of  State  of   an
             individual's claim under Article 8 outside the Rules. If there
             is no arguable case, it will  suffice  for  the  Secretary  of
             State simply briefly to say so  giving  adequate  reasons  for
             that  conclusion.  At  the  other  extreme,  where  there  are
             arguable good grounds that the Rules do  not  adequately  deal
             with  an  individual's  circumstances  relevant  in  assessing
             Article  8,  the  Secretary  of  State  must  consider   those
             circumstances  and  identifiably  carry  out   the   balancing
             exercise required by proportionality  in  determining  whether
             there are "exceptional circumstances" requiring the  grant  of
             leave outside the Rules under Article 8.


      d. Upper Tribunal Judge Gill in R (on the application of  Oludoyi  and
         Ors) v SSHD (Article 8-MM (Lebanon)  and  Nagre)  IJR  [2014]  UKUT
         00539 (IAC) stated:


             "There is nothing in Nagre, Gulshan or Shahzad  that  suggests
             that a threshold test was being suggested as opposed to making
             it clear that there was a need to look at the evidence to  see
             if there was anything which has not  already  been  adequately
             considered in the context of the IRs and which could lead to a
             successful Article 8 claim. If, for  example,  there  is  some
             feature which has not been adequately considered under the IRs
             but which cannot on any view  lead  to  the  Article  8  claim
             succeeding (when the individual's circumstances are considered
             cumulatively), there is no need to go any further.  This  does
             not mean that  a  threshold  or  intermediate  test  is  being
             applied. These authorities must not  be  read  as  seeking  to
             qualify or fetter the assessment of Article  8.  The  guidance
             given must be read in context and  not  construed  as  if  the
             judgments are pieces of legislation."


20. The FtTJ allowed this  appeal  under  the  family  life  provisions  of
    article 8. He carried out a full Article 8 assessment and he had regard
    to public interest and the issue of immigration  control.  As  detailed
    above he noted the Immigration Rules were not met and whilst he did not
    set out each Rule it seems clear that  the  appellant  could  not  meet
    paragraph 276ADE and the FtTJ had already found  the  child  could  not
    meet the Immigration Rule that governed entry clearance. She could also
    not meet the requirement  of  Section  E-ECC  because  her  mother  has
    indefinite leave to remain. Having regard to these facts and the  above
    case law I am satisfied the FtTJ was entitled to  consider  the  appeal
    under article 8. He carried out a thorough examination of the  evidence
    including the fact he had previously found the aunt  had  more  control
    over the child than the mother. However, for the  reasons  he  gave  he
    concluded refusing entry would breach the  child's  article  8  rights.
    There is nothing in the above case law that suggests his  approach  was
    wrong based on the findings he made. He had regard to Immigration Rules
    and those he did not refer to were not material.


21. I  therefore  find  there  is  no  error  in  law  and  I  dismiss  the
    respondent's appeal.


    DECISION


22. There was no material error of law I uphold the original decision.


23. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended) the  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    order has been made and no request for an order was submitted to me.



Signed:     Dated: December 15, 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



TO THE RESPONDENT

There was no application for a fee award and I uphold the original fee
award decision.



Signed:     Dated: December 15, 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
