

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/15907/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 1 May 2014                                 |On 11th July 2014            |
|Delivered orally                              |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                HANAAN AHMED

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                    THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NAIROBI

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Hodgetts, instructed by South West Law
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REMITTAL

   1. The appellant is a national of Somalia who claims to be married  to  a
      Dutch national exercising treaty rights in the  United  Kingdom.   The
      appellant applied for entry  clearance  to  enable  her  to  join  her
      husband in the United Kingdom.  That  application  was  refused.   The
      notice of refusal is dated 9 July 2012.  The appellant appealed to the
      First-tier Tribunal and after a hearing on 15 April  2013  Judge  A  E
      Walker dismissed the appeal.  The  appellant  now  has  permission  to
      appeal to this Tribunal.

   2. The grounds of appeal raise a number of issues.  There is a reply from
      the Entry Clearance Officer's representative who  indicated  that,  in
      the view of the respondent, the Judge  dealt  properly  with  all  the
      material before her in reaching her conclusion that, as  she  put  it,
      the reasons given by the respondent do justify  the  refusal  of  this
      application.  It appears to us, and we say it with  regret,  that  the
      determination falls far short of what might be expected from  a  Judge
      of the First-tier Tribunal.  It  contains  a  considerable  number  of
      misprints; it contains a considerable number of errors both of law and
      fact.  The Judge gives in our view no real indication that on the  two
      issues before her, (that is  to  say,  firstly  the  validity  of  the
      marriage, bearing  in  mind  that  there  is  a  suggestion  that  the
      appellant was below the age that a marriage  could  be  contracted  in
      Ethiopia where the marriage took place and secondly, the  question  as
      to whether the marriage was a marriage of convenience) the  burden  of
      proof differed between the parties, and the standard of proof  may  be
      different.  Bearing in mind the errors and the lack  of  reasoning  it
      appears to us that there is no alternative but to direct that the case
      be heard again in the First-tier Tribunal.

   3. We emphasise  in  doing  that  firstly,  that  we  do  not  reach  the
      conclusion that the First-tier Tribunal Judge's judgement was  on  the
      merits wrong: we do not know; but we emphasise also that although none
      of her findings of fact are preserved  the  evidence  that  was  given
      before the First-tier Tribunal is evidence in the case and  will  fall
      for consideration in addition to any other evidence when the appeal is
      reheard.

   4. We therefore set aside the Judge's decision and direct that the appeal
      be reheard by the First-tier Tribunal by a different judge.










                               Signed






                                                              C M G OCKELTON

  VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                          Date:  4 July 2014




