
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/15930/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 22nd August, 2014                          |On 5th September 2014        |
|Given extempore                               |                             |
|Signed 4th September, 2014                    |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley



                                   Between

                            SHAKEELA JAVID SADIQ

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISLAMABAD

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Respondent:    Mr Chris Boyle, Solicitor with Halliday Reeves,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Clive Dewison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    The  Appellant  in  this  appeal  is  the  Entry  Clearance   Officer,
    Islamabad.  To avoid confusion, I shall refer to the Appellant as  "the
    Entry Clearance Officer".

2.   The Respondent is a citizen of Pakistan, who made  application  to  the
    Entry Clearance Officer for entry clearance to the United Kingdom as  a
    partner under Appendix FM of Statement of Changes in Immigration  Rules
    HC 395, as amended ("the Immigration Rules").

3.   The Entry Clearance Officer refused  the  Respondent's  application  on
    17th  July,  2013  indicating  that  he  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    relationship between the Respondent and his  sponsor  was  genuine  and
    subsisting and that they  intended  to  live  together  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The Entry Clearance Officer  also  refused  the  application,
    because the sponsor had no income other than public funds and the Entry
    Clearance Officer was not satisfied that  the  Respondent  and  sponsor
    were able to maintain and accommodate  themselves  and  any  dependants
    adequately without recourse to public funds.

4.   Before  the  hearing  of  the  appeal,  the  Entry  Clearance  Manager,
    Islamabad, carried out an appeal review and on the evidence before  him
    was satisfied that the Respondent would be  adequately  maintained  and
    accommodated and conceded that part of the appeal.

5.   The  Respondent  appealed  and  his  appeal  was  heard  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Catherine Gordon at North Shields on 12 June  2014.   In
    her determination, she found that the parties would be in a position to
    adequately maintain and  accommodate  themselves  (clearly  not  having
    realised that the Entry Clearance Officer had conceded this part of the
    appeal). The judge considered the  question  of  the  relationship  and
    found that it was genuine and  subsisting  and  that  the  parties  did
    intend to live permanently together.  She allowed the appeal.

6.   The Entry Clearance Officer challenged the appeal  on  the  basis  that
    the judge had  erred  in  law  in  accepting  that  employment  support
    allowance could be taken into consideration in considering the question
    of maintenance.

7.   At the hearing before  me,  Mr  Dewison  accepted  that  the  issue  of
    maintenance had been conceded by the Entry Clearance Manager  and  told
    me that there  were,  in  fact,  no  material  errors  of  law  in  the
    determination capable of affecting it's  outcome,  and  invited  me  to
    dismiss the Entry Clearance Officer's appeal.  Mr Boyle  expressed  his
    agreement.

8.   I am grateful to Mr Dewison.   He  was  entirely  correct  to  draw  my
    attention to the fact that on 9th June, 2014, just  three  days  before
    the hearing of the appeal before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  Entry
    Clearance Manager had conceded the question of maintenance.

9.   The determination of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Gordon  involved  the
    making of no material error on a point  of  law.   Her  decision  shall
    stand.  The appeal of Shakeela Javid Sadiq is allowed.
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

