
IAC-BH-PMP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/15235/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 5th January 2015                          |On 16th January 2015           |
|                                             |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COATES


                                   Between

                           TANAKA JAMES CHIGODORA
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss C Warren instructed by Paragon Law
For the Respondent:    Miss C Johnstone, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a Zimbabwean national born on 25th January 2003.   The
    Appellant applied for entry clearance to settle with his  mother  under
    the family reunion provisions of the Immigration Rules.  The  Appellant
    was 11 years of age at the date of application  and  his  mother,  Miss
    Ellen Gonyora, has refugee status in the UK.  The Appellant's  14  year
    old brother was already living in the United Kingdom with their mother.



 2. The Appellant's application was refused by the Respondent on  28th  May
    2013.   His  appeal  against  that  refusal  was  allowed   under   the
    Immigration Rules by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Thomas  on  27th
    June 2014.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by a Designated Judge on 3rd  November
    2014 on the basis that it was arguable that the First-tier Judge  erred
    in law in stating that the  standard  of  proof,  which  lay  upon  the
    Respondent in proving that a material document  was  not  genuine,  was
    higher than the balance of probabilities.

 4. That is the background against which the matter came before me  for  an
    error of law hearing on 5th January 2015.

 5. Representation was as mentioned above.  The Sponsor was present at  the
    hearing.  I have taken into account all the documents which were before
    the First-tier Tribunal plus the grounds of application for  permission
    to appeal by the Respondent's representative and  a  Rule  24  response
    drafted by Counsel who represented the Appellant before the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 6. The submission by Miss Johnstone on behalf of the Respondent was  short
    and succinct.  She relied upon the grounds submitted in support of  the
    application for permission to appeal.  She also referred to  paragraphs
    2 and 12 of the  First-tier  Judge's  determination  and  reasons.   At
    paragraph 2 the judge said -

         "The general burden of proof under the Immigration Rules is on  the
         Appellant to the standard of a balance of probabilities,  save  for
         the decision under paragraph 320(7A) where the burden of  proof  is
         on the Respondent and to a higher standard".

     At paragraph 12 the First-tier Judge stated  "The  Respondent  bears  a
    higher burden in respect to an allegation involving  false  documents".
    Miss Johnstone submitted that the reference to "a higher  standard"  or
    "a higher burden" was an error of law and that the determination should
    be set aside.

 7. For the Appellant, Miss Warren adopted the Rule 24 response  which  had
    been drafted by her colleague.  This argues that even if the judge fell
    into error in  enunciating  the  standard  of  proof,  that  error  was
    immaterial to the outcome of the appeal given that the judge placed  no
    or little weight upon the Respondent's evidence of  falsity  and  given
    that she found the Sponsor to be a credible witness and accepted all of
    her evidence as to how the first and second  certified  copies  of  the
    birth certificate were obtained.  It  is  further  submitted  that  the
    First-tier Judge gave detailed reasons and made clear findings that the
    Respondent's  evidence  was  insufficient  to  show  that   the   birth
    certificate was false to the standard of balance of probabilities, thus
    making any error immaterial.

 8. It is abundantly clear from the case law that  when  considering  false
    documents or false representations under the Immigration Rules there is
    but  one  civil  standard,  which  is  the  balance  of  probabilities.
    However, it is also settled law that, because of the seriousness of  an
    allegation  of  falsehood,  cogent  evidence  will   be   required   to
    substantiate such an allegation.

 9. As I observed during the appeal hearing, the words used by  the  First-
    tier Judge are clear and  unambiguous.   The  reference  to  "a  higher
    standard" or "a higher burden" is clearly an error  of  law.   However,
    the question which has  to  be  addressed  is  whether  that  error  is
    material or not.

10. In this appeal the document which the Respondent considered to  be  not
    genuine was a birth certificate submitted on behalf of  the  Appellant.
    The Respondent relied on a Document Verification Report referring to an
    email from the Harare Register General in Zimbabwe confirming that  the
    birth certificate referred to was not authentic.  That was supported by
    a letter from someone named E  Dube  listing  nine  birth  certificates
    which were found to be authentic and the Appellants which was found  to
    be not authentic.  The First-tier Judge states at paragraph 12  of  her
    determination that there is  however  no  explanation  as  to  why  the
    certificate is defective; how it differed from the  other  certificates
    listed,  or  upon  what  basis  the  conclusion  that  the  Appellant's
    certificate is not authentic was drawn.  The grounds point out that the
    First-tier Judge accepted that the Appellant had  been  issued  with  a
    Zimbabwean passport by the Registrar General  against  the  copy  birth
    certificate which the same authority then inexplicably later deemed  to
    be false.  A bare assertion that a  document  is  not  genuine  is  not
    sufficient to discharge the burden of proof.

11. A second Ground of Appeal relating to the Appellant's membership of the
    Sponsor's pre-flight family was not pursued and I do not have  to  deal
    with it.

12. For the reasons which I have given, I conclude that any  error  of  law
    which there may be in misstating the correct standard of proof  is  not
    material.  In the circumstances  I  uphold  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    determination and dismiss the Respondent's appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date 9th January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Coates


