
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/15204/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 14th July 2014                             |On 16th July 2014            |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            BALDISH KAUR DOSANJH
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr J Kingham - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

For the Respondent: Mrs Chaggar instructed by London Immigration

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is  an  appeal  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  against  a
        determination of First- tier Tribunal Judge  Trevaskis  promulgated
        following a hearing at Newport on 18th  March  2014,  in  which  he
        allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules  on  the  basis  the
        decision was 'not in accordance with the law'.


     2. Mrs Dosanjh is an Indian national who applied for  entry  clearance
        to enable her to settle with her husband, who is also her  sponsor.
        On 21st June 2013 her application was refused under Appendix FM and
        paragraph 276ADE of the Rules.


     3. There were two issues of concern to the  Entry  Clearance  Officer,
        the first relating to whether it had been shown  that  the  party's
        intentions were as they say or that the marriage is subsisting and,
        secondly, that documents provided did not  show  that  the  minimum
        required level of income was available.


     4. In relation to the first issue the Judge  considered  the  evidence
        and was satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the marriage
        is genuine and subsisting and that  Mrs  Dosanjh  and  her  husband
        intend to live together permanently in the  United  Kingdom.   This
        finding is not subject to challenge.


     5. In relation to the  financial  aspects  the  Judge  refers  to  the
        evidence that was submitted, the Rules, and a  letter  provided  by
        the sponsor's aunt dated 1st March 2014 which was  not  before  the
        decision maker and therefore could not be considered as it was  not
        admissible. At paragraph 19 the Judge states that the applicant has
        not met the Rules, but only in respect of the income requirement.


     6. The Judge then refers to the High  Court  decision  of  MM  v  SSHD
        [2013] EWHC 1900 (Admin) which is a decision of Mr Justice Blake in
        which he was highly critical  of  the  minimum  level  of  required
        income to be found in the  Rules  and  who  allowed  an  appeal  on
        Article 8 grounds accordingly. The Judge notes that  following  the
        decision of the Secretary of State to appeal MM  to  the  Court  of
        Appeal decisions have been put on hold in respect  of  applications
        which would be refused solely because the  Rules  relating  to  the
        minimum income thresholds are not met  and  that,  accordingly,  he
        decided that the Entry Clearance Officers  decision  should  awaits
        the outcome of that appeal.


     7. The Judge did consider Article 8 by  reference  to  Gulshan  [2013]
        UKUT 00640 but did not find there were arguably  good  grounds  for
        granting entry clearance outside the Immigration Rules based on the
        facts of the appeal.


     8. In the intervening period the Court  of  Appeal  have  handed  down
        their judgement in relation to the appeal to them against  MM.  The
        citation for their decision is MM (Lebanon) and others v  Secretary
        of State for the Home Department and Master AF  (Interested  Party)
        [2014] EWCA Civ 985. In their judgement the  Court  comprehensively
        reject the findings  of  Mr  Justice  Blake,  concluding  that  his
        analysis and conclusion that the new provisions were  incapable  of
        being compatible with Article 8  rights  of  UK  partners  was  not
        correct. The outcome of the Court of Appeal's decision is that  the
        provisions of the Rules are not unlawful and must  be  honoured  by
        individuals seeking to enter  the  United  Kingdom,  including  the
        provisions relating to minimum levels of financial resources.


     9. The grounds on which permission to appeal was sought refer  to  the
        fact the First-tier found that  Mrs  Dosanjh  could  not  meet  the
        requirements of the Immigration  Rules  but  then  found  that  the
        decision was not in accordance with the law, which is said to being
        an unsustainable conclusion.


    10. Before  the  Upper  Tribunal  Mrs  Chaggar  rightly  accepted  that
        following the publication of the Court of Appeal judgement she  was
        in difficulty in seeking to satisfy the Tribunal that there was  no
        legal error in the First-tier Judge's determination.


    11. I find the Judge  was  correct  to  find  that  on  the  admissible
        evidence Mrs Dosanjh had not discharged the burden  of  proof  upon
        her to the required standard to show that  she  could  satisfy  the
        requirements of the Immigration Rules.  The finding that,  somehow,
        because there was doubt surrounding the sustainability of the  High
        Court's decision in MM he should  allow  the  appeal  is,  however,
        perverse.  Decisions of the  High  Court  are  persuasive  but  not
        binding in the same way decisions of the Court of Appeal  are.  The
        Judge was required to either  conclude  that  MM  had  no  material
        effect upon the requirements of the Rules and therefore dismiss the
        appeal or to accept that even  if  the  Rules  could  not  be  met,
        following MM, the appeal was allowed under Article 8, if  this  was
        justified on the facts.


    12. The approached the Judge adopted effectively fell between these two
        stools and resulted in a decision that is not legally  sustainable.
        I therefore set the determination aside. There is no  challenge  to
        the findings regarding the validity of the marriage which shall  be
        preserved.


    13. When proceeding to remake the decision,  Mrs  Chaggar  acknowledged
        that although  she  had  in  her  possession  documentary  evidence
        indicating  the  sponsor's  income  was  above  the  minimum  level
        required by the Immigration Rules, this had not been  disclosed  to
        the decision maker and was not admissible before this Tribunal.  On
        the basis of the admissible evidence I have available and  am  able
        to consider, I do not find that  Mrs  Dosanjh  has  discharged  the
        burden of proof upon her to the required standard to show that  she
        is able to satisfy the requirements of the Rules  relating  to  the
        required level of income  that  has  to  be  shown  to  entitle  an
        individual to a grant of entry clearance.  Accordingly  the  appeal
        is dismissed.


    14. This is a matter which has failed  at  this  stage  but  which  may
        succeed in the future.  A  fresh  application  is  to  be  made  in
        relation to which Mrs Dosanjh needs to think  carefully  about  the
        requirements of the Rules  and  the  provisions  contained  therein
        relating to the way in which available income has to be proved  and
        ensure that the necessary admissible evidence is sent in  with  the
        application.


Decision

    15. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the  original  Judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as
        follows. This appeal is dismissed.


   Anonymity.


    16. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.  I make no such order pursuant to rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
        Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


   Fee Award.


   Note: this is not part of the determination.


    17. In the light of my decision to re-make the decision in  the  appeal
        by dismissing it, I have considered whether to  make  a  fee  award
        (rule  23A  (costs)  of  the  Asylum   and   Immigration   Tribunal
        (Procedure) Rules 2005  and  section  12(4)(a)  of  the  Tribunals,
        Courts and Enforcement Act 2007).  I have had regard to  the  Joint
        Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in  Immigration  Appeals
        (December 2011).


          I make no fee award.


          Reasons:     The applicant lost as her case has no legal merit.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 15th July 2014












