
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/15560/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at The Royal Courts of Justice,    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|Belfast                                  |                                    |
|On 27 July 2017                          |On 27 September 2017                |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                      Entry Clearance Officer - mumbai
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MRS SWATI KARI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr McVeety, Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mrs N Drawid, Sponsor


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  appeals  with  permission  against  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Farrelly promulgated on 22  April
    2016 allowing the respondent's appeal against the decision made  on  30
    November 2014 to refuse her entry clearance to the United Kingdom as an
    adult dependent relative.

 2. The respondent is a citizen of India born 14 September 1947.  She  owns
    her  own  apartment  but  having  previously  tried  to  reside  in   a
    residential home, found herself unable to do so and returned to her own
    apartment in June 2014 before making the present application.  She  has
    a sister who is older than her and who lives in Pune.   The  sister  is
    widowed; she also has a younger sister living in Australia.

 3. The sponsor is the respondent's only child.  She  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom on 23 April 2000 and currently works in a local hospital  as  a
    physiotherapist.  She and her husband lived in Belfast with  their  two
    children; he is also employed in the local hospital.

 4. The Entry Clearance Officer refused the application on the  basis  that
    the applicant did not fulfil the requirements of  EC-DR.1.1(d)  on  the
    basis that she was not financially dependent on the sponsor for day-to-
    day requirements and that there were no exceptional circumstances  such
    that any grant of entry clearance outside  the  Immigration  Rules  was
    warranted.

 5. It is, however, asserted in the Entry Clearance Manager's  review  that
    the only matter in question is whether care is not available  in  India
    or that there is no-one who can provide it, it being  noted  there  are
    adequate care  homes  in  India  where  the  respondent  would  receive
    appropriate care and  treatment  and  whilst  that  might  not  be  the
    respondent's preferred choice of care it is available and is the  level
    which she requires.

 6. The judge found that the applicant did not fulfil the requirements of E-
    ECDR.2.5 which provides as follows:-
    E-ECDR.2.5.   The applicant or, if the applicant and their partner  are
                  the sponsor's parents  or  grandparents,  the  applicant's
                  partner, must be  unable,  even  with  the  practical  and
                  financial help of the  sponsor,  to  obtain  the  required
                  level of care  in  the  country  where  they  are  living,
                  because-
                  (a)  it is not available and there is no  person  in  that
                      country who can reasonably provide it; or
                  (b)  it is not affordable.

 7. The judge directed himself in line with AD  (Pakistan)  v  SSHD  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 313 and Dasgupta (Error of law  -  proportionality  -  correct
    approach)  [2016]  UKUT  00028  finding   [22]   considerable   factual
    similarities with Dasgupta, the distinguishing feature here being  that
    the sponsor had not threatened to uproot her  family  to  be  with  her
    mother.  He found that there was a very close bond between the  sponsor
    and the respondent given she is an only child and that her  father  had
    been absent all her life but that  the  mother's  ability  to  function
    independently had reduced and, whilst comparatively young. the evidence
    indicated she has experienced difficulties psychologically impacting on
    her physical health and while she did not meet the requirements  of  E-
    ECDR.2.5 and the respondent and sponsor are in a  position  to  finance
    care in India and that whilst  there  are  care  homes  available  that
    should take care of the immediate physical needs, including feeding and
    supervision, the emotional support that could be provided on a  day-to-
    day basis would be missing concluding that  the  Rule  had  yet  to  be
    tested in court [23] appeared to be restrictive, focusing upon material
    needs.

 8. The judge found that family life did exist between the  respondent  and
    the sponsor; that  consideration  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  was
    required [25] and, that the decision was disproportionate [26].

 9. The Entry Clearance Officer sought permission to appeal on the  grounds
    that the judge had erred:-

      1) in failing to consider the relevant  case  law  when  finding  that
         family life existed between the respondent and the sponsor;

      2) that the judge had failed to make a reasoned  assessment  following
         Razgar in that as family life had been maintained by regular visits
         a refusal of entry clearance did not prevent  the  respondent  from
         making a  visit  application  or  from  the  sponsor  visiting  the
         appellant and that this did not amount to compelling  circumstances
         such as to justify a departure from the Immigration Rules.

10. On 25 October 2016, Upper Tribunal Judge Martin granted  permission  to
    appeal concluding that it was arguable that the  judge  had  failed  to
    identify why Article 8 was engaged  and  in  failing  to  identify  the
    compelling circumstances.

11. Mr McVeety accepted that the grounds appeared not to have engaged  with
    the more recent case law.  I agree.  It cannot be argued though that on
    the facts of this case the judge erred in concluding, recognising  this
    was a highly fact-sensitive issue, that unusually that family life  did
    exist between the adult respondent and her daughter.  That was  clearly
    a conclusion open  to  him  on  the  evidence  and  is  adequately  and
    sufficiently reasoned.  Contrary to what is averred the judge did  have
    regard to the principles as set out in Ghising in the Court of  Appeal.
    If anything it is  the  Secretary  of  State  who,  in  drafting  these
    grounds, simply ignored the more recent jurisprudence.

12. The sponsor explained that her mother is depressed but that  given  the
    stigma attached  to  mental  illness  was  not  prepared  to  obtain  a
    diagnosis.  She said that she struggles in living  a  normal  life  and
    that the respondent can no longer cope.  She said that the only  option
    now is for her to return to India with one of the children, her husband
    remaining here in the United Kingdom with the other.

13. I am satisfied that although the judge gave  adequate  and  sustainable
    reasons for concluding that the respondent had a family life  and  that
    Article 8 was engaged, there is no indication that he had proper regard
    to the public interest  in  this  case  in  assessing  proportionality.
    Whilst it was not incumbent on him to set out Section 117A and 117B  of
    the 2002 Act, it has to be evident that he had taken that into account.
     There is no such indication and whilst he does make reference  to  the
    similarities with Dasgupta, equally there were on the  evidence  before
    him significant differences in that the family would not be split.   It
    cannot be argued that the  situation  here  is  one  where  control  is
    maintained.  On the contrary, Article 8 is being used here as  a  means
    of dispensing with the clear policy of the United Kingdom government to
    exclude people in the respondent's situation. While the judge does find
    that the respondent is unlikely to be a burden on the public purse  and
    has some command of English, this is not entirely clear.   The  failure
    to engage  with  the  public  interest  is  all  the  more  stark  when
    considering the policy considerations identified  in  BRITCITS  v  SSHD
    [2017] EWCA Civ 368.

14. Accordingly, for the reasons set out above  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal must be set aside.

15. In deciding how the decision should be remade, I bear in mind that I do
    have jurisdiction to reopen the  issue  under  the  Immigration  Rules,
    albeit that there was on cross-appeal on that  issue.   It  is  notable
    from the judge's decision that  he  concluded,  that  the  approach  to
    paragraph ECDR was limited to medical needs.   That appears now to have
    been in error, given what was stated in BRITCITS at [76]: -

         "76. Thirdly, for the reasons I have given the  appellant  has  not
             established that the conditions for entry and right to  remain
             for ADRs under the new ADR Rules are  incapable  of  practical
             fulfilment in virtually all cases for parents, let  alone  for
             all the categories of ADRs entitled  to  apply,  whose  family
             life engages Article 8.  In particular, rejection on the basis
             of the availability of adequate care in the ADR's home country
             turns upon whether the care which is available  is  reasonable
             for the ADR to receive and of  the  level  required  for  that
             applicant.  Contrary to the submission of the appellant, those
             considerations are  capable,  with  appropriate  evidence,  of
             embracing the psychological and  emotional  needs  of  elderly
             parents."

    And also paragraph 59:-

         "59. Second, as is apparent from the Rules and  the  Guidance,  the
             focus is on whether the care required by the ADR applicant can
             be 'reasonably' provided and to 'the required level' in  their
             home  country.   As  Mr  Sheldon   confirmed   in   his   oral
             submissions, the provision of care in the home country must be
             reasonable both from the perspective of the provider  and  the
             perspective of the applicant, and the standard  of  such  care
             must be what is required for that particular applicant.  It is
             possible that insufficient attention has been paid in the past
             to these considerations, which focus  on  what  care  is  both
             necessary and reasonable for the applicant to receive in their
             home country.  Those considerations include issues as  to  the
             accessibility and geographical location of  the  provision  of
             care and the standard of care.  They are capable of  embracing
             emotional and psychological requirements  verified  by  expert
             medical evidence.  What is reasonable is,  of  course,  to  be
             objectively assessed."

16. Further, the nature of any findings in respect of the Immigration Rules
    which may however need to be addressed by the provision  of  additional
    evidence relating to the situation of the respondent  at  the  date  of
    refusal, such as any medical reports or other reports commenting on her
    psychological  and  emotional  needs,  may  now  be  necessary.   These
    considerations would of necessity inform a consideration of  Article  8
    outside the Rules.

17. Whilst I am aware of the difficulties  that  there  may  be  given  the
    restrictions of what can and cannot be taken into account in an  appeal
    against entry clearance to which Section 85 of the 2002 Act applies,  I
    nonetheless, consider that the matter needs to be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal for  fresh  consideration.   I  am  also  satisfied  that
    extraordinarily, it would be appropriate to  remit  the  case  back  to
    Judge Farrelly for him properly to carry out the  exercises  identified
    above.

    SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law, and I set it aside. The findings of fact in respect  of  family
    life existing are preserved.

19. I remit it to the same judge, First-tier Tribunal Judge Farrelly for  a
    further consideration of the case under the Immigration  Rules  and  on
    human rights grounds


Signed                                  Date   25 September 2017



Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
