
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Numbers:
OA/15752/2012
                                                               OA/15753/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 20 March 2013                           |On 18th June 2013          |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

                               MR GULZAR SINGH
                                MRS GIAN KAUR
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER NEW DELHI
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:

                            For the Appellant: Mr R Rai of counsel
           instructed by Gills Immigration Law
          For the Respondent: Ms J Isherwood a Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellants are citizens of India. They are husband and  wife.  The
      first was born on 1 October 1930 and the second on 6  May  1933.  They
      have been given permission to appeal the determination  of  First-Tier
      Tribunal Judge Hodgkinson who  dismissed  their  appeals  against  the
      respondent's decisions of 12 July 2012 to refuse to grant  them  entry
      clearance to the United Kingdom for the  purpose  of  settlement  with
      their son and sponsor Balraj Singh under the provisions  of  paragraph
      317 of the Immigration Rules.


   2. The respondent refused the application not being  satisfied  that  the
      appellants had shown that  they  were  financially  wholly  or  mainly
      dependent on the relative present and settled in the UK or  that  they
      could be accommodated adequately together with any dependents  without
      recourse to public funds in accommodation which the sponsor  owned  or
      occupied exclusively. The application was also refused  on  Article  8
      human rights grounds.


   3. The appellants appealed and the judge heard the  appeal  on  20  March
      2013. Both parties were represented and the judge heard oral  evidence
      from the sponsor and the sponsor's daughter-in-law, Mrs  Dhillon.  Her
      father, Mr Ghoman provided  a  witness  statement  but  did  not  give
      evidence.


   4. At the hearing the appellants' counsel conceded that the grounds under
      the Immigration Rules and Article 8 stood or fell together and if  the
      appellants did not succeed under the former then they would fail under
      the latter.


   5. Whilst accepting that the sponsor had  provided  the  appellants  with
      some financial support the judge found that  the  appellants  had  not
      established that they were financially wholly or mainly  dependent  on
      the sponsor. He touched on the issue of accommodation, finding that it
      was not necessary to consider this in detail if the appellants  failed
      in relation to financial dependency, but  indicating  that  they  were
      likely to be able to satisfy this requirement. He dismissed the appeal
      under the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.


   6. The appellants applied for permission to appeal which was granted by a
      judge in the First-Tier Tribunal. The grounds  argue  that  the  judge
      erred in law. Firstly, by failing to give  sufficient  weight  to  the
      evidence of the sponsor and the other  witness.  Secondly,  procedural
      unfairness by not indicating that he was concerned by the  absence  of
      Mr Ghoman so that the appellants' representative could  address  these
      concerns. Thirdly, failing properly to evaluate Mr  Ghoman's  evidence
      and the documents submitted by him or to indicate that he had concerns
      about these matters; failing to take into account the  other  evidence
      of funds taken to India for the appellants; failing properly to assess
      the evidence as to the appellants having  domestic  servants;  failing
      properly  to  assess  all  the  evidence  and  submissions  about  the
      telephone interview with the first  appellant;  failing  to  give  the
      appellants the opportunity to address  his  concerns  about  documents
      which he concluded  had  been  prepared  on  the  "same  machine"  and
      requiring evidence that the sponsor's brother had no income other than
      his pension.


   7. I have been provided with the  authorities  of  Markem  Corporation  v
      Zipher Ltd [2005] EWCA Civ 267 and In the Matter of Mumtaz  Properties
      Ltd [2011] EWCA Civ 610.


   8. Mr Rai said that the main point in the grounds arose from the  judge's
      treatment of unchallenged evidence.  Whilst  the  sponsor  was  cross-
      examined Mrs Dhillon was not. In paragraph 33 of the determination the
      judge referred to "one element which I have referred to  below".  What
      followed did not make it clear what this was. The points raised by the
      judge in the determination should have been put to the two  witnesses.
      The appellants' representatives could have asked for an adjournment in
      order to deal with the points but only if the judge had told them what
      they were.  The  point  as  to  the  typeface  in  the  documents  was
      prejudicial.


   9. Mr Rai referred me to paragraphs 56 to 61 of Markem Corporation and 40
      to 41 of Mumtaz Properties. He argued that the  judge  made  no  clear
      finding as to the credibility of the two witnesses.  He  asked  me  to
      find that the judge erred in law, to set aside  the  decision  and  to
      send it back to the First-Tier Tribunal for rehearing.


  10. Ms Isherwood submitted that there was no material  error  of  law.  No
      evidence from Mr Ghoman was put before the respondent  so  that  there
      was no opportunity for the respondent to take a position on  this.  At
      the beginning and  the  end  of  the  telephone  interview  the  first
      appellant said that he had no complaints or problems.  The  element(s)
      referred to by the judge in paragraph 33 were, as appeared later,  the
      methods of money transmission to the  appellants  and  the  extent  of
      their dependency on the sponsor.


  11. As to the question of whether the judge  should  have  raised  at  the
      hearing the points  on  which  he  relied  in  his  determination,  Ms
      Isherwood submitted that it was not for the judge to put  every  point
      to the appellants' representatives,  particularly  if  it  related  to
      matters which the appellants had not put before  the  respondent  with
      their applications. The appellants were on  clear  notice  as  to  the
      areas which they needed to address, the judge's  concerns  related  to
      these areas and it was for the appellants to prove their case.  I  was
      asked to find that there was  no  error  of  law  and  to  uphold  the
      determination.


  12. In his reply Mr Rai summarised the appellants' case by saying that  is
      a matter of fairness the appellants were entitled  to  know  the  case
      facing  them  as  it  was  perceived  by  the  judge.  I  reserved  my
      determination.


  13. Much of the evidence provided by the appellants for the hearing before
      the  judge  had  not  been  submitted  to  the  respondent  with   the
      application. The appellants' bundle before the judge runs to 151 pages
      and the witness statements  postdate  the  decision.  In  this  common
      situation the reasons for refusal could not  be  expected  to  address
      much of the evidence before the judge. The reasons  for  refusal  made
      clear the requirements of the rules about which the respondent was not
      satisfied and the judge did not stray outside these.


  14. I find that the judge did not fail to give sufficient  weight  to  the
      evidence of the sponsor and Mrs Dhillon. Apart from the  inconsistency
      referred to in paragraph 42 relating to the servants  who  helped  the
      appellants, which the judge regarded as only "potentially" damaging to
      credibility, he accepted  most  of  their  evidence,  leading  to  the
      conclusion in paragraph 50 that the sponsor  provided  the  appellants
      with some financial support. The challenge in paragraphs 4  and  5  of
      the grounds of appeal is in general terms and amounts to no more  than
      an alternative basis of assessment which identifies no error of law in
      the reasoning and assessment carried out by the judge.


  15. The absence of Mr Ghoman was  a  matter  raised  at  the  hearing,  as
      appears from paragraph 36. Mrs  Dhillon  was  asked  why  he  was  not
      present and explained that he was working. It matters not that  it  is
      not clear who asked the question. The appellants were  represented  by
      solicitors and competent counsel who would  have  been  aware  of  the
      issues which the appellants needed  to  address.  The  claim  that  Mr
      Ghoman was a regular  conduit  for  money  from  the  sponsor  to  the
      appellants was an important element of the appellants' case. It should
      not have taken the appellant by surprise that his  absence,  with  the
      consequence that he could not be cross-examined, was  a  factor  which
      the judge was likely to take into account; the more so if, as I  find,
      the judge was entitled to consider that the receipts  produced  by  Mr
      Ghoman did not provide any clear explanation as to how some  parts  of
      the money transfer process took place.  The  question  as  to  why  Mr
      Ghoman did not attend the hearing  should  have  put  the  appellants'
      counsel on notice that there could have been  an  application  for  an
      adjournment.  His  evidence  was  an  important  part  of  seeking  to
      establish the extent of  the  support  for  the  appellants  from  the
      sponsor. The respondent could not have addressed the  evidence  of  Mr
      Ghoman because, at the time of the decision, there does not appear  to
      have been any evidence from him.


  16. I can find  no-fault  with  the  judge's  reasoning  in  paragraph  42
      relating to the servants who assisted the appellants or that he should
      have put his concerns to the appellants' representative.  It  was  the
      sponsor's oral evidence that the appellants had servants  working  for
      them. Once this had been said it should  have  been  obvious  to  all,
      including the appellants' counsel, that this was an  important  factor
      going to the question of whether the appellants had anyone in India to
      care for or assist them. Whether this piece of evidence was  given  in
      chief or cross-examination the appellants' counsel would have had  the
      opportunity to explore and clarify  the  situation.  It  was  relevant
      against the background of the picture portrayed by the appellants  and
      the sponsor in evidence and referred to by the judge in paragraphs 14,
      19 and 23. It was said that the appellants were living on their own in
      India and finding it difficult to  look  after  themselves  and  their
      home, were unable to go to the doctor, needed to be looked after every
      day and were living "in the most exceptional destitute circumstances".


  17. I can find no-fault with  the  judge's  assessment  of  the  telephone
      interview of the first appellant set out in paragraph 43 to 45 or  the
      conclusion that what the appellant said  was  correct  notwithstanding
      the later claims to the contrary. There  is  no  indication  that  the
      judge failed to have in mind the age of the appellants, apparent  from
      the first paragraph of the determination, and I note as  submitted  by
      Ms Isherwood that at the beginning and the end of  the  interview  the
      appellant indicated that he was happy with the way  in  which  it  had
      been conducted.  In  the  absence  of  a  statement  from  the  second
      appellant saying how her evidence might have differed from that of her
      husband I do not find any force in the statement that she should  also
      have been interviewed.


  18. What the judge said in paragraph 46  about  some  of  the  appellants'
      documents having been produced on the same machine was not treated  as
      "determinative" and the judge was entitled to regard it as  "a  factor
      of relevance".


  19. The factors referred to by the judge in paragraphs 47 and 48  relating
      to the financial circumstances of the appellants' son in  Canada  were
      material in the  light  of  the  first  appellant's  evidence  in  his
      interview that both sons were employed and both were  supporting  him.
      In his written evidence the son in Canada said that he was retired and
      did not have a regular income  apart  from  his  pension.  Documentary
      evidence about his financial  circumstances,  including,  for  example
      bank statements, might have supported his contention that  he  had  no
      income from employment.


  20. I do not find much assistance from  the  cases  of  Markem  or  Mumtaz
      beyond the principle that the judge must act fairly.  This  is  not  a
      jurisdiction and not an appeal in which the parties' cases are set out
      in precise pleadings. The respondent's  refusal  gave  a  sufficiently
      clear indication of the areas in which the appellants failed and which
      they needed to address. It could not deal with  the  large  amount  of
      evidence submitted later. I find that none of the factors relied on by
      the judge did or should have taken the appellants by  surprise.  There
      was nothing of substance on which the judge  relied  in  reaching  his
      conclusions which should have been put to the appellants. I find  that
      in line with paragraph 41 of Mumtaz the judge's findings were fair  to
      the witnesses (and the appellants). The evidence relied on  was  known
      to the parties and the issues to be decided were clear.


  21. This is a lengthy, detailed and careful determination. I find that the
      judge reached conclusions open to him on all the evidence. There is no
      error of law and I uphold his determination.







      .............................................
            Signed                                             Date 14 June
      2013
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

