
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA157022014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 May 2016                                |On 14th June 2016             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                                    [Z A]


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Revill of Counsel instructed by VIP Legal
For the Respondent:    Mr Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a young child born on [ ] 2012.   In  April  2014  she
    applied for entry clearance to the United Kingdom as the adoptive child
    of a parent who was present and settled in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    sponsor, [SH], is the aunt of the appellant and a British citizen.  She
    and  her  husband  have  obtained  a  guardianship  order  through  the
    Pakistani courts.  They wish the appellant to join them as her adoptive
    parents.

2.   Entry clearance was refused by the decision of 12 November 2014.

3.   It was  a  requirement  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  and  particularly
    paragraphs 316A and  319A  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  that  such  an
    adoption should be because of the inability of the original parents  or
    current carers to look after the child prior to  her  being  physically
    transferred to her prospective parent or parents.  It was not  accepted
    such was the reason for the adoption nor is it accepted that  any  ties
    had been broken as between the appellant  and  her  biological  family.
    Further the Requirements for a de facto adoption under  paragraph  309A
    of the Immigration Rules had not been  met.    The  biological  parents
    still remain in Pakistan, and it was not considered that there were any
    serious or compelling  grounds  so  as  to  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 297(i)(f).  A review of that decision  was  sought  and  that
    decision was upheld.

4.   An appeal against that decision was lodged in the First-tier  Tribunal,
    coming before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Taylor  for  hearing  on  16
    September 2015.  The appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

5.   Challenge has been made to that decision on a  number  of  grounds  and
    leave to argue the matter has been granted.  Thus the matter  has  come
    before me to determine whether or not the decision contained  an  error
    of law.

6.   It is common ground that at  the  hearing  both  the  sponsor  and  her
    husband attended.  They were represented by Ms Revill  of  Counsel  who
    represented them also in the appeal before me.  In essence  the  appeal
    proceeded on the basis that a detailed statement from the  sponsor  was
    presented.  There was no Home Office Presenting Officer  present.  Thus
    there was little if any questioning of the sponsor as to  the  contents
    of the statement.

7.   The statement itself is set  out  at  pages  1  to  13  of  the  bundle
    together with a number of enclosures.  The sponsor and her husband  are
    British citizens, she working as a  reception  class  teacher  and  her
    husband as a shop supervisor.  They have a reasonable income  which  is
    set out in the statement. A son, [S] was born to the sponsor  when  she
    was married to another.  Sadly it would seem that her  current  husband
    [Ar] is unable to provide her with further children.

8.   [Ar]'s younger brother [An] is the biological father of  the  appellant
    and is married to [Sa] and they have two daughters.   They  are  living
    from farming and live as a family unit in Gojra in rural Pakistan.

9.    The  sponsor's  husband,  [Ar],  was  unwell  and  as  part   of   his
    recuperation travelled to Pakistan on 1 April 2012.  It was during that
    visit that she and  he  learned  that  [Sa]  was  expecting  [ZA],  the
    appellant.  [Sa] was not  in  good  health.  She  was  finding  matters
    difficult to cope having two small children.  She  was  suffering  from
    severe postnatal depression and was refusing to  have  anything  to  do
    with the  appellant  when  she  was  born.   Indeed  her  parents  were
    considering giving her away to another.

10.  A decision was made as between the sponsor and her  husband  that  they
    would take responsibility for the appellant and that was agreed by  all
    parties. Since [Ar] was due to return to UK he  appointed  a  neighbour
    [N] to look after [ZA] until he had time to return to Pakistan for her.

11.  Thereafter  contact  was  made  with  the  Kent  County  Council  about
    adopting [ZA] officially.  [Ar] returned to  Pakistan  at  the  end  of
    October and remained until the  middle  of  December  to  be  with  the
    appellant.  The sponsor and her husband were granted a  certificate  of
    suitability as adoptive parents and both travelled to  Pakistan.   They
    instructed a local family lawyer to obtain the guardian certificate  in
    respect of her.

12.  Since the application for entry clearance was refused it has fallen  to
    [N] to continue to  look  after  the  appellant,  the  sponsor  husband
    spending as much time as they can in Pakistan with the appellant.   The
    sponsor speaks as to her personal circumstances and  why  it  would  be
    difficult for her to return to Pakistan on a more permanent basis to be
    with the appellant.  The nanny has only been appointed on  a  temporary
    basis.

13.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge first considered the  matter  under  Rule
    316A.  The Tribunal sets out the general facts giving rise to the claim
    and the submissions which are made in connection with it is set out  in
    paragraph 10 of  the  determination.   The  Judge  was  not  satisfied,
    however, that the appellant's biological parents were  unable  to  look
    after her because of her mother's severe postnatal depression and  lack
    of acceptance of the appellant.  The Judge did  not  find  it  credible
    that the parties were able to make a reasoned decision of the magnitude
    as now relied upon on the observation of just three days  behaviour  of
    the  appellant's  mother  and  in  the  absence  of  any   medical   or
    professional advice.  There was little  evidence  of  severe  postnatal
    depression, certainly no medical evidence  beyond  October  2012.   The
    evidence was noted from [N] who was the nurse employed  to  look  after
    the appellant who lives next door in fact to the appellant's biological
    parents that they saw one another on a regular basis.  The Judge  found
    that the timescale was more based  on  a  decision  of  preferred  male
    gender.  The Judge therefore found that there was no evidence that  the
    parents were unable to look after the appellant but  rather  that  they
    wished to transfer parental responsibility was based on the desire  for
    male children.  The Judge found no evidence that [N] was not capable of
    looking after the appellant.  Whilst Ms Revill accepts that  though  it
    was open to the Judge to have come to those conclusions on the facts as
    presented, it was fundamentally unfair of the Judge to have made  those
    conclusions without alerting herself or her  clients  to  the  concerns
    that the Judge had about the evidence.  This was particularly important
    because there had been no overt challenge to what had been said in  the
    statement and indeed no overt challenge in the refusal  letter  on  the
    issue of credibility.  If the Judge had  indicated  the  concerns  then
    those could have been addressed not only by  submissions  but  also  by
    further evidence given that the  sponsor  and  her  husband  were  both
    present and could speak directly on the issue.

14.  I was invited to find that justice should not only be done  but  should
    be seen to be done and that fundamentally the objection that is made to
    the determination is  that  it  lacks  fairness  within  the  terms  as
    considered by Mr Justice McCloskey in Nwaigwe  (adjournment:  fairness)
    [2014] UKUT 418 (IAC) as reflecting indeed the decision in the Court of
    Appeal in SH (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 1284.

15.  It is a subsidiary challenge to the  interpretation  of  the  Judge  to
    that particular section in relation to the part played  by  the  nurse.
    It is said that on a proper construction of the  Rule  that  is  not  a
    relevant consideration.  Challenge is also made to the  approach  taken
    by the Judge to paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules,  in  particular
    whether there are serious and compelling family or other considerations
    which make  exclusion  of  the  child  undesirable  and  that  suitable
    arrangements have been made for her care.

16.  As has been made clear in the statement, the sponsor  and  her  husband
    have obtained the necessary certificate of approval  for  the  adoption
    through  the  social  services  and   have   obtained   the   necessary
    guardianship order through the Pakistani courts.  It is contended  that
    there has been a genuine transfer of parental responsibility  and  that
    there are compelling circumstances why  the  appellant  should  now  be
    permitted to return to the UK with her adoptive parents.

17.  That issue has been but briefly considered by the  Judge  at  paragraph
    16 of the determination.  That the appellant is being looked after by a
    neighbour is perhaps to beg the very fundamental question at  issue  in
    this case as to whether there has been a genuine transfer  of  parental
    responsibility and if so why it would not be a responsibility exercised
    by the sponsor husband in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  fact  that  the
    appellant maintains some contact with her natural parents is not  fatal
    to the issue of settlement as was determined in the case of VB v  Entry
    Clearance Officer - Ghana  [2002]  UKIAT  1323,  more  particularly  at
    paragraphs 14 and 15 thereof.  Little recognition it is said was  given
    by the Judge to the fact that the living conditions with the nurse  was
    but a temporary arrangement leaving aside the issue as to why there was
    a transfer of parental responsibility has not been adjudicated one  way
    or the other whether  that  transfer  is  a  genuine  one  in  all  the
    circumstances.  If it is then the question arises as to why  it  should
    not be implemented in the interests of all concerned.

18.  I am concerned that the approach taken by the Judge  to  paragraph  297
    in its entirety when related to the  factual  matrix  as  presented  is
    inadequate and in places unclear as to the  primary  findings  of  fact
    that have been made or accepted.

19.  The absence of a Presenting Officer created practical difficulties  for
    a  Judge  under  the  Surendran  guidelines.   It  is  not  appropriate
    generally for a Judge to question, or  to  challenge  evidence  in  the
    absence of any challenge being  made.   However  in  this  case  it  is
    apparent that the Judge not only did not accept evidence that was given
    but found it to lack credibility as well as accuracy.  It does seem  to
    me that as a matter of fairness  the  sponsor  and  her  representative
    should have been given notice of the concerns in order that they  could
    be addressed.  Further I do not consider that paragraph  297  has  been
    adequately and properly dealt with in the light of the evidence it  was
    presented.

20.  In many  ways  the  issue  of  Article  8  stands  or  falls  upon  the
    determination of the Immigration Rules.

21.  In all the circumstances I find that the determination as  a  whole  is
    tainted both by  unfairness  and  also  above  error  of  law.   It  is
    important to evaluate properly the factual matrix.

22.  In those circumstances I set aside the decision and direct a  rehearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal on all issues.  I indicate that that  is
    the appropriate forum having regard to the relevant Practice Directions
    given the necessity for further evidence to be given  and  for  factual
    analysis to be made.  Any such directions as shall be necessary for the
    furtherance of the hearing will be  as  determined  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed. The decision shall be set aside to be remade  upon  a
de novo hearing, focussed particularly upon Paragraph 297 but not  excluding
other considerations.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                                  Date 14th June 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

