
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
OA/15471/2014



                                                OA/15479/2014

                                                OA/15485/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 2 August 2017                   |On 24 August 2017                  |
|                                   |                                   |


                                   Before



                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE-PRESIDENT
                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL DEANS


                                   Between


                             MISS CHARITY SMITH
                             MASTER ALBERT SMITH
                         MASTER FRANCIS SCOTT SMITH
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and



                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ACCRA

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr H Ndbuisi, Drummond Miller LLP, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. These are appeals against a decision by Judge of the First-tier
      Tribunal Boyd dismissing appeals against refusal of entry clearance as
      children of a parent settled in the UK.




   2. The appellants are siblings and nationals of Ghana.  The oldest is now
      over 18 years of age but was under 18 at the time the applications
      were made.  The applications were refused because the Entry Clearance
      Officer (ECO) was not satisfied that their father, who is settled in
      the UK, had sole responsibility for their upbringing and that
      maintenance and accommodation was available without recourse to public
      funds.  It seems that there was also a question over the relationship
      between the children and their father though this was resolved to the
      respondent's satisfaction before the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal
      was heard.




   3. The appellant's father in his evidence before the First-tier Tribunal
      said that he last saw the children in 2007.  The children were
      abandoned by their mother around that time when their parents'
      marriage broke down.  Since then the children have lived with their
      maternal grandparents.  Their father said in his evidence that he
      sends money for the children.  He claims he cannot return to Ghana
      because of a family feud, seemingly arising from a property dispute.




   4. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal was not satisfied that the
      appellants' father had sole responsibility for them.  The judge found
      that the children's maternal grandparents made all the day-to-day
      decisions in respect of them.  The judge acknowledged that sole
      responsibility could be exercised from a distance but was not
      satisfied on the evidence that the father was doing this.




   5. The judge further considered whether there were serious and compelling
      considerations which made the exclusion of the appellants undesirable
      and suitable arrangements had been made for their care.  The judge
      observed that the relationship between the children and their
      grandfather might not be ideal but there was insufficient evidence to
      show that the test of serious and compelling considerations was
      satisfied.  On the issue of suitable arrangements, the judge accepted
      there was adequate accommodation.  Both the appellants' father and his
      partner were in employment.  The requirement for suitable arrangements
      was therefore satisfied.




   6. Permission to appeal was granted by the Upper Tribunal primarily on
      the basis of a 9 month delay between the hearing before the First-tier
      Tribunal and promulgation of the decision.  On the face of it this
      raised some doubt about the accuracy of the judge's analysis.  Other
      grounds were also found to be arguable.  These included contentions
      that the judge had made no finding in respect of the evidence given by
      the appellants' father's partner and no finding on the father's oral
      evidence about the condition of the appellants.




   7. A rule 24 notice by the respondent contended that the judge had taken
      into account all the oral evidence and made findings supported by
      adequate reasons.




   8. At the hearing before us Mr Ndbuisi, for the appellants, submitted
      that the judge had not had proper regard to the evidence of the
      appellants' father and his partner.  The concept of sole
      responsibility did not exclude the delegation of care by a parent to
      someone else.  Care of the appellants had been delegated by their
      father, who provided the appellants with their main source of income
      and made decisions about their upbringing.  The appellants' mother had
      abdicated responsibility and their father had sole responsibility for
      them.  He had entrusted day-to-day care to the children's
      grandparents.




   9. For the respondent, Mr Diwnycz relied upon the rule 24 notice.




  10. We are, of course, greatly concerned by the delay in promulgation of
      the decision of the First-tier Judge.  Although the cause of this was
      not known to the parties we understand that the judge was affected by
      serious health issues.  Under these circumstances this may mean that
      the decision was not done as it should have been.




  11. We consider that the judge did not make adequate findings on the
      question of sole responsibility.  Such findings were necessary for
      consideration of the issues in accordance with TD (Yemen) [2006] UKAIT
      00049.  If the children's mother was not involved in the care of the
      children, their father might have sole responsibility for them,
      notwithstanding that he had entrusted day-to-day care to their
      maternal grandparents.  The judge did not state clearly whether he
      accepted the evidence given at the hearing by the appellants' father
      and his partner.  Little if any evidence is recorded in the decision
      about the responsibility for making decisions about the appellants'
      upbringing and welfare.




  12. We are satisfied the judge erred in law by omitting to address the
      relevant issues in accordance with TD (Yemen).  We do not consider the
      evidence recorded and the findings made are adequate for us to re-make
      the decision and accordingly the appeals will be remitted to the First-
      Tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing before a different judge with no
      findings by Judge Boyd preserved.




  13. For the appellants to succeed at the fresh hearing they will need to
      show sole responsibility in accordance with TD (Yemen).  This may
      require their father and his partner giving oral evidence once more.

Conclusions

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making
of an error on a point of law.

We set aside the decision and remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal
to be heard afresh before a different judge with no findings preserved.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction.  We have not
been asked to make such an order and see no reason of substance for doing
so.









Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Deans
       23 August 2017















