
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/15383/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On 12 November 2014                      |On 14 November 2014       |
|                                         |                          |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                           Mr ABDULLAH SALAD AHMED
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Hirst, Counsel (instructed by Wilson Solicitors
LLP)
For the Respondent:    Ms S Sreeraman, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   Introduction


   1. The Appellant appealed with permission granted by First-tier Tribunal
        Judge TRP Hollingworth on 1 October 2014 against  the  determination
        of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Davey   who   had   dismissed   the
        Respondent's appeal in a determination promulgated on 5 August 2014.




   2. The Appellant is a national of Somalia, resident in Kenya, born on  2
        February 1981.  He had applied to enter the United  Kingdom  as  the
        spouse of a person with refugee status in the United  Kingdom.   His
        application had been refused under paragraphs 320(3) and 352A of the
        Immigration Rules.  The Entry Clearance  Officer,  Nairobi  had  not
        been satisfied as to the Appellant's identity.  That was the central
        issue in the appeal.  The judge found that the Appellant had  failed
        to establish his identity on the balance of probabilities.


   3. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted because it was
        considered  arguable  that  the  judge,  having  intimated  at   the
        conclusion of the hearing on 16 June 2014 that he  would  allow  the
        appeal, had not in the event done  so  when  his  determination  was
        promulgated.


   4. Standard directions were made, providing that  the  appeal  would  be
        reheard immediately in the  Upper  Tribunal  in  the  event  that  a
        material error of law were found.


   5. The Respondent filed a rule 24 notice indicating that the appeal  was
        opposed.  The Appellant filed a bundle of documents  which  included
        witness statements from the counsel who had appeared at the hearing,
        his instructing solicitor and the sponsor.


   Submissions - error of law


   6. Ms Hirst for the Appellant relied on the application  for  permission
        to appeal and grant of permission  to  appeal.   There  had  been  a
        breach of procedural fairness.  The judge should have indicated that
        he had changed his mind about the appeal and given the  parties  the
        opportunity to address him: R (Bashir) v Special Adjudicator  [2002]
        Immigration AR 1 and SK  (Sri  Lanka)  [2008]  EWCA  Civ  495.   The
        hearing would have appeared unfair to a fair-minded observer.  Great
        distress had been  caused  to  the  Appellant  and  sponsor  as  the
        supporting witness statements showed.


   7. The tribunal indicated that neither the determination nor the judge's
        record of proceedings suggested any intention to allow  the  appeal.
        A  copy  of  the  record  of   proceedings   was   given   to   both
        representatives and time was allowed for it to be read.  The judge's
        comments on the record of proceedings  had  not  been  sought.   The
        tribunal declined to seek them  at  this  late  stage,  particularly
        because they were immaterial.  Clearly the parties  were  under  the
        impression that the judge had said something which made them  expect
        that he would allow the appeal.   Ms  Sreeraman  produced  the  Home
        Office Presenting Officer's note from the hearing which was  to  the
        same effect.   Thus the judge's own views could take the  matter  no
        further.


   8. Ms Sreeraman for the Respondent submitted  that  there  had  been  no
        procedural error leading to unfairness.  The judge's indication  had
        not been binding.


   9. Ms Hirst submitted in any event that the determination was flawed and
        inadequately reasoned.  The judge's findings were perverse  in  that
        he had gone out of his way to reject evidence which he had  accepted
        at the hearing.  The reason why there had been no statement from the
        husband, i.e., the Appellant, had been provided to the  judge.   The
        judge had not sufficiently explained why he rejected  the  sponsor's
        evidence.  The conclusions he had reached were not reasonable.   Nor
        was  it  fair  that  the  United  Kingdom  had  not  recognised  its
        obligation to facilitate the resettlement of families  of  refugees.
        The delay in the decision making process was unfair in itself.


   No material error of law finding


   10.      The tribunal stated at the conclusion of  submissions  that  it
        found that there was no material  error  of  law  and  reserved  its
        determination which now follows.


   11.      The evidence before the tribunal plainly shows  that,  somehow,
        Judge Davey created the impression at  the  end  of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal hearing that he would be allowing  the  appeal.   The  Home
        Office Presenting Officer's typed note dated 16  June  2014  records
        that the judge had said that the appeal  "will  be  allowed",  which
        indicates a future  intention.  The  Appellant's  counsel's  witness
        statement dated 28 August 2014 is to the  same  effect:  "During  my
        submissions the judge used words to the effect that although it  was
        a finely balanced case, he was going to allow the appeal."  That  is
        obviously different from a direct statement by the  judge  that  the
        appeal was allowed then and there.


   12.      The record of proceedings made by the judge,  however,  has  no
        note to any  such  effect.   The  note  merely  indicates  that  his
        determination was reserved.  The record of proceedings shows a fully
        contested hearing.  While no doubt individual practice may vary,  in
        the tribunal's experience  the  usual  practice  in  the  First-tier
        Tribunal is to note on the record of proceedings that an appeal  has
        been allowed if a judge has decided he or she is able to  make  that
        commitment.  It is also significant, in the  tribunal's  view,  that
        the determination states that it was prepared within two days of the
        hearing, when it is reasonable to expect that the judge had a  clear
        recollection of any commitment about the outcome of the appeal which
        he had made, and would also have been aware  of  whether  he  needed
        further assistance from the parties for any  reason.   The  approved
        determination was signed just over a month after the hearing.


   13.      As was  accepted  by  both  advocates,  under  the  Asylum  and
        Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005  (as  amended)  which
        applied to the appeal, the promulgation of the determination was the
        point at which the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  became  binding:
        see SK  (Sri  Lanka)  (above)  at  [21].   Moreover,  there  was  no
        suggestion  that  Judge  Davey  had  intended  to   give   an   oral
        determination at the end of  the  hearing.   On  the  contrary,  his
        record of proceedings states that his determination was reserved.


   14.      By way of contrast, under The  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
        Tribunal)(Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014  SI  2604,  in
        force from 20 October 2014, oral decisions can be  given  by  First-
        tier Tribunal judges and any such decision be effective at the point
        of pronouncement.


   15.      The result in the tribunal's view is  unfortunate  and  perhaps
        even embarrassing, but it does  not  amount  on  the  facts  of  the
        present appeal to procedural error leading to unfairness, let  alone
        actual injustice to the Appellant and his sponsor.  The result was a
        disappointment for the parties whose hopes  had  been  inadvertently
        raised.   The Respondent had refused to concede  the  appeal,  which
        was contested.  The Appellant had not sought an adjournment for  any
        reason, and the judge's  ultimate  conclusions  were  based  on  the
        evidence which had been submitted.  Even if the  judge  changed  his
        mind over "a finely balanced case"  (and,  as  already  stated,  the
        tribunal accepts that the  judge  created  the  impression  that  he
        intended to allow the  appeal),  his  remarks  suggesting  that  the
        appeal would be allowed were  made  at  the  end  of  the  contested
        hearing.   He had not cut short evidence or submissions  because  he
        had already reached a decision, at least at the time of the hearing.


   16.      The hearing itself had been fairly  conducted.   There  was  no
        allegation to the contrary in the grounds of onwards  appeal  or  in
        any of the witness statements.  At  [5]  of  his  determination  the
        judge records that he raised the matter of the absence  of  evidence
        from the Appellant during  that  hearing  and  had  not  received  a
        satisfactory response.  The  judge  was  not  bound  to  accept  the
        explanation offered on the Appellant's behalf.


   17.      In the tribunal's view there is nothing in the determination to
        support the submission that the judge went out of his way to  reject
        the Appellant's evidence.  Rather there was a  careful  and  neutral
        evaluation of the evidence, against the country background  accepted
        by the Entry Clearance Officer that obtaining  documentary  evidence
        from Somalia could  be  difficult.   The  judge  described  that  as
        "perhaps   unsurprising",   signalling   his   awareness   of    the
        circumstances.  But at [3] of his determination he drew attention to
        the absence of evidence from Kenya.  The judge explained why he  was
        unable  to  give  weight  to  such  evidence  as  was  produced,  in
        particular that of a witness who admitted that she had not seen  the
        Appellant prior to or in the course of a wedding ceremony  in  2007,
        some seven years ago.


   18.      The judge's description of the sponsor's evidence as "clear and
        unequivocal" did not  amount  to  acceptance  that  the  Appellant's
        identity as her husband had been proved to  the  required  standard,
        either by her evidence or other means. He noted that  the  sponsor's
        evidence had not been supported  by  equivalent  evidence  from  the
        Appellant, although it was asserted that the sponsor was in  regular
        contact with him. At [19], the judge left open the possibility  that
        further evidence might be obtained which would resolve the  identity
        issue in the Appellant's favour, which  would  obviously  be  for  a
        future entry clearance  application.   That  surely  underlines  the
        judge's open minded approach to the appeal.  So far as the  tribunal
        understands, that suggestion has since  been  adopted  in  that  the
        Appellant now has a Somali passport, issued on 20 August 2014.


   19.      The obligation of  the  United  Kingdom  to  facilitate  family
        reunion for refugees is met by the  provisions  of  paragraphs  352A
        onwards of the Immigration Rules.  The delay in  the  processing  of
        entry  clearance  applications  is  ultimately  a  matter  for   the
        government.  The First-tier  Tribunal  has  no  general  supervisory
        powers.


   20.      The tribunal finds that the judge's findings and decision  were
        open  to  him.   There  was  no  material  error  of  law   in   the
        determination and there is no basis for interfering with the judge's
        decision.


   DECISION


      The making of the previous decision did not involve the making of  an
        error on a point of law and stands unchanged




   Signed                                    Dated


   Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell       12 November 2014
