
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/15055/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 September 2016                          |On 11 October 2016            |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                FAHIMA BEGUM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, a Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M K Hasan, Counsel, instructed by KC Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Entry Clearance Officer against a decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge S Iqbal who, in a  determination  promulgated
    on 23 March 2016 allowed the appellant's appeal.

 2. The appellant before the First-tier Tribunal  Miss  Iqbal  (hereinafter
    "the claimant") is a Bangladeshi national born on  6  June  1988.   She
    applied for entry clearance as  the  partner  of  Mr  Ahmed  Ali  under
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules  HC  395.    The  Entry  Clearance
    Officer refused the claimant's application for entry  clearance  on  16
    October 2014.  The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  having  noted  that  the
    claimant was not exempt from the  English  language  requirement  under
    paragraph E-ECP4.2 and that she  was  not  a  national  of  a  majority
    English speaking country, set out that the  claimant  was  required  to
    produce evidence that she met the English language requirements.

 3. The claimant had submitted an ETS  TOEIC  certificate  as  evidence  of
    meeting the English language requirement.  The Entry Clearance  Officer
    refused  the  application  because  the  appellant  had  not  submitted
    evidence of a qualification from a recognised provider as required, ETS
    was not on the list of approved providers.

 4. The claimant appealed against the Entry Clearance Officer's decision to
    the First-tier Tribunal.

The Appeal before the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The First-tier Tribunal found that  the  appellant's  test  certificate
    dated 28 August 2014 was valid.  The judge  also  considered  that  the
    review officer was likely on balance to have made a different  decision
    had the evidence of a later language certificate been submitted to  the
    Entry Clearance Manager.  The judge found that the matter ought  to  be
    sent back to the Entry Clearance Officer in order for  the  officer  to
    reconsider the evidence, in particular, that as the claimant  had  held
    an ETS certificate up until 22 October 2014 the Entry Clearance Officer
    ought to have interviewed her in in accordance with their own published
    guidance.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. On behalf of the Entry Clearance Officer the Secretary of State applied
    for permission to appeal against the First-tier  Tribunal  decision  to
    the Upper Tribunal.  On 22 August 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge Landes
    granted the Entry Clearance Officer permission to appeal.

Summary of Submissions

 7. The grounds of appeal set out that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was
    wrong in law to find that the simple statement found on the  government
    website  amounted  to  a  policy  which  gave  rise  to  a   legitimate
    expectation.  Further, it is asserted that the judge was wrong  in  law
    to place any reliance on that statement given that  it  post-dated  the
    refusal decision and was not a  matter  appertaining  to  the  date  of
    decision. It is further asserted that the judge was wrong to find  that
    the ETS language certificate the claimant  held  was  on  the  approved
    register of providers when the appellant applied for entry clearance on
    7 October 2014.

 8. In oral submissions Mr Tufan submitted that the issue was  whether  the
    appellant had the relevant qualification at the date  of  the  decision
    and that it was clear that she did not.

 9. With regard to the  Tribunal's  finding  that  the  subsequent  English
    language certificate of 28 August 2014 which by mistake was sent to the
    Tribunal but not to Entry Clearance Manager was in error.  He submitted
    that this qualification post-dated the decision and could not therefore
    be relevant to the appeal.  He submitted  that  the  appeal  could  not
    succeed.

10. Mr Hasan indicated that, in his view, this was an unfortunate case.  He
    acknowledged that the important document was HC 198 of  10  June  2014.
    He accepted that the documents the judge considered did not  amount  to
    Immigration Rules or guidance and therefore he accepted that the  judge
    was wrong to find that the Entry Clearance Officer ought to have  taken
    that into consideration.

11. When pressed, Mr Hasan conceded that in light of the correct  documents
    the First-tier Tribunal's decision did contain a material error of law.



Discussion

12. I have considered the Statement of Changes HC 198 of 10 June 2014. This
    document makes clear that ETS was not an approved provider  of  English
    language testing services at the  time  that  the  appellant  made  her
    application in August 2014.  The statement that the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge relies on is not the Secretary of State's guidance. It appears to
    be a release of information about whether  or  not  evidence  has  been
    found  of  systematic  cheating  at  providers  other  than   ETS   and
    information about what happened in the past rather than being  designed
    to inform applicants that from that date ETS tests would no  longer  be
    accepted and neither does it imply that ETS  tests  had  been  accepted
    until 22 October 2014 subject to the applicant undergoing an interview.



13. It is clear that one of the reasons that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    allowed the appeal was that the Entry Clearance Manager would have been
    likely to have made a different decision, that is  not  supporting  the
    original refusal, had he  or  she  seen  the  results  of  the  English
    language test certificate submitted by  the  claimant  in  March  2015.
    Whilst the Entry Clearance Manager might have  exercised  a  discretion
    differently, the matter under appeal was  the  decision  taken  by  the
    Entry Clearance Officer.  The later English language  test  certificate
    was not a matter which illuminated  the  decision  made  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer at the date of the decision.

14. At the date of the decision ETS was no longer a provider  that  was  on
    the Secretary of State's list of approved providers.  The claimant  did
    not therefore  provide  a  valid  certificate  and  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules at the date of  her  application.
    The fact that she  has  subsequently  obtained  a  certificate  from  a
    provider that may be  on  the  approved  list  is  not  relevant.   The
    relevant date in appeals such as this is  the  date  of  the  decision.
    Therefore, there  was  a  material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision and I set that decision aside.



 Remaking the Decision

15.  For  the  reasons  given  above  the  claimant  did  not  satisfy  the
    Immigration Rules at  the  time  of  her  application.  Her  ETS  TOEIC
    certificate was not valid as evidence of meeting the  English  Language
    requirements because ETS was not an approved provider at that date. The
    claimant's appeal against the entry  clearance  officer's  decision  is
    dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The claimant's appeal against the decision of the  entry  clearance  officer
is dismissed. The decision of the entry clearance officer stands

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   P M Ramshaw                         Date 11 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

