











UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/15937/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated         |
|On: 14 June 2016                  |on 01 July 2016                          |
|                                  |                                         |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between

                                    [J C]
                         no anonymity direction made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           entry clearance officer

                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr H Kannangara, counsel (instructed by Law Direct
Immigration      Advisors)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Nigeria, born on [ ] 2000.


   2. On 19 April 2016 the Upper Tribunal set  aside  the  decision  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal Judge who dismissed the appellant's appeal against
      the respondent's refusal of his application for entry clearance to the
      UK pursuant to paragraph 301 of the Immigration Rules. The  First-tier
      Judge had overlooked various documents including letters  relating  to
      his mother's (sponsor's) communications with, and  her  attendance  at
      his school in Nigeria.


Remaking the decision


   3. For this appeal to succeed, I must be  satisfied  on  the  balance  of
      probabilities, the burden being on the appellant,  that  he  satisfies
      the relevant requirements  under  paragraph  301  of  the  Immigration
      Rules. The single live issue is whether the appellant's mother has had
      sole responsibility for the appellant's upbringing.


   4. I have had regard to the bundles of evidence produced by the appellant
      and the     sponsor.


      The appellant's case


   5. The appellant's mother, [MF] of [  ],  Thornton  Heath,  attended  the
      hearing and gave evidence. She adopted the contents of a joint witness
      statement made with her husband, [GE], in support of his appeal.


   6. [MF] is the biological mother of the appellant who was  born  on  [  ]
      2000. His biological father's name is [GC]. She  was  not  married  to
      him, but had a relationship with him.  When  he  heard  that  she  was
      pregnant, he ended the relationship. She did not have any contact with
      him after that and she does not know his whereabouts.


   7. She gave birth to the appellant at home. She only registered his birth
      in August 2001. A DNA report showed that she is his mother.


   8. The appellant has never seen his biological  father.  Whilst  she  was
      still living in Nigeria, [MF] brought him up without the benefit of  a
      father. She was living with her mother and grandmother.


   9. After she left Nigeria in 2003, her mother moved closer to her  sister
      so it would be easier for her to look after the appellant.


  10. [MF] could not travel back  to  Nigeria  on  account  of  'immigration
      issues'. She claims that she still maintained full responsibility  for
      her son. Her mother consulted  her  regarding  decisions  to  be  made
      concerning the appellant, including his schooling and his health.  She
      has also been financially supporting him  by  sending  money,  as  her
      mother did not have a regular income to meet his expenses.


  11. There was limited documentary proof of money transfers for the  period
      August 2013 to July 2015 which was produced in the bundle  before  the
      First-tier Tribunal.


  12. The appellant is living with her mother in the same household/compound
      as her sister. Her mother is now elderly and cannot  look  after  him.
      Accordingly, her sister, [JU], looks after  him.  Her  sister  attends
      school meetings for the appellant "... on my advice and request as  my
      mother cannot attend to those events". She referred to a school letter
      confirming that arrangement.


  13. She and her husband have made important decisions in her  son's  life.
      It is she  who  made  the  decision  about  his  primary  school.  She
      instructed her mother to send him to the school that he attended.


  14. When he reached the age of attending secondary school it was  she  who
      made the decision to send him there. She asked her sister to recommend
      a few schools and after checking their  reputation  she  selected  the
      secondary school which the appellant subsequently attended  for  three
      years. After that, he has attended a science specialist school. It was
      her decision to send him there.


  15. They pay his expenses and school fees. She sends  money  regularly  to
      her sister for his expenses.


  16. [MF] stated that she visited her son in Nigeria during March 2013  and
      spent nearly three weeks  there.  Her  visits  are  reflected  in  her
      passport.


  17. Her mother is not now physically fit to cook food; she used to prepare
      her son's meals when she was able to do so. It is  mainly  her  sister
      who currently prepares food for everyone.


  18. [MF] said during her oral evidence that she visited the  appellant  in
      2015 but has not 'gone' in 2016.


  19. She was referred to the supplementary bundle at B. At page 4, there is
      a letter from the Principal  of  [  ]  College,  dated  24  May  2016,
      certifying that the appellant sat a recent Senior  School  Certificate
      examination. This  was  conducted  by  the  West  African  Examination
      Council. She explained that she wanted him to have  extra  classes  at
      that college. He accordingly needed to  write  his  exams  there.  She
      spoke to the headmaster herself, after which her son  took  his  exams
      there.


  20. She said that the appellant is  still  staying  with  her  sister  and
      mother, who is not well.


  21. In cross-examination she was referred to a  letter  at  B1,  from  the
      Principal of the [ ] Science School dated 17 May 2016. That  "attests"
      that the appellant was a student at that school, having been  admitted
      there in the 2013/14 academic session.  He  was  promoted  to  'Senior
      Secondary  three  (SS3)'  on  14  September  2015.  He   has   written
      examinations. However, he left the school to  register  for  the  West
      African Senior School Certificate Examination elsewhere.


  22. He goes on to state that  the  appellant's  mother  has  always  shown
      concern by calling the school regularly to know about his welfare  and
      conduct there. She has also physically visited the school.


  23. [MF] said that her son started at the [ ] Science School in  2013.  He
      did his pre-exam (mocks) there. She wanted him to take the exam at the
      [ ] College.


  24. She said that  she attended that school on two occasions, in 2013  and
      2015. She also spoke to the principal over the phone.  The  last  time
      she called him was a few weeks ago.


  25. She said that she told her sister that she  wanted  him  to  do  extra
      tuition. She then recommended the school. It was she, [MF],  who  then
      spoke to the headmaster, who was situated in the River State.


  26. There was no re-examination.


  27. I have also had regard to the other documentation, including  a  joint
      letter in the respondent's bundle dated 15 July 2014 from two  of  his
      class teachers at the [ ] Science School. In that joint  letter,  they
      "confirmed" that the sponsor and her husband are  known  to  them  "as
      they do communicate with the school to find out [JC]'s welfare and the
      update on [JC]'s studying." They know the appellant's  mother  as  [M]
      and his stepfather as [G], "who also thanks us too."


  28. I have also had regard to further evidence of transfers of  monies  by
      the sponsor, including payments referred to at B5-7.


  29. I have also had regard to  details  of  calls  made  using  Lycamobile
      telephone cards between May and October 2015. There are numerous calls
      made for that period set out at pages 10-60 of the bundle.


      Submissions


  30. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Walker submitted that  it  is  evident
      that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in not  taking  into  account
      all the evidence available. This included the letters  dated  15  July
      2012 and the letter dated in August 2015.


  31. He accepted that  there  has  been  further  evidence  that  has  been
      produced. The appellant's  mother  has  maintained  contact  with  the
      schools continuously. She has  found  a  new  school  where  he  would
      further his education. She also found a school on the  internet  where
      he could take his latest examinations.


  32. Mr Walker also accepted that [MF] she had shown a  continued  interest
      in his wellbeing. That he conceded went strongly towards the fact that
      she had been solely responsible for his upbringing.


  33. Mr Walker invited the Tribunal to make a decision accordingly.


  34.  On  behalf  of  the  appellant,  Mr  Kannagara  submitted  that   the
      appellant's mother had been a  credible  witness.  She  has  explained
      everything including why she wanted him to attend an exam conducted by
      the West African Examination Council.


  35. He submitted that all 'relevant decisions' were made by  the  sponsor.
      She went to Nigeria to see the appellant when she could. She has  been
      to the school. He referred to the letter in  the  respondent's  bundle
      dated 15 July 2014.


  36. In submitting that [MF] has had sole responsibility, he noted that  it
      was she who has effectively brought up  the  appellant.  Although  she
      left him with her mother, it has been she who 'overall' has maintained
      sole responsibility for the appellant's upbringing.


      Assessment


  37. The meaning of "sole responsibility" has given rise to a body of  case
      law, including decisions from the Court of Appeal.  In  TD  (paragraph
      297(i)(e)): "Sole Responsibility"  (Yemen)  [2006]  UKAIT  00049,  the
      Tribunal examined in considerable detail the case law relating to  the
      notion   of   "sole   responsibility".   It   concluded   that   "sole
      responsibility" is a  factual  matter  to  be  decided  upon  all  the
      evidence.


  38. Where one parent is not involved in the child's upbringing because  he
      or she had abandoned or abdicated responsibility, the issue may  arise
      between the remaining parent and others who have  day-to-day  care  of
      the child abroad.


  39. The test is whether the parent has continuing  control  and  direction
      over the  child's  upbringing,  including  making  all  the  important
      decisions in  the  child's  life.  However,  where  both  parents  are
      involved in a child's upbringing, it would be exceptional that one  of
      them will have "sole responsibility".


  40. The Tribunal noted  at  [30]  that  the  Court  of  Appeal  saw  "sole
      responsibility" as  a  practical  rather  than  an  exclusively  legal
      exercise of  "control"  by  the  UK  based  parent  over  the  child's
      upbringing and whether what is done by the carer is  done  "under  the
      direction" of their parent.


  41. At [46] of the determination  the  Tribunal  held  that  in  order  to
      conclude that the UK based parent had "sole  responsibility"  for  the
      child, it would be necessary  to  show  that  the  parent  abroad  had
      abdicated any responsibility for the child and was  merely  acting  at
      the direction of  the  UK  based  parent  who  was  otherwise  totally
      uninvolved in a child's upbringing.


  42. Decisions from the Court of Appeal make it clear that  the  touchstone
      of "sole responsibility" is the continuing control  and  direction  by
      the parent in the UK in respect of "the important decisions" about the
      child's upbringing. If the UK  based  parent  has  allowed  the  carer
      abroad to make some important decisions  in  the  child's  upbringing,
      then it may readily be said that the responsibility for the child  has
      become "shared" - [50].


  43. The Tribunal set out at [52] the proper approach to questions of  sole
      responsibility under the relevant rule. It emphasised  that  the  term
      "responsibility" in the Immigration Rules should not be understood  as
      a theoretical or legal obligation,  but  rather  as  a  practical  one
      which,  in  each  case,  looked  to  who   in   fact   is   exercising
      responsibility for the child. That responsibility may have been for  a
      short duration in that the present arrangements may have  begun  quite
      recently. Wherever the parents are, if both parents  are  involved  in
      the upbringing of the child, it would be exceptional that one of  them
      would have sole responsibility.


  44. At paragraph [52(ix)] the Tribunal stated that the test is not whether
      anyone else has day to day responsibility, but whether the parent  has
      continuing control and direction of the child's upbringing,  including
      making all the important  decisions  in  the  child's  life.  If  not,
      responsibility is shared and so not "sole".


  45. I have also had regard to the Court of Appeal's judgment  in  Nmaju  v
      Entry Clearance  Officer  [2001]  INLR  26.  At  paragraph  9  of  the
      judgment, the Court concluded that while  legal  responsibility  under
      the appropriate legal system would be  a  relevant  consideration,  it
      will not be a conclusive one. One must also look at what has  actually
      been done in relation to the child's upbringing by whom and whether it
      has been done under the direction of the  parent  settled  here.  That
      paragraph has been adopted and included by the Tribunal in TD.


  46. I find that [MF] has given credible and reliable evidence. Apart  from
      her own assertions she has produced substantial  documentary  evidence
      corroborating her claims.


  47. The evidence points to the fact that it  was  the  sponsor,  sometimes
      with her husband, who has made all the important decisions relating to
      the appellant's life. It is  she  who  made  the  decision  about  his
      primary school. She instructed her mother to send  him to  the  school
      which he attended.


  48. When the appellant reached the age of attending  a  secondary  school,
      she decided to send him there. She had initially asked her  sister  to
      recommend a few schools. She then checked the reputation of the school
      and thought that it would be best for  him  to  go  to  the  secondary
      school which he attended for three years. After  that  he  joined  the
      current  school  which  he  attended  prior  to  taking   his   recent
      examinations. That was  a  science  specialist  school  to  which  she
      decided to send him as it specialises in science.


  49. It was [MF] who made the recent  decision  regarding  the  appellant's
      extra tuition to enable him to  take  the  Senior  School  Certificate
      examinations in  2016,  which  were  conducted  by  the  West  African
      Examination Council.


  50. I have referred to various letters produced both in  the  respondent's
      and the appellant's bundles from  class  teachers,  in  which  it  was
      confirmed that it was the sponsor and her husband who  were  known  to
      the school and who have communicated with the school to find out about
      the appellant's welfare.


  51. It is the sponsor who has over the years sent money regularly  to  her
      sister for the appellant's expenses as well paying his school fees.


  52. I have also had regard to the  joint  "letter  of  consent"  from  the
      appellant's aunt and uncle dated 9 June 2015 in which they state  that
      they had been responsible for the appellant's day to day  upkeep  over
      the past few years "due to his grandmother's ill health."  On  account
      of the present economic conditions of her family,  since  her  husband
      lost his job, his aunt stated that it is necessary for  the  appellant
      to live with his mother.


  53. There is also a letter dated 6 August 2015 from the  Director  of  the
      school that the appellant  attended.  The  Director  stated  that  his
      mother is always in contact with the school through telephone calls to
      know about his conduct and welfare in school. She has also  physically
      come to visit the school to ascertain his activities and  performance.
       I have also had regard to the substantial amount of  contact  between
      the appellant and his mother as evidenced  from  the  Lycamobile  call
      record history.


  54. None of this evidence has been challenged in any way.


  55. Mr Walker has very fairly accepted that the appellant's mother has had
      a  continuing interest in the appellant's upbringing. He accepted that
      this goes "strongly towards the fact of sole responsibility"  for  the
      appellant.


  56. I am satisfied on the evidence as a whole that it is  the  appellant's
      mother  (and  sponsor)  who  has  been  solely  responsible  for   the
      appellant's upbringing. It is she who has made major decisions in  his
      life  including  his  attending  school.  It  is  she  who  has  given
      directions to her relatives who are responsible for  the  day  to  day
      care of the appellant.


  57. In the circumstances, I am satisfied that the appellant has  shown  on
      the balance of probabilities that he has met the relevant requirements
      under paragraph 301 of the Immigration Rules.


  58. There is no dispute that the other requirements under  that  paragraph
      in respect of maintenance and accommodation are satisfied.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error on a point of law. Having set the decision aside, I  re-make  it
      and substitute for it a decision allowing the appellant's appeal under
      the Immigration Rules.


      No anonymity direction is made.










      Signed                                       Date  30 June 2016


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer

