
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/15640/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28th November 2016                         |On 20th December 2016         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                            miss maham haziq butt
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Solomon, Counsel instructed by Bespoke
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on  20th  July  1994.   The
    Appellant made application for family  reunion.   Her  application  was
    considered under paragraph  352D  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  was
    refused by notice of refusal dated 7th November 2014.  The basis of the
    Appellant's refusal was that the Secretary  of  State  noted  that  her
    application was submitted on 1st September 2014 and her birth  date  as
    noted in her national passport and  birth  certificate  was  20th  July
    1994.  That meant that the Appellant was 19 years and 2 months  of  age
    when the application was submitted and consequently did  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 352D(ii).

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Row sitting at Birmingham  on  14th  March  2016.   In  a
    Decision and Reasons promulgated on 21st  March  2016  the  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed on human rights grounds.

 3. The Appellant lodged Grounds of Appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.   Those
    grounds came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Gillespie on 15th  August
    2016.  Judge Gillespie noted  that  the  appeal  was  by  common  cause
    confined to an issue of protection under  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention of Human Rights.  He found that the points argued criticised
    the decision but did not disclose arguable material errors of  law  and
    refused permission.  Renewed Grounds  of  Appeal  were  lodged  on  1st
    September 2016.  On  10th  October  2016  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Reeds
    granted permission to appeal.  Judge Reeds noted that it  was  arguable
    that when the judge reached his conclusions at  paragraphs  24  and  25
    that there was no special dependency  based  on  health,  emotional  or
    financial needs that the judge did not consider  the  totality  of  the
    medical evidence.  Whilst the judge made reference to the  evidence  as
    at the date of the hearing there was arguably earlier evidence relevant
    to her mental health as set out in her medical records.  As to  whether
    she was a single, lone female it was also arguable that the  judge  had
    failed to consider the corroborative evidence that  was  available  and
    the finding that she had failed to produce such evidence was arguably a
    mistake of fact.

 4. There appears to be no Rule 24 response in this appeal  and  it  is  on
    that basis that the appeal comes before me to determine whether or  not
    there is a material error of law in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant appears by her  instructed  Counsel,  Mr
    Solomon.  The Secretary of State appears by her Home Office  Presenting
    Officer, Mr Bramble.

Submissions/Discussions

 5. Mr Bramble adopts an extremely pragmatic approach to this  matter.   He
    asks as a preliminary point that it would be of considerable assistance
    to the Secretary of State to know exactly  what  medical  evidence  was
    relied upon when the matter came before the First-tier Tribunal  Judge.
    He enquires exactly what medical evidence was available at the date  of
    decision  noting  that  there  is  a  clear   indication   given,   and
    acknowledged, by the Secretary of State within  the  Sponsor's  witness
    statement of funding and clear evidence  of  dependency.   He  is  most
    helpful in his approach in noting that the Appellant is to be construed
    as a lone female and that the judge has not engaged  with  the  witness
    statement.  It is accepted that the Appellant was on her own  and  that
    her brother had also made a similar  application  to  the  UK  and  had
    succeeded and that that appeal shows dependency.   He  is  prepared  to
    concede that all these factors were ones which were missed by the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.

 6. Mr Solomon takes me to the Grounds of Appeal that were lodged when  the
    matter came before the First-tier Tribunal.  He notes that there was  a
    substantial Appellant's bundle  before  the  Tribunal  and  that  these
    bundles contained the relevant documents relating  to  the  Appellant's
    health.  He takes me to them.  Initially he  asked  me  to  look  at  a
    report from the Neuro  Clinician,  Dr  Naeem  Mughal,  from  his  Neuro
    Clinical Office where he is  the  Consultant  Neuro  Psychiatrist.   He
    points out the references made therein  that  the  Appellant  has  been
    suffering from  depression  and  had  disturbed  sleep  and  fear.   He
    thereafter takes me to the other bundle that was submitted and  to  the
    findings that the Appellant had been on medication for depression which
    had not been of long-term benefit and it was questionable how long  she
    can remain on that medication.

 7. Mr Bramble's concern relates to the date of decision and as to  whether
    or not the correspondence set out by  the  Appellant's  representatives
    predate or postdate that  decision.   He  considers  that  this  is  an
    important feature to be made so far as any re-making of the decision is
    concerned.

The Law

 8.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account   immaterial   consideration,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

 9. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

10. I have been greatly assisted by Mr Bramble  in  this  matter.   He  has
    accepted that the judge has not  engaged  with  the  witness  statement
    provided that the Appellant is a lone female and the Secretary of State
    accepts that she is here on her own and that her brother has  succeeded
    on his appeal to the UK showing a  dependency.   Also  there  is  clear
    support and evidence given within the witness statements attached as to
    the funding that is available to support the Appellant.  This  too  has
    not been addressed.  Given these concessions,  which  I  fully  endorse
    having looked at the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  decision  and  the
    documentary evidence herein, I find that there is a material  error  of
    law and I  consequently  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.

The re-making of the Decision

11. The issue arises at this stage as to  whether  or  not  the  judge  had
    before him at the date of the First-tier  Tribunal  sufficient  medical
    evidence to consider whether or not the appeal should or should not  be
    allowed under Article 8.  I am satisfied after the submissions made and
    consideration of the documentary evidence that he  did.   The  date  of
    decision is 7th November 2014.   The  first  letter  seemingly  written
    hereinafter is dated 14th January 2015 from  Dr  Mughal.   That  letter
    sets out that the Appellant had been socially withdrawn and had a  lack
    of inability to study for some eight months prior to  her  seeing  him,
    that she had suffered  from  aggression  for  six  months,  a  lack  of
    appetite and sleep for almost four  and  a  half  months  and  suicidal
    ideation for some two weeks.  Save for  the  latter  factor  all  those
    dates predate the date of the initial medical report and that  view  is
    endorsed by the expansive response set out in the  clinical  assessment
    of Dr Butt sent out on 20th August 2015.  This remains the  issue  that
    was of concern to the Secretary of State.  I am satisfied  that  it  is
    properly addressed.

12. Consequently, bearing in mind all the above  factors,  I  am  satisfied
    that the correct approach is  to  re-make  the  decision  allowing  the
    Appellant's appeal pursuant to Article 8 of the European Convention  of
    Human Rights based solely on the issue of protection that is extant.

Decision

13. The Appellant's appeal is allowed  re-making  the  appeal  pursuant  to
    Article 8 of the European Convention of Human Rights.

14. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 20/12/2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
