
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-dp-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/15392/2014
     OA/15394/2014
     OA/15395/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 October 2016                            |On 16 December 2016           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     a m
                                     f m
                                     s m
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr Brown instructed by Crater Law Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the Entry Clearance Officer as the respondent  and  to
    the respondents as the appellants as they appeared respectively  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.  The appellants are all citizens of Yemen  and
    are siblings.  The second appellant was born in 2009 and the first  and
    third appellants are twins,  born  in  2006.   This  decision  will  be
    published so, because all three appellants are minors, I have  made  an
    anonymity direction.

 2. The Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) found that  the  appellants  did  not
    satisfy the requirements of paragraph 297 of HC 395  (as  amended),  in
    particular (v):

         Requirements for indefinite leave to enter the  United  Kingdom  as
         the child of a parent, parents or a relative present and settled or
         being admitted for settlement in the United Kingdom

         297. The requirements to be met  by  a  person  seeking  indefinite
         leave to enter the United Kingdom as the child of a parent, parents
         or a relative present and settled or being admitted for  settlement
         in the United Kingdom are that he:

         (i) is seeking leave to  enter  to  accompany  or  join  a  parent,
         parents or a relative in one of the following circumstances:

         (a) both parents are present and settled in the United Kingdom; or

         (b) both parents are  being  admitted  on  the  same  occasion  for
         settlement; or

         (c) one parent is present and settled in the United Kingdom and the
         other is being admitted on the same occasion for settlement; or

         (d) one parent is present and settled  in  the  United  Kingdom  or
         being admitted on the same occasion for settlement  and  the  other
         parent is dead; or

         (e) one parent is present and settled  in  the  United  Kingdom  or
         being admitted on the same occasion for settlement and has had sole
         responsibility for the child's upbringing; or

         (f) one parent or a relative is present and settled in  the  United
         Kingdom or being admitted on the same occasion for  settlement  and
         there are serious and compelling  family  or  other  considerations
         which  make  exclusion  of  the  child  undesirable  and   suitable
         arrangements have been made for the child's care; and

         (ii) is under the age of 18; and

         (iii) is not leading an independent life, is unmarried and is not a
         civil partner, and has not formed an independent family unit; and

         (iv) can, and will,  be  accommodated  adequately  by  the  parent,
         parents or relative the child is seeking to join  without  recourse
         to public funds in  accommodation  which  the  parent,  parents  or
         relative the child is seeking to join, own or  occupy  exclusively;
         and

         (v) can, and will, be maintained adequately by the parent, parents,
         or relative the child is  seeking  to  join,  without  recourse  to
         public funds; and

         (vi) holds a valid United Kingdom entry clearance for entry in this
         capacity; and

         (vii) does not fall for  refusal  under  the  general  grounds  for
         refusal.

 3. In addition, the application was refused under paragraph 320(xi) on the
    grounds that the appellants had used deception in their applications.

 4. The appellants appealed against the refusals to the First-tier Tribunal
    (Judge O R Williams) which, in a decision promulgated on 27 April  2016
    allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules and on  Article  8  ECHR
    grounds.  The Entry Clearance Officer now appeals, with permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 5. The refusal turned on a narrow issue:

         You have  stated  on  your  application  form  your  father  is  in
         employment as a sales assistant with Durdur Food Store.  In support
         of your application you provided wage slips, bank statements and  a
         P60.  However, checks undertaken by this office  with  HMRC  showed
         that your father ceased employment on 5/06/2014  which  is  over  a
         month before you submitted your visa application.  The  results  of
         the checks undertaken  are  detailed  in  a  Document  Verification
         Report held by this office.  I am  satisfied  that  you  have  used
         deception in your application for  entry  clearance.   I  therefore
         refuse your application under paragraphs 320(xi) of the Immigration
         Rules.

         As your sponsor is no longer in employment I am not  satisfied  you
         will be maintained adequately without recourse to public funds.   I
         therefore refuse your application under  paragraph  297(v)  of  the
         Immigration Rules.

 6. Judge Williams refers [5] to the refusal having  been  "amended/subject
    to concession".  Unfortunately, I cannot find the  respondent's  letter
    of    13    November    2015    which    supposedly    contains    this
    amendment/concession.  However, before the Upper Tribunal, Mr  Diwnycz,
    for the respondent, did  not  seek  to  persuade  me  that  refusal  on
    paragraph 320 grounds should be upheld.  He was correct not to  do  so.
    It is accepted by both parties that the  sponsor  (the  father  of  the
    appellants) was working for Durdur Food Stores both before the date  of
    application for entry clearance and following the  refusal.   He  still
    works for that store.  The confusion appears to have arisen  is  in  an
    aspect of a period of leave taken from the store by the sponsor.  There
    is a letter from the Durdur Food Store dated 6 May 2015 part  of  which
    reads as follows:

         [The sponsor] is employed from July 2013 on a  permanent  contract.
         On 3/6/14  he  asked  for  leave  to  submit  his  children's  visa
         application.  It is not our policy to  provide  unpaid  employment.
         His payslip of the 5/6/2014 was for the  month  of  May  2014.   We
         notified our accountants who removed him  the  payroll  on  31  May
         2014.  The accountant confirmed that  all  payslips  submitted  are
         authentic.  He was unsure how long it would take to  sort  out  his
         children's  visa  application.   We  agreed  with  him   that   his
         employment would resume on his return.   [The  sponsor]  would  not
         have been aware we had removed him from the payroll as we agreed it
         would be for a period of unpaid leave.

 7. The evidence which the ECO obtained from the HMRC was  correct;  HMRC's
    records show that the appellant had ceased work as from  31  May  2014.
    What appears to have happened (as is evidenced by  the  helpful  letter
    from Durdur Store) is that, when the sponsor initially asked for  leave
    to travel abroad to make the appellants'  visa  applications  on  their
    behalf, Durdur Food Store ceased his employment because (as they say in
    their letter) it was not their "policy to provide  unpaid  employment".
    Subsequently, that store appears to have reversed that policy or  chose
    not to enforce in in relation to the  sponsor  as  the  letter  plainly
    indicates.  The question for the First-tier Tribunal was to look beyond
    the prima facie inferences to be drawn from  the  evidence  (especially
    that from the HMRC) to seek to establish what the actual  position  was
    as regard the sponsor's employment.  In the light of  the  letter  from
    Durdur Food Store, I find that the Tribunal was  entitled  to  conclude
    that, notwithstanding the evidence from HMRC, the sponsor had, in fact,
    been granted  a  period  of  unpaid  leave  by  his  employers.   Since
    paragraph 297 does not impose strict documentary evidence requirements,
    it was  open  to  the  judge  to  conclude  that,  notwithstanding  the
    sponsor's period of unpaid leave, his employment at Durdur  Food  Store
    was secure and that it generated an income for the sponsor which  would
    enable the appellants to live in the United Kingdom without recourse to
    public funds.  It follows from  that  finding  that  there  can  be  no
    question that the sponsor or the appellants have attempted  to  deceive
    the Entry  Clearance  Officer;  indeed,  on  the  contrary  very  clear
    evidence has been provided by the sponsor from  his  employers  with  a
    view to establishing the true position.

 8. In the circumstances, this appeal is dismissed.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                              Date 2 November 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

