
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/15546/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 4th August 2016                       |On 9th August 2016                  |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                              Uzma Marwat KHAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISLAMABAD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No legal representation
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Mark Eldridge of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 4th November 2015.

 2. The Appellant is a female citizen of Pakistan born 10th May 1987 who on
    30th April 2014 applied for entry clearance to enable her to settle  in
    the United Kingdom with her husband Marwat Khan (the Sponsor),  who  is
    settled in the United Kingdom.

 3. That application was refused on 29th October 2014, and two reasons were
    given for refusal.  Firstly the Respondent  did  not  accept  that  the
    Sponsor had undergone a valid divorce, and therefore was not  satisfied
    that his marriage to the Appellant was valid.

 4.  Secondly  the  Respondent  was  not  satisfied  that   the   financial
    requirements of Appendix FM were satisfied as wage slips covering a six
    month period prior to the date of application had not been submitted.

 5. The Appellant appealed pursuant  to  section  82  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the  2002  Act).   Enclosed  with  the
    appeal were the Sponsor's payslips for April 2014, a copy of  a  decree
    absolute, a P60 form, and bank  statements.   The  Appellant  requested
    that her appeal be decided on the papers, and did not request  an  oral
    hearing.

 6. The appeal was reviewed by an  Entry  Clearance  Manager  who  was  not
    satisfied that a valid divorce had taken place because the Sponsor  had
    not provided the original divorce  decree.   It  was  noted  that  bank
    statements for the six month period prior to the application for  entry
    clearance had been submitted, as had payslips for April 2014, but there
    were no  payslips  for  February  and  March  2014  and  therefore  the
    specified documentary evidence required had  not  been  produced.   The
    decision to refuse entry clearance was maintained.

 7. The FTT decided the appeal on the papers as requested and was satisfied
    that the Sponsor had undergone  a  valid  divorce,  and  therefore  his
    marriage to the Appellant was valid.  The FTT did  not  however  accept
    that the financial requirements of Appendix FM were satisfied.  The FTT
    noted that the payslips must cover a period of six months prior to  the
    date of the application which was made in April 2014.  No payslips  for
    February or March 2014 had been provided and therefore the requirements
    of paragraph 2(a) of Appendix FM-SE were not satisfied.  The appeal was
    dismissed as the FTT found  that  the  financial  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules were not met, and did not consider  that  refusal  of
    entry clearance would breach Article 8 of the 1950 European  Convention
    on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention).

 8. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    In summary it was contended that the payslips for  February  and  March
    2014  had  been  submitted  with  the  initial  application  for  entry
    clearance.  It was contended that the Sponsor's  four  salary  payments
    for February 2014, and the four salary payments  for  March  2014  were
    evidenced in the bank statements that had been submitted, and  the  FTT
    had erred in law by failing to consider the bank statements.

 9. Alternatively, if  the  payslips  for  February  and  March  2014  were
    missing, it was contended that the Respondent  should  have  considered
    Appendix FM-SE D(d).  It was submitted that where documents are missing
    a decision  maker  can  grant  the  application  exceptionally  if  the
    information is verifiable from other documents submitted.  In this case
    the February and March 2014 salary payments were  verifiable  from  the
    bank statements submitted.

10. Judge Nicholson  of  the  FTT  granted  permission  to  appeal  in  the
    following terms;

         "2.  The judge accepted that the  Appellant  and  her  Sponsor  had
             entered into a valid marriage but dismissed the appeal on  the
             grounds that specified  evidence  had  not  been  sent  in  as
             required with the application.

         3.   The grounds contend, amongst  other  things,  that  the  judge
             should have found that the Respondent's decision  was  not  in
             accordance with the law because of a  failure  to  exercise  a
             discretion under Appendix FM paragraph D.

         4.   Appendix FMD(b)(ii) is widely drawn and gives the Respondent a
             discretion to request a specified document when it is  missing
             - which was arguably the case here.  Pursuant to  Appendix  FM
             D(c) there would have been  no  need  for  the  Respondent  to
             exercise that discretion if the appeal failed because  of  the
             validity of the marriage - but the judge  found  the  marriage
             was valid.

         5.   It is perhaps understandable that the judge did not deal  with
             this issue because the appeal proceeded on the papers and  the
             grounds of appeal to the judge did not specifically  refer  to
             the discretion under Appendix FM D(b)(ii).

         6.    However,  the  grounds  of  appeal  did  contend   that   the
             Respondent's decision was 'not in accordance with the law' and
             it is arguable that  the  judge  should  have  addressed  that
             ground and in so doing considered the issue  by  reference  to
             Appendix FM D(b)(ii).

         7.   Permission is  granted  on  this  ground.   I  do  not  refuse
             permission on the other grounds."

11. The reference to Appendix FM in the grant of  permission  should  be  a
    reference to Appendix FM-SE.

12. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 contending in summary  that  there  was  no  requirement  for  the
    Respondent to exercise discretion in relation to missing documentation,
    as it was not accepted that further documentation existed.  It was  for
    the  Appellant  to  ensure  that  documentation  that   satisfied   the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules was submitted.

13. Directions were subsequently issued making provision for there to be  a
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal to decide whether  the  FTT  decision
    should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

14. There was no attendance at the hearing on behalf of the  Appellant.   I
    considered rule 38 of the 2008 Procedure Rules.  I was  satisfied  that
    both the Appellant and Sponsor had been notified of the time, date  and
    place of the Upper Tribunal hearing.  Notice of the  hearing  had  been
    sent on 9th June 2016, to the  address  provided  by  the  Sponsor  and
    Appellant for correspondence.

15. There was no explanation for the non-attendance, and no application for
    an adjournment.  I was invited by  Mr  Harrison  to  proceed  with  the
    hearing, and considered that it was in the interests of justice  to  do
    so.

16. I then heard submissions from Mr Harrison who relied upon the  rule  24
    response.  I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

17. The issue before me is whether the FTT erred in dismissing  the  appeal
    with reference to the financial requirements.

18. The application for entry clearance was refused, in part,  because  the
    Sponsor's payslips covering the six month period prior to the  date  of
    application had not been submitted.  This was made clear  both  in  the
    initial refusal decision dated 29th October 2014,  and  the  subsequent
    review by an  Entry  Clearance  Manager  dated  2nd  April  2015  which
    specifically referred to the lack of  any  payslips  for  February  and
    March 2014.

19. The FTT dealt with the  appeal  on  the  papers  as  requested  by  the
    Appellant.  I am satisfied that the payslips  for  February  and  March
    2014 were not on the  Tribunal  file.   Those  payslips  had  not  been
    submitted with the appeal, and were not submitted to the FTT after  the
    Entry Clearance Manager review.

20. The FTT did not err in  law  in  paragraph  16,  in  finding  that  the
    requirements of paragraph 2 of Appendix FM-SE  were  not  met,  because
    payslips covering  a  period  of  six  months  prior  to  the  date  of
    application had not been submitted.

21. The FTT was not provided with any explanation as to  why  the  payslips
    for February and March  2014  were  missing.   There  was  no  specific
    reference to the provisions of Appendix FM-SE D.

22. One of the grounds of appeal to  the  FTT  was  that  the  Respondent's
    decision was not in accordance with the law,  although  no  particulars
    were given, and on this point the FTT concluded at paragraph 19;

         "19. Finally, the Appellant asserted in her notice of  appeal  that
             the decision was otherwise not in accordance with the law.   I
             have seen nothing to justify that contention and conclude that
             the decision was otherwise lawful."

23. I do not find that the FTT materially erred in law.

24. It is  correct  that  Appendix  FM-SE  D(b)(ii)  provides  that  if  an
    applicant has not submitted a specified document with the  application,
    the decision maker may contact the applicant to request  the  document.
    Sub-paragraph (c) states that  the  decision  maker  will  not  request
    documents if it  is  not  anticipated  that  addressing  the  error  or
    omission referred to in sub-paragraph (b) will lead to a grant  because
    the application will be refused for other reasons.

25. In this case,  the  Respondent  may  not  have  requested  the  missing
    payslips, because the application  was  also  refused  as  it  was  not
    accepted that a valid marriage had taken place.  In my  view,  the  FTT
    did not err  in  concluding  that  the  Respondent's  decision  was  in
    accordance with the law, even though the FTT  subsequently  found  that
    the marriage was valid.  At the date of refusal, the Respondent was not
    under an obligation to request missing documents.  This is not  a  case
    where only one document was missing, as eight  payslips  had  not  been
    provided.

26. I do not accept that the Appellant was entitled to rely  upon  Appendix
    FM-SE D(d) because this was not a case where the applicant submitted  a
    document in the wrong format, or a document that was a copy and not  an
    original, or  a  document  that  did  not  contain  all  the  specified
    information.  In this case, eight payslips had not been submitted.   It
    was not the case that any reason or explanation was given either to the
    Respondent, or the FTT, as to why the payslips had not been provided.

27. I therefore conclude that the  FTT  considered  all  the  evidence  and
    issues placed before it, and made findings open to it on the  evidence,
    and provided sustainable reasons for those findings.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the FTT  did  not  involve  the  making  of  a
material error on a point of law.  I do not set  aside  the  decision.   The
appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made by the FTT.  There has been no  request  for
anonymity and I see no need to make an anonymity order.


Signed                              Date 5th August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.


Signed                              Date 5th August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
