
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V3

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/15304/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 March 2016                              |On 1 August, 2016             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY

                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               qaisar mehmood
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Harrison, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Brown, Counsel instructed by Roberts and Smith
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   In this decision the Appellant is  referred  to  as  the  ECO  and  the
    Respondent is referred to as the Claimant.

2.   The Claimant, a national of Pakistan, date of birth 28  December  1984,
    had applied for entry clearance on the basis of marriage which had been
    refused by the ECO on 27 October 2014.  The basis of  the  refusal  was
    that the Claimant had submitted various documents but had not submitted
    photographic evidence or sufficient evidence to show that the  Claimant
    and his wife were present at the same wedding.  As a matter of fact  it
    was said that they had previously met in 2007 and no factual issue  was
    taken with that claimed meeting.  The Claimant had the burden of  proof
    of showing on a balance of probabilities that at the date of the  ECO's
    decision he met each relevant requirement of paragraph  EC-P.1.1(d)  of
    Section EC-P in terms of eligibility for entry as a partner.

3.   The matter  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Brookfield  (the
    Judge) who, on 21 May 2015, concluded that the appeal by  the  Claimant
    should be allowed because the evidence  established  that  he  met  the
    relevant requirements of the Immigration Rules, HC 395, as amended (the
    Rules) with particular reference to Appendix FM of the Rules.  The  ECO
    challenged the decision and on 11 October 2015 permission to appeal was
    given by Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek.

4.   The Claimant submitted a Rule  24  response,  dated  15  October  2015,
    essentially asserting that the Claimant had  done  all  that  could  be
    reasonably required and a proper explanation had been given as  to  why
    there was an absence of photos taken at the wedding ceremony:   It  was
    said that it was due to the death of a close family member and, out  of
    respect, the marriage was not, as  it  might  otherwise  have  been,  a
    conventional celebration of the wedding.  It was further explained that
    there had been no party or other celebration thereafter  for  the  same
    reason.  It was submitted that  there  was  no  obligation  to  provide
    photographic evidence and that was an erroneous basis of refusal  under
    the Rules.  Also in the light of the evidence that  had  been  provided
    and/or said to be available for the judge to  consider,  there  was  no
    error of law by the judge accepting the evidence provided and rejecting
    the reason for refusal raised by the ECO.

5.   The Judge did not make any adverse factual findings in respect  of  the
    evidence he had received from the live witnesses.  Although to a degree
    there was some lack of balanced presentation of  the  argument  by  the
    judge, that was  not  due  to  any  fault  of  the  Claimant  or  those
    representing him or giving evidence on his behalf.  The judge heard the
    evidence and was entitled to reach the conclusions that she did.

6.   The grounds do not suggest perversity or irrationality and  essentially
    amount to a disagreement with the view the judge formed.  It is not for
    me to interfere with the  decision  because  I  might  have  reached  a
    different view, bearing in mind the evidence  the  judge  had  included
    that from the witnesses, together with a statement from  the  Iman  who
    performed the Nikah on 9 October 2012, and also the  evidence  of  Syed
    Ghafoor Ahmed.  The latter confirmed he was present at the ceremony and
    was one of the witnesses at "a quiet family event due to the passing of
    the grandmother of Sirah and Quisar, dated  22  September  2012".   His
    statement confirmed no photographs were taken on the day due  to  those
    circumstances and there was confirmation, as was repeated to  me,  that
    the bride and the Claimant are first cousins.

7.   In the circumstances I conclude that the evidence before the judge  was
    such that she was entitled to reach the view that she did and even if I
    was to take a different view as I might have done.

8.   It does not seem to me in the light of R Iran [2005] EWCA Civ  982  and
    E & R [2004] QB 1044 CA that it was appropriate to interfere  with  the
    judge's decision.

9.   The ECO's  appeal  is  dismissed.   The  Original  Tribunal's  decision
    stands.





ANONYMITY ORDER

10.  No anonymity order is necessary or appropriate.





Signed                                  Date 27 July 2016


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey




    P.S. I regret the delay in promulgation which is due to the file  being
        mis-stored

