
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/15202/2010


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 17th October 2013                            |On 25th November 2013      |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McGEACHY

                                   Between

                             dipak kalyan kerai
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                      entry clearance officer - mumbai
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Gill QC, Counsel, Instructed by Markand & Co
For the Respondent:    Ms H Horsley, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of India born on 16th  July  1990.   He
    applied for entry clearance to settle in the UK with  his  mother,  the
    sponsor Kesharbai Kalyan.  That application was refused for the reasons
    given in a Notice of Decision  dated  19th  May  2010.   The  Appellant
    appealed and his appeal was heard by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Malins (the Judge) sitting at Hatton Cross on 2nd December  2010.   She
    decided  to  dismiss  the  appeal  for  the  reasons   given   in   her
    Determination dated 8th January 2011.  The Appellant  sought  leave  to
    appeal that decision which was initially refused but following an order
    of the High Court, granted on 30th August 2013.

Error of Law

 2. It is first necessary for us to consider if the judge made an error  on
    a point of law so that her decision should be set aside.

 3. The bare facts of this case, which are not in  dispute,  are  that  the
    Appellant was born on 16th July 1990, some three months after the death
    of his father.  The Appellant was brought up by his mother as a  single
    parent.  The Sponsor was born a Citizen of the UK and  Colonies  (CUKC)
    and under the provisions of the British Nationality Act 1981  became  a
    British Overseas Citizen  (BOC).   On  30th  August  2008  the  Sponsor
    exercised her right to come to the UK leaving her son,  the  Appellant,
    in  the  care  of  extended  family  members  in  India.   The  Sponsor
    registered as a British citizen on 19th February 2009  and  was  issued
    with a UK passport on 9th April 2009.   Thereafter  the  Sponsor  began
    working and from May 2009 sent regular remittances  to  India  for  the
    upkeep of her son.  At the time  of  the  Appellant's  application  for
    entry clearance, he was a full-time student at the  National  Institute
    of Computer Training.  The Sponsor visited the Appellant in  India  for
    about four weeks in December 2009.  Since then the Sponsor has kept  in
    regular contact with  the  Appellant  by  telephone  conversations  and
    birthday cards.

 4. On the basis of this evidence, the Judge found that the  Appellant  did
    not qualify for entry clearance under the provisions of  paragraph  317
    of the Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules HC  395.   Indeed,  it
    was not argued before her that he did.  Further, as regards  Article  8
    of the ECHR, the Judge found, following the decision in JB  and  Others
    (Children of former British Overseas Citizens -  limits  of  NH)  India
    [2008] UKAIT 00059, that there was no family life between the Appellant
    and the Sponsor.  Alternatively, the Judge found that if there was such
    family life, the interference with it was proportionate.

 5. At the hearing, we heard a lengthy submission from  Mr  Gill  QC  based
    upon the grounds of application in which he argued that the  Judge  had
    erred in law particularly in respect of her finding that the  Appellant
    and the Sponsor did not enjoy a family life.  Ms Horsley responded with
    a submission to the contrary.  Those submissions are  recorded  in  the
    Record of Proceedings and need not be repeated here.

 6. We found that there was an error on a  point  of  law  in  the  Judge's
    decision.  In particular, we were satisfied that the Judge erred in law
    in her finding that there was not family life between the Appellant and
    the Sponsor.  The existence of family life is a question of  fact,  and
    yet the Judge appeared to be influenced by what was  found  in  JB  and
    Others.  Further, in this appeal the  Judge  had  to  consider  whether
    family life existed between a parent and her adult son.  (The Appellant
    was 19 years and 10 months of age at the date of decision).  To  decide
    that issue, the Judge found "no evidence of  an  exceptional  or  other
    dependency".  This is the wrong test.  The test  given  in  Kugathas  v
    SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31 is that the relationship between a  mother  and
    her adult son would not necessarily acquire the protection of Article 8
    of the Convention without evidence of further elements  of  dependency,
    involving more than the normal emotional ties.  In this case there  was
    clear evidence of such  dependency,  if  only  that  of  the  Sponsor's
    funding of the Appellant, and therefore the judge should have concluded
    that there was family life between the Appellant and  the  Sponsor.  We
    accept that the Judge went on to consider in  the  alternative  whether
    the interference to family life was proportionate, but  the  error  was
    material because the erroneous finding of no family life clearly had  a
    bearing upon the Judge's decision as to proportionality.  In  paragraph
    8.4 of the Determination she drew a distinction between "strong  family
    life" and her finding of no family life.

 7. We therefore set aside the decision  of  the  Judge  and  proceeded  to
    remake that decision on the basis of the evidence before the judge.  We
    heard no new evidence because in cases of this nature Article 8  issues
    have to be decided according  to  the  circumstances  at  the  date  of
    decision.

Re-made Decision

 8. We heard further submissions from both representatives  in  respect  of
    the re-made  decision  which  again  are  recorded  in  the  Record  of
    Proceedings and will not be repeated here.

 9. We find that at the date of decision there was a  family  life  between
    the Appellant and  the  Sponsor  for  the  reasons  already  suggested.
    Although the Sponsor voluntarily came to the UK in August 2008  leaving
    the Appellant with members of her  extended  family  in  India,  it  is
    apparent from the evidence that  thereafter  the  Appellant  formed  no
    independent  life  but  continued  to  be  dependent  upon  his  mother
    financially and for emotional and other support during his studies.  We
    are also satisfied that the decision of the Respondent  amounts  to  an
    interference with that family life of such gravity  as  potentially  to
    engage the operation of Article 8.   The  effect  of  the  Respondent's
    decision is to prevent the Appellant  and  the  Sponsor  from  enjoying
    family life in the  same  household.   As  the  Sponsor  is  a  British
    citizen, she has every right to remain in the UK.

10. It is not in dispute that the interference is in  accordance  with  the
    law, and necessary in a democratic society  to  maintain  the  economic
    well-being of the country through immigration  control.   We  must  now
    decide if the decision is proportionate.

11. The public interest to which we must attach weight  is  represented  by
    the fact that the Appellant has no right to entry clearance  under  the
    Immigration Rules.  However, we find that the weight to be attached  to
    that public interest is reduced considerably by  the  need  to  correct
    what has been described in this appeal as the "historical wrong".  This
    is a reference to the historical discrimination  against  East  African
    Asians, the barriers created in terms of  their  ability  to  come  and
    settle in the UK with their children, and the subsequent recognition by
    the UK Government that those historical wrongs needed to be  undone  as
    described in NH (India) [2007] EWCA Civ 1330.  It is to be  noted  that
    the Sponsor in this appeal is of Kenyan origins.  It was argued  by  Ms
    Horsley  that  in  this  case  the  historical  wrong  was  of   little
    significance because of the Sponsor's delay in  seeking  a  redress  of
    that wrong.  However, as argued by Mr  Gill  QC,  any  such  delay  was
    explained  satisfactorily  by  the  Sponsor's  circumstances  upon  her
    arrival in the UK.

12. On the other side of the balance, we find that there was a particularly
    strong family life between the Appellant and the Sponsor, no doubt as a
    consequence of the circumstances of the Appellant's birth.  It is  true
    that the Sponsor chose to come to  the  UK  leaving  the  Appellant  in
    India, but we are satisfied from the evidence that that action did  not
    amount to an abandonment of the Appellant.  The Sponsor continued to be
    financially responsible for him, and has assisted him as best  she  can
    through his  studies.   She  has  maintained  close  contact  with  the
    Appellant even to the extent of visiting him in India.   The  Appellant
    has not formed any independent life in India and it  is  apparent  from
    the evidence that he still considers his family to consist of  him  and
    his mother.  There is no evidence of any physical hardship  experienced
    by the Appellant living in  India,  but  it  is  also  clear  from  the
    evidence that he will be adequately maintained and accommodated in  the
    UK and will not become a burden upon the state.

13. Taking all these factors into account, we find that  the  circumstances
    of the Appellant outweigh the public interest and  that  therefore  the
    interference is disproportionate to the legitimate public end sought to
    be achieved.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

We set aside the decision.

We re-make the decision in the appeal by  allowing  it  on  Article  8  ECHR
grounds.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005  and  we  do  not
find it necessary to do so.





Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
