
[pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: oa/15177/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision and Reasons           |
|                                           |Promulgated                    |
|On 14 October 2014                         |On 31 October 2014             |
|                                           |                               |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVID TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                Tridev Gurung
                        (anonymity directon not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Jafar of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Secretary of the State is the appellant to this appeal but for  the
    sake of consistency I refer  to  her  as  the  respondent  and  to  the
    original appellant as such.
2.   The appellant is a 27 year old citizen  of  Nepal  born  on  28  August
    1987.  In a determination promulgated on 5 August 2014  in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, Judge Beg allowed his appeal against the Entry Clearance
    Officer's decision refusing him entry clearance to the  United  Kingdom
    for settlement as the dependent son of a former  Gurkha  soldier.   The
    appeal was dismissed under the Immigration Rules but  allowed,  outside
    the Rules, under Article 8 of the ECHR.

3.   The grounds seeking permission to appeal argue that the judge erred  in
    that she "made no case specific findings as to case  specific  arguably
    good grounds and compelling circumstances not  sufficiently  recognised
    under the Rules  and  proceeded  simply  to  undertake  a  freestanding
    Article 8 assessment".  On 28 August 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge T R
    P Hollingworth granted permission to appeal for the following  specific
    reason:

         "It is arguable the judge focussed too  heavily  on  the  'historic
         injustice' aspect of the appeal.  Ignoring the fact  the  appellant
         introduced documents with his application  that  were  false.   And
         giving  insufficient  reasons  why   there   were   compelling   or
         exceptional circumstances pursuant to Article 8".

4.   In his submissions on the question of error of law, Mr  Wilding  relied
    on two grounds.  Firstly he submitted that the judge in the  First-tier
    Tribunal had failed to engage with the guidance in Gulshan [2013]  UKUT
    640 in that she had not given any or adequate reasons  why  there  were
    compelling circumstances requiring her to consider  Article  8  outside
    the Immigration Rules.  The second submission was that  the  judge  had
    failed to take into account the undisputed fact that the appellant  had
    submitted a false document with his application which purported to show
    that he had passed certain examinations in  Nepal;  the  appellant  had
    altered the certificates to show higher marks indicating  that  he  had
    passed the exams and not failed them.  It was said that  he  did  this,
    not to deceive the immigration authorities, but  so  as  not  to  cause
    distress to his parents who thought  that  he  had  passed  the  exams.
    Nevertheless, Mr Wilding submitted that this was  an  important  factor
    that must be taken into account.

5.   In reply,  Mr  Jaffar  submitted  that  the  education  documents  were
    irrelevant to the question of family life under Article 8. They had not
    been changed in order to deceive the immigration authorities but rather
    to satisfy the appellant's parents.  His parents do not  speak  English
    and to this day they do not know that he failed the exams.  It  is  not
    in dispute that he attended the course in question and it was submitted
    that the judge at [13] clearly took this factor  into  account  in  her
    assessment.  In the First-tier Tribunal the judge  had  heard  evidence
    from the appellant's father and he was not asked about the  appellant's
    studies.  The deception in question  was  not  criminal  behaviour  nor
    matters of economic issue and therefore were not related to immigration
    control.  It was submitted that the judge had  not  made  any  material
    error of law in her determination.

6.   I reserve my decision and have since reviewed  all  the  evidence  that
    had been before the First-tier Tribunal as well as the submissions that
    were made to me.
7.   I am satisfied that there is no merit in the  respondent's  submissions
    that the judge was not entitled to carry out a freestanding  assessment
    of the appellant's family life under Article 8.  At [8] she referred to
    Gulshan and Nagre but does not appear to  have  been  referred  to  the
    Court of Appeal decision in MM [2014] EWCA Civ  985  which  was  handed
    down shortly before the First-tier Tribunal hearing.  At [128]  of  the
    Court of Appeal decision Aikens LJ said this:

         "Nagre does not add anything to the debate, save for the  statement
         that if a particular person is outside the  rule  then  he  has  to
         demonstrate, as a preliminary to a consideration outside the  rule,
         that he has an arguable case that there may  be  good  grounds  for
         granting leave to remain outside the  rules.   I  cannot  see  much
         utility in imposing  this  further,  intermediary,  test.   If  the
         applicant cannot satisfy the rule, then there either is or there is
         not a further Article 8 claim.  That will have to be determined  by
         the relevant decision maker."

8.   There was no requirement therefore for the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    to give reasons why she proceeded to consider  Article  8  outside  the
    Rules.  There was no sugestion that the appellant could  succeed  under
    the Article 8 provisions of the Rules and therefore the only  potential
    issue was whether he had a reasonable claim outside the  Rules.   There
    was no error of law in her proceeding on that basis.

9.   The judge's  consideration  of  the  Article  8  claim,  following  the
    conventional approach under  Huang,  reveals  no  error  of  law.   She
    considered the dependency of the adult appellant with his  parents  and
    she was entitled to consider the "historical  injustice"  to  ex-Gurkha
    soldiers as part of her assessment of proportionality.  Her reasons for
    considering the overall balance between the  competing  rights  of  the
    appellant (and his  family)  against  those  of  the  respondent  could
    perhaps have been more clearly shown but taking the  determination  and
    reasons as a whole it cannot be said that there was any error of law in
    her approach or in her final decision.

Decision and Reasons

There was no error of law in the First-tier Tribunal determination and  that
    decision shall
therefore stand.

No anonymity direction was requested and none is made.




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge David Taylor
30 October 2014
