
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/15988/2013
     OA/15989/2013
     OA/15990/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 31st May 2017                      |On 12th June 2017                     |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                      (1) mohideen fareena kareem ilyas
                        (2) najah hassan kareem ilias
                       (3) najeela hasmin kareem ilias
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr A Burrett (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants in this appeal are citizens of  Sri  Lanka.   The  first
    Appellant, who is the mother of the second and  third  Appellants,  was
    born on 29th April 1973.  The second Appellant, her son,  was  born  on
    31st May 1994.  The third Appellant, her  daughter,  was  born  on  4th
    August 1997.  They appealed  the  decision  of  the  Respondent,  Entry
    Clearance Officer in Chennai, dated  24th  June  2013,  refusing  their
    applications of 5th April 2013, for entry clearance as respectively the
    spouse and dependent children of a British citizen,  namely,  Mr  Ilyas
    Kareem (hereafter "the Sponsor").  The relevant Immigration  Rules  are
    paragraphs 320(3) and (11) and paragraphs EC-P.1.1(c) and  (d)  and  S-
    EC.1.5, and E-ECP.3.1 of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.

 2. By a decision promulgated on 14th March 2017, the Right Honourable Lord
    Boyd, sitting as a judge of the  Upper  Tribunal,  ordered  that  there
    should be a rehearing before the Upper Tribunal, having found there  to
    be an error of law in the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,
    Judge Eban, which was promulgated on 20th May 2014, and after there had
    resulted a fresh appeal before the Tribunal of Lord Boyd,  pursuant  to
    the consent order handed down by the Court of Appeal on 6th July  2016,
    allowing the appeals of the Appellants, because the Upper Tribunal  had
    earlier on 18th September 2014 upheld  the  original  decision  of  the
    Entry Clearance Officer in Chennai, when the Respondent Entry Clearance
    Officer, had appealed the decision of Judge  Eban,  that  I  have  just
    referred to.

 3. The reason why Lord Boyd in  the  Upper  Tribunal  had  in  March  2017
    ordered that there be a rehearing was that Judge  Eban  had  failed  to
    consider  whether  it  would  be  possible  for  the  Sponsor  and  the
    Appellants to conduct family life outside the UK, and in particular  in
    Sri Lanka, given that the Sponsor had lived  his  entire  life  in  Sri
    Lanka until the age of 36, when he came  to  the  UK,  which  was  some
    eleven years ago.  It was true that thereafter, having had  his  asylum
    appeal rejected, he had remained here unlawfully for some eight  years,
    until he was eventually granted ILR in December  2010,  but  if  family
    life could have been carried on outside the UK, then there will  be  no
    breach of the Article 8 rights of the parties concerned,  even  if  the
    Sponsor might not wish to live in Sri Lanka.

 4. After the Sponsor had  been  granted  ILR  on  1st  December  2010,  he
    subsequently travelled to Sri Lanka in January 2011 and has been  there
    at least three times since then, but he is now a British  citizen,  and
    he owns a company and runs his own business, and  has  employees.   The
    judge even found that the Sponsor and  the  first  Appellant  had  been
    married in 1992, for almost 22 years, and that there was a genuine bond
    between the first Appellant and her sponsoring husband, and they wished
    to live together, such that there was a family unit between them.  Even
    though the second Appellant was over 18 at the time of the application,
    he had not formed an independent life of his own.

 5. Judge  Eban  looking  at  the  situation  had  concluded  that  if  the
    application was allowed of the first and third Appellants,  the  second
    Appellant, who was over 18, would naturally be separated from them, and
    yet he was part of the family unit, and so she had decided to allow the
    appeal of all of the Appellants.  A significant aspect of these appeals
    is the reason as to  why  the  Appellants'  applications  to  join  the
    sponsoring Mr Ilyas Kareem in this country, had  been  refused  in  the
    first place.   This  was  because  they  had  made  no  less  than  six
    applications under a false name.

 6. This was a matter that Judge Eban  did  not  overlook.   In  fact,  she
    concluded that had it not been for the ill-advised conduct of the first
    Appellant, who had persistently applied in a false name, the first  and
    third Appellants would by now have joined their  sponsoring  father  in
    the UK.  Nevertheless, Judge Eban had concluded that the weight  to  be
    given to a fair and consistent immigration system was outweighed by the
    compassionate circumstances of this case.

 7. Lord Boyd, who heard the Upper Tribunal appeal on 4th October 2016,  in
    giving his decision some six months later on 14th March 2017 took  into
    account the judgment in SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387,  and  this  led
    him to the conclusion that, although there may  well  be  compassionate
    circumstances, which may compel a case for leave to  be  given  outside
    the Immigration Rules, the test which Judge Eban addressed was a rather
    different one, because she considered whether it would be reasonable to
    expect the Sponsor to relocate to Sri Lanka, and she  did  not  address
    the question of whether there would be insurmountable  difficulties  in
    the Sponsor and the Appellants' continuing family life  in  Sri  Lanka.
    For these reasons, he ordered that there  be  a  rehearing  before  the
    Upper Tribunal, and "the parties should address the question of whether
    there are compelling reasons for entry clearance to  be  given  outwith
    the Rules" (see paragraph 17).  It is in these circumstances therefore,
    that this matter appears before me today.

Submissions

 8. In the submissions before me, Mr Burrett, appearing on  behalf  of  the
    Appellants, handed up his skeleton argument, which was before the Court
    of Appeal, when the Appellants' application for  leave  to  appeal  was
    granted by the Court of Appeal on 28th May 2015 by  Underhill  LJ.   He
    submitted that the reason why the first  Appellant,  the  wife  of  the
    sponsoring Mr Ilyas Kareem, had applied under a false name  repeatedly,
    was because her husband's asylum claim had been rejected,  and  he  had
    continued to live in the UK unlawfully.  The effect of this ill-advised
    conduct was unnecessarily  visited  upon  the  innocent  children,  the
    second and third Appellants, who had tarnished with it, and  were  also
    unable to then succeed in  their  applications  under  the  Immigration
    Rules before the Entry Clearance Officer in Chennai.  However,  it  was
    significant that once ILR had been granted  to  Mr  Ilyas  Kareem,  the
    Sponsor, the applications were then made under the  correct  name.   He
    did not seek to excuse their conduct but simply to explain how  it  had
    arisen on the part of the first Appellant.

 9. Second, and nevertheless, the Respondent Entry  Clearance  Officer  had
    then made decisions which  had  punished  the  innocent  children,  the
    second and third Appellants,  who  have  been  kept  apart  from  their
    father,  which  was  a  matter  accepted  even  by  Lord  Boyd  in  his
    determination, as he had recognised that,  had  it  not  been  for  the
    foolhardy behaviour of the first Appellant,  the  children  would  have
    joined their sponsoring father.  The fact remained, however, that  they
    were children.  They were not themselves exercising any deception.

10. Third, in this sense, the  children  themselves  could  have  succeeded
    under the Immigration Rules because paragraph 320(11) is not couched in
    mandatory terms (and here Mr Burrett referred to the skeleton  argument
    before the Court of Appeal at paragraphs 27 to 32)  pointing  out  that
    Judge Eban had not conducted an Article 8  assessment  under  paragraph
    320(11), which in any event does not refer to the exclusion  of  family
    members, and if only the exercise of  discretion  had  been  considered
    under paragraph 320(11) there  is  every  reason  to  assume  that  the
    balance of considerations would have fallen in favour of the second and
    third  Appellants.   It  was,  he  submitted,  recognised  within   the
    Immigration Rules themselves that cases of deception had been  used  in
    previous  applications  for  entry  clearance  are  not  always   cases
    "strongly justifying refusal".

11. Where children were concerned, justifying exclusion,  would  have  been
    particularly difficult to do,  as  a  discretionary  matter  under  the
    Rules, and this aspect should have been expressly considered  by  Judge
    Eban.  The weight to be given to the children's  interests  had  simply
    been overlooked.  Finally, the fact here remained that the  family  had
    been separated from the sponsoring Mr Ilyas  Kareem  for  a  number  of
    years, and yet  they  were  a  genuine  family  unit,  and  the  second
    Appellant had formed no independent family unit of his own even to this
    day.

12. For his part, Mr Tufan submitted that although paragraph 320(11) of the
    Immigration Rules was expressly before the Court of  Appeal,  when  the
    Appellants had appealed the decision of the Upper  Tribunal  which  had
    gone against them, following the challenge to  the  decision  of  Judge
    Eban, by the Respondent Entry Clearance Officer, the fact was that  the
    consent order itself did not refer to paragraph 320(11)  being  a  live
    issue.  Moreover, Lord Boyd did not regard paragraph 320(11)  to  be  a
    live issue any longer.  What one had, in this appeal, was  a  voluntary
    separation between the parties, whereby, after  the  rejection  of  his
    asylum claim, the Sponsor chose not to return back to Sri Lanka, but to
    lay down roots in this country and to effectively settle himself with a
    business established subsequently.   He  was  essentially  an  economic
    migrant.  There was nothing preventing him from returning back  to  Sri
    Lanka.

13. Secondly,  if one has regard to the established legal authorities  now,
    it was plain that the Appellants could not succeed.  Two years  ago  in
    Agyarko [2015] EWCA Civ 440, the Court of Appeal  had  determined  that
    where there had been  a  "precarious  family  life"  there  had  to  be
    exceptional circumstances shown if leave to remain was  to  be  granted
    (see paragraph 51).  That decision had now been upheld by  the  Supreme
    Court in Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11,  where  Lord  Reid  had  endorsed  the
    principle that where "precarious family  life"  was  concerned  it  was
    "likely only to be in exceptional circumstances" that removal of a non-
    national family member would constitute a violation of Article  8  (see
    paragraph 54).

14. Indeed, the fact that a British citizen was involved, who had lived all
    his life in the United Kingdom, had a job  here,  did  not  change  the
    position because as Lord Justice Sales recognised  (at  paragraph  25),
    the fact that such a person "might  find  it  difficult  and  might  be
    reluctant  to  relocate"  did  not  mean  that  this  would  constitute
    "insurmountable obstacles" to his doing so.  One  could  not  get  away
    from the fact that in this case there was a "precarious  family  life".
    It had arisen due to a voluntary separation  whereby  the  Sponsor  had
    left Sri Lanka to come to the UK on the  basis  of  a  claim  that  was
    subsequently found to have been unsubstantiated.

15. It is true he managed to get ILR and  thereafter  British  citizenship.
    But the case law does not suggest that the grant of British citizenship
    makes it a "insurmountable obstacle" to return back to one's country of
    origin.  In MM (Lebanon) [2017] UKSC 10 the Supreme Court more recently
    observed that

         "The fact that it will cause hardship to many, including  some  who
         are in no way to blame for the situation in  which  they  now  find
         themselves,  does  not  mean  that  it  is  incompatible  with  the
         Convention rights or otherwise unlawful at common  law"  (paragraph
         81).

    That was the position here, submitted Mr Tufan.  In SS  (Congo)  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 37, the Court  of  Appeal  even  considered  the  position  of
    applications made by family members  outside  the  United  Kingdom  for
    leave to enter to come here to take up or resume their family life (see
    paragraph 34), and the reality was that no  exceptional  or  compelling
    circumstances had been demonstrated in this case.  The  appeals  should
    be refused.

16. In reply, Mr Burrett submitted that there was a distinction to be drawn
    between those seeking leave to remain ("LTR") and those  seeking  leave
    to enter ("LTE"), and this distinction is expressly recognised  in  the
    very authorities that Mr Tufan had referred to, so that in  SS  (Congo)
    itself, Lord Justice Sales had observed that "the position in  relation
    to  LTE  Rules  is  different  from  that  immigration  to  LTR  Rules"
    (paragraph  35).   Plainly,  if  one  had  committed  serious  criminal
    offences, and was facing deportation,  one  had  to  show  "exceptional
    circumstances" and "insurmountable obstacles" to demonstrate why  one's
    removal would be  wrong  in  law.   This  distinction  was  significant
    because Judge Eban had already concluded, when she heard  the  evidence
    of the Sponsor, that but for the deception of the principal  Appellant,
    they would have met the Immigration Rules and would have been  able  to
    come to the UK a long time ago.

17. Secondly, reliance upon Agyarko was misplaced because the parties there
    did not meet the  Immigration  Rules  at  all.   These  are  completely
    different cases.  In the instant case, it has  never  been  in  dispute
    that the Sponsor, Mr Ilyas Kareem, has had a family life with his  wife
    and children.  The issue therefore was to what extent the Sponsor,  who
    came to the UK in 2003 and settled by 2010 in  a  perfectly  legitimate
    and lawful way, should be expected to return back  to  Sri  Lanka,  and
    whether he should be barred from enjoying a family life in this country
    because of the historic use of deception by his wife, for reasons which
    had been explained.  The balance of considerations, he submitted,  went
    in favour of the Appellants in this case, and these appeals  should  be
    allowed.

My Findings on the Facts

18. I have given careful consideration to the oral  submissions  before  me
    and the documentary evidence and I am  satisfied  that  the  Appellants
    discharge the burden of proof that is upon them.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.  I note that what the Court of Appeal in SS (Congo) emphasised
    was that compelling  circumstances  would  need  to  be  identified  to
    support a claim for grant of leave to remain outside the new  Rules  in
    Appendix FM.  The court pointed out that that is a formulation which is
    not as strict a  test  of  exceptionality  or  a  requirement  of  very
    compelling  reasons  which  applies  in  different  circumstances,  but
    nonetheless the test is one of compelling circumstances (see  paragraph
    33 of the judgment).

19. There is, however, a distinction to be drawn between the LTR Rules  and
    the LTE Rules, as the judgment of Lord Justice Sales made clear in  the
    Court of Appeal in SS (Congo).  This is because

         "Cases involving someone outside the United Kingdom who applies  to
         come here to take up or resume family life may involve family  life
         originally established in ordinary and legitimate circumstances  at
         some time in  the  past,  rather  than  in  the  knowledge  of  its
         precariousness in terms of  United  Kingdom  immigration  controls"
         (paragraph 36).

20. In the instant case, I note that the Sponsor and  the  first  Appellant
    were married in 1992, which was 22 years ago, and that the marriage has
    stood the test of time, such that there is a  close  and  genuine  bond
    between the first Appellant and the Sponsor, who wish to live together,
    and do still retain a family unit, with their two children, neither  of
    whom have formed an independent family life.

21. Secondly, the Court of Appeal also made clear that,

         "what is in issue in relation to an application for LTE is more  in
         the nature of an appeal to the State's positive  obligations  under
         Article 8, rather than enforcement of its negative duty which is at
         the fore in LTR cases.  This means that the requirements  upon  the
         State under Article 8 are less stringent in the LTE context than in
         the LTR context" (paragraph 38).

22. I note that Mr Burrett submitted before me that, whatever the  position
    earlier, the family  life  between  the  parties  here  was  no  longer
    "precarious", but that is to be less than charitable to the parties  in
    this case, because the plain fact is that for the entire time that  the
    Sponsor came to the UK in 2003, his Article  8  family  life  with  his
    dependant wife and children was not  precarious.   It  was  lawful  and
    legitimate.

23. Indeed, whereas one may describe the Sponsor's  immigration  status  in
    the UK as being one which is "precarious" to all intents and  purposes,
    up to the time that he is granted ILR in the UK on 1st  December  2010,
    one cannot reasonably describe his "family  life"  with  his  wife  and
    children to be "precarious", a fact that is made  abundantly  clear  by
    his subsequently visiting his family in January  2011,  and  thereafter
    three times again, when he is able to do so.

24. In point of fact, however, I do find the circumstances in  this  appeal
    to be "compelling", if I were to apply that epithet,  bearing  in  mind
    that this is not as strict a test as that  of  "exceptionality"  or  of
    "very compelling  reasons",  because  this  is  a  case  where  as  the
    supplementary witness statement of the  Sponsor  makes  clear  (in  the
    bundle of 21st April 2017 before me), the Sponsor has  been  living  in
    the UK for fourteen years now has set up a  business  with  an  average
    income of �35,000 per  annum,  such  that  his  company  now  also  has
    employees (see paragraph 8 of his  witness  statement).   He  makes  it
    clear that although he has indeed made a few visits to them, these have
    been "for very short periods as I cannot stay there for too long due to
    my business and employment commitments in the UK" (paragraph  12).   He
    makes it clear that he is not able to give up his business and  go  and
    live in Sri Lanka "without a primary source of income"  because  if  he
    does then not only will he suffer, but his  family  will  also  suffer,
    together with the three employees and their families as well (paragraph
    13).  At the same time, his two children, both of whom are over 18,  as
    well as his wife, are economically dependent upon him (paragraph 15).

25. Whether or not these are "very exceptional circumstances", I am  in  no
    doubt that there certainly are "compelling"  reasons  for  choosing  to
    enjoy family life in this country, rather than in  Sri  Lanka,  a  fact
    attested to by the Sponsor's  living  in  this  country  for  the  last
    fourteen years.  I notice that the  "Affinity  Global  Ltd"  a  company
    which he has established (see page 7) is a viable company and  that  he
    has P60 returns (see page 17), showing that this is a proper  business.
     The Appellants succeed outside the Immigration  Rules  and  not  least
    because if the Razgar principles are employed, it  is  clear  that  the
    decision of  the  Respondent  disproportionately  interferes  with  the
    family life rights of the Appellants to enjoy a family  life  with  the
    Sponsor, Mr Ilyas Kareem.  For all these  reasons,  these  appeals  are
    allowed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 10th June 2017

