

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/15257/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On May 6, 2015                                |On May 8, 2015               |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                               MISS ISHA DEWAN
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:
    For the Appellant: Mr Akhtar (Legal Representative)
    For the Respondent:     Mr Walker (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nepal. The appellant  applied  for  entry
    clearance on April 23, 2013 but this application  was  refused  by  the
    respondent on June 21, 2013.

 2. The appellant appealed this decision on November 7, 2013 under  section
    82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  and  the
    respondent reviewed the decision and appeal on  January  22,  2014  but
    upheld the refusal.

 3.  The  appeal  came  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   Khan
    (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ") on August 13, 2014,  and  in  a
    decision promulgated on September 3, 2014 he refused the appeal.

 4. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on September 5, 2014  submitting
    the FtTJ had erred by materially in law in his approach  to  Article  8
    ECHR  but  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Hollingworth   refused
    permission to appeal. Grounds of  appeal  were  renewed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on November 15, 2014. Upper Tribunal Judge  Reeds found  there
    was an arguable error in law because the FtTJ had  not  had  regard  to
    what the Upper tribunal had said in Ghising and others  (Ghurkhas/BOCs:
    historic wrong; weight) [2013] UKUT 00567 (IAC).

 5. The matter came before me on  the  above  date  and  the  parties  were
    represented as set out above. The sponsor, Sagun Dewan,  and  his  wife
    were both in attendance.

 6. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
    pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 and I see no reason to alter that order.

PRELIMINARY ISSUE

 7. I raised with Mr Walker whether he agreed with the contents of the rule
    15 letter dated April 1, 2015 and he indicated that he  did  not  adopt
    that letter. He accepted that the FtTJ had materially erred because  in
    paragraph [17] he stated the "need for a fair and effective immigration
    control outweighs any Article 8 claim that might exist".  He  indicated
    that the respondent  accepted  family  life  existed  at  the  date  of
    application because the family had all been living  together  in  Nepal
    save when she attended university when she was supported by the sponsor
    in any event. He was conscious of the fact  the  FtTJ  failed  to  have
    regard to Ghising and others (Ghurkhas/BOCs:  historic  wrong;  weight)
    [2013] UKUT 00567 (IAC) in his  determination  in  which  the  Tribunal
    stated at paragraph [60]-

         "... if the Respondent is relying only  upon  the  public  interest
         described by the Court of Appeal at paragraph 41  of  Gurung,  then
         the weight to be given to  the  historic  injustice  will  normally
         require a decision in the Appellant's favour."

    He invited me to set aside the earlier decision under Article 8 ECHR.

 8. Mr Akhtar had no submissions to make on that issue and  invited  me  to
    set aside the decision and to remake it.

FINDINGS

 9. When this matter came before the FtTJ I am satisfied he  did  not  have
    regard to all of the relevant case law and in  particular  he  did  not
    have regard to  Ghising  and  others  (Ghurkhas/BOCs:  historic  wrong;
    weight) [2013] UKUT 00567 (IAC) although he did have other cases before
    him including Gurung & Ors, R (on the application of) v  The  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2013]EWCA Civ 8 and  Ghising  (Family
    Life - adults - Gurkha policy) [2012] UKUT 00160 (IAC).

10. The Tribunal in Ghising  and  others  (Ghurkhas/BOCs:  historic  wrong;
    weight) [2013] UKUT 00567 (IAC) considered  what  the  Court  meant  in
    Gurung  with  regard  to  the   issue   of   historic   injustice   and
    proportionality. They found at paragraphs [59] and [60]-

         "59. That said, we accept Mr Jacobs' submission that where  Article
         8 is held to be engaged and the fact  that  but  for  the  historic
         wrong the Appellant would have been settled in the UK long  ago  is
         established, this will ordinarily  determine  the  outcome  of  the
         proportionality assessment; and  determine  it  in  an  Appellant's
         favour. The explanation for this is to be found, not in any concept
         of new or additional "burdens" but, rather, in  the  weight  to  be
         afforded   to   the   historic   wrong/settlement   issue   in    a
         proportionality balancing  exercise.  That,  we  consider,  is  the
         proper interpretation of what the Court of Appeal were saying  when
         they referred to the historic injustice as being such an  important
         factor to be taken into account in the balancing exercise. What was
         crucial, the Court  said,  was  the  consequence  of  the  historic
         injustice, which was that Gurkhas and BOCs:

             "were prevented from settling in the  U.K.  That  is  why  the
             historic injustice is such an important  factor  to  be  taken
             into account in the balancing exercise and why  the  applicant
             dependent child of a Gurkha who is settled in the UK has  such
             a strong claim to have  his  Article  8(1)  right  vindicated,
             notwithstanding  the  potency  of  the  countervailing  public
             interest in maintaining of a firm immigration policy". [41]

         In other words, the historic injustice issue will carry significant
         weight, on the Appellant's side of the balance, and  is  likely  to
         outweigh the matters relied  on  by  the  Respondent,  where  these
         consist solely of the public interest just described.

         60. Once this point is grasped, it can immediately  be  appreciated
         that there may be cases where Appellants in Gurkha cases  will  not
         succeed, even though their family life engages Article 8(1) and the
         evidence shows they would have come  to  the  United  Kingdom  with
         their father, but for the injustice that prevented the latter  from
         settling here on  completion  of  his  military  service.   If  the
         Respondent can point to matters over and above the "public interest
         in maintaining of a firm immigration policy", which argue in favour
         of removal or the refusal of leave to enter, these  must  be  given
         appropriate weight in the balance in the Respondent's favour. Thus,
         a bad immigration history and/or criminal behaviour  may  still  be
         sufficient  to  outweigh  the  powerful  factors  bearing  on   the
         Appellant's side. Being an adult child of a UK settled  Gurkha  ex-
         serviceman is, therefore, not a "trump card", in the sense that not
         every application by such a person will inevitably succeed.    But,
         if  the  Respondent  is  relying  only  upon  the  public  interest
         described by the Court of Appeal at paragraph 41  of  Gurung,  then
         the weight to be given to  the  historic  injustice  will  normally
         require a decision in the Appellant's favour."

11. The FtTJ did not make any specific findings on whether  Article  8  was
    engaged and in light of his finding at paragraph [17]  when  he  stated
    "the need for a fair and effective immigration  control  outweighs  any
    Article 8 claim that might exist" I am satisfied he  failed  to  engage
    with the guidance from  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  such  cases.  He  was
    required to make findings on why the appeal was refused and if  it  was
    only because of historic injustice then he should have found that would
    outweigh any immigration control issues.

12. I agreed to set aside the FtTJ's decision in so far as Article  8  ECHR
    was  concerned.  The  decision  under   the   Immigration   Rules   was
    unchallenged.

13. Mr Walker accepted there was family life both in 2011 and in 2013  when
    the appellant's family came  to  the  United  Kingdom.  There  were  no
    adverse factors against allowing the application under Article  8  ECHR
    other  than  immigration  control.  Although  he  was  aware   of   the
    immigration history he did not intend to  argue  that  the  appeal  was
    being refused  for  anything  else  than  immigration  control  and  he
    accepted that there was an historic injustice in  this  appeal  because
    the appellant's father had been prevented from applying  when  she  was
    under the age of 18 to bring her with him.

14. Mr Akhtar confirmed that the appellant had been  unable  to  pursue  an
    application in 2011 because of a problem with her birth certificate and
    at the time she was studying. He confirmed the appellant and her family
    lived together until the sponsor, her mother and siblings all  came  to
    the United Kingdom in April 2013. Shortly afterwards  she  applied  for
    entry clearance. He accepted the Immigration Rules  were  not  met  but
    submitted that the only reason  now  advanced  by  the  respondent  for
    refusing the application under Article 8 was  for  immigration  control
    reasons  and  in  light  of  the  decision  in   Ghising   and   others
    (Ghurkhas/BOCs: historic wrong; weight)  [2013]  UKUT  00567  (IAC)  he
    submitted that the appeal should be allowed.

FINDINGS OF FACT

15. The appellant is now twenty three years of age but she  submitted  this
    application when she was twenty two years of age. She had  been  living
    with her family in Nepal until they came to the United Kingdom on April
    2, 2013. Mr Walker has accepted there is family life and that Article 8
    would be engaged despite the  Immigration  Rules  not  being  satisfied
    (accommodation and maintenance issues).

16. I challenged Mr Walker as to the respondent's position  and  posed  two
    questions namely:

          a. Was this case refused for any reason  other  than  immigration
             control because the Immigration Rules were not met?

          b. Did he accept the appellant would be covered by the  "historic
             injustice" issue highlighted  in  cases  such  as  Gurung  and
             Ghising.

17. Mr Walker indicated there were no adverse factors that  could  be  held
    against the appellant and her father's  position  was  covered  by  the
    phrase "historic injustice".   He  indicated  he  did  not  oppose  the
    appellant being granted entry under Article 8 ECHR.

18. In light of Mr Walker's position  and  having  regard  to  case  law  I
    therefore allowed the appeal under Article 8 ECHR.

DECISION

19. There was a material  error  but  only  in  so  far  as  Article  8  is
    concerned. I have set aside that part of the FtTJ's decision and I have
    remade the decision and allowed it under Article 8 ECHR.



Signed:     Dated: May 6, 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The substantive appeal under the Immigration Rules failed  and  I  therefore
make no fee award.



Signed:     Dated: May 6, 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
