


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/15022/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 21st September 2016                    |On 29th September 2016            |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                      Entry Clearance Officer - bogota
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   F A B S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms R Akther, Counsel, instructed by Thoree & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014. I continue that order.
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


 1. Although  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  is  the  Appellant  in  these
    proceedings I refer to the parties  as  they  were  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant, a citizen of Ecuador, applied for entry clearance  as  a
    dependent child of his mother, who resides in the  UK.   The  Appellant
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the decision of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer (ECO) to refuse that application. The basis  for  the
    refusal was that the ECO was not satisfied that the  Sponsor  had  sole
    responsibility  for  the  Appellant  in  accordance  with  Appendix  FM
    paragraph EC-C.1.1 of the Immigration Rules.

 3. In a decision dated 21st March 2016  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Moxon
    allowed the appeal  on  the  basis  that  he  was  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant met the requirements of the Immigration Rules  and  that  the
    Sponsor had shown that  she  does  have  sole  responsibility  for  the
    Appellant.

 4.  The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  appealed  against  that  decision  and
    Permission to appeal was granted on 15th August 2016 on the basis  that
    it is arguable that the judge erred in finding that it is  more  likely
    than not that the Sponsor has continuing control and direction  of  the
    Appellant's upbringing in light of  the  adverse  credibility  findings
    made in relation to the Sponsor.

 5. The background to this appeal is that the Appellant was  born  on  20th
    June 1999.  The Sponsor says that she was in a  relationship  with  the
    Appellant's father but that that ended when the Appellant was 6  months
    old and there had been no  contact  since  that  save  for  her  having
    tracked him down to obtain custody to allow her to travel  abroad  with
    the Appellant.

 6. The Sponsor claims that she came to the UK in March 2003  in  order  to
    work to save money to pay her husband's debts leaving the Appellant  in
    the care of her grandmother, the  Appellant's  great-grandmother.   The
    Sponsor says that she intended to return to Ecuador but in  March  2007
    met her current husband and began a  relationship  with  him  and  they
    married in May 2012.  She sought leave to remain as  a  result  of  her
    marriage but was refused and returned  to  Ecuador.   She  was  granted
    leave to enter the UK on 4th November 2014 on the basis of her marriage
    but the Appellant's application  was  refused,  that  decision  is  the
    subject of this appeal.  In January 2015 the Sponsor returned to the UK
    pursuant to that grant of entry clearance.

 7. The Appellant's case is that his great-grandmother died  on  1st  April
    2015 and since that he has been cared for by his  uncle.   The  Sponsor
    says that she has been in charge of all decisions in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's education, always maintaining contact with her  grandmother
    while she cared for the Appellant and that she regularly sent money  to
    her grandmother and to the Appellant's uncle.

 8. The judge considered the oral evidence of the Sponsor and the Sponsor's
    husband and the documentary evidence.  At paragraph 27 of the  decision
    the judge said:

         "Taken in isolation the Sponsor is not  a  credible  witness.   Her
         immigration history is  deeply  flawed  and  I  do  not  accept  as
         plausible her explanation for how she managed to enter the country.
          I find as far more likely than not that she would have either used
         forged documentation or that she would have fled from the hospital.
          I also take  into  account  that  she  failed  to  return  to  the
         Appellant upon paying off her debts and again upon the death of her
         grandmother.  I note that she has  failed  to  provide  the  school
         reports  that  are  forwarded  to  her  although  accept  that  the
         necessity of doing so would not have been  immediately  obvious  to
         her.  I do note with some concern that the reports are not  emailed
         directly to her by the school  which  is  something  that  I  would
         expect.   I  note  that  there  is  no  documentary   evidence   of
         communication between the Appellant and the  Sponsor  although  she
         offered to show contents of her phone during the hearing."

 9. The judge went on to find that the fact that the Sponsor had chosen her
    life with her husband in the  UK  over  a  life  in  Ecuador  with  the
    Appellant damaged the Appellant's case but accepted that  it  does  not
    follow that the Sponsor was not maintaining control and  responsibility
    over his upbringing albeit from afar [28].

10. The judge went on to give the documentary evidence some weight [29] and
    went on to say:

         "More significantly I note the evidence of [the Sponsor's husband].
          He is not subject to adverse credibility findings.   His  evidence
         in relation to the contact between the Appellant and  Sponsor,  and
         the influence she has on his upbringing  is  corroborative  of  the
         Sponsor's account in that  regard.   I  find  his  evidence  to  be
         credible and persuasive."

11. The judge went on at paragraph 30 to specify elements of the  Sponsor's
    husband's evidence which he found credible.  The  judge  accepted  that
    money has been transferred and that it is far more likely than not that
    this would have been for the  support  of  the  Appellant.   The  judge
    considered  the  Sponsor's  regular  visits  to   Ecuador   since   the
    regularisation of her  immigration  status  to  be  supportive  of  her
    asserted relationship with the Appellant.

12. The judge concluded at paragraph 33:

         "In summary, I do  have  some  reservations  when  considering  the
         evidence submitted on behalf of the Appellant  and  find  that  the
         Sponsor's credibility has been substantially undermined.  I  remind
         myself however of the burden  of  proof.   I  balance  the  adverse
         credibility findings with aspects of the Sponsor's evidence that  I
         find to be credible and reliable,  for  example  her  role  in  the
         choice of his schooling, her transfer  of  money,  her  determining
         whether he could go on school trips and her approach to discipline.
          Taken together with the documentary evidence and in particular the
         evidence of [the Sponsor's husband], I find as more likely than not
         that  she  does  have  continuing  control  and  direction  of  the
         Appellant's upbringing including making all the important decisions
         in his life and that she has therefore satisfied the definition  of
         sole parental responsibility as provided in TD.  I  therefore  find
         that the Appellant does meet the requirements  of  the  Immigration
         Rules as outlined above."

Error of Law

13. In the grounds of appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  it  is  contended  on
    behalf of the ECO that there was a  severe  lack  of  evidence  in  the
    Appellant's case and that the requirements set out in guidance given by
    the Upper Tribunal in  the  case  of  TD  (Paragraph  297(i)(e):  "sole
    responsibility") Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049 had  not  been  demonstrated.
    It is contended that the Sponsor made a personal choice in leaving  the
    Appellant in Ecuador and coming to the UK and  in  remaining  with  her
    husband rather than returning to Ecuador to be with her  son  and  that
    this does not demonstrate that she is responsible for the Appellant  in
    making him a priority in her life. It is  further  contended  that  the
    Judge erred in  that  he  found  that  the  Sponsor's  evidence  lacked
    credibility but accepted the Sponsor's husband's oral evidence whenever
    his evidence did not host any documentary evidence to substantiate  his
    claims and it is submitted that his overall evidence is feeble.  It  is
    contended that the Sponsor failed to return to the  Appellant  on  many
    occasions, in particular when his grandmother passed away when he would
    have required a mother as emotional support. It is contended  that  the
    Appellant has spent his entire life in Ecuador and lives with his uncle
    and there is no reason why these arrangements cannot continue with  the
    financial support of the Sponsor and that  there  are  no  serious  and
    compelling  family  or  other  considerations  making  the  Appellant's
    exclusion from the UK undesirable.

14. At the hearing before me Mr Kotas relied upon the grounds of appeal and
    said that he had nothing further to add.

15. Ms Akther submitted that the credibility findings in  relation  to  the
    Sponsor concerned her entry to the UK and her general  credibility  but
    did not go to the Sponsor's relationship with the Appellant or  to  the
    issue of sole responsibility.  She submitted that this was otherwise  a
    comprehensive decision.  She contended that the judge did not  have  to
    accept all of the evidence but pointed to the fact that on balance  the
    judge found that the test had been met and the judge applied the  right
    test.  She pointed out that the judge accepted the Sponsor's  husband's
    evidence. She submitted that the other elements of the grounds did  not
    relate to the test or to the evidence before the judge.  She  submitted
    that there was nothing wrong or perverse in the judge's decision,  that
    the judge took everything into  account  and  that  overall  there  are
    sufficient positive findings.

16. I agree with  Ms  Akhtar's  submissions.   The  judge  found  that  the
    Sponsor's evidence was not credible because of her immigration  history
    and noted  the  absence  of  some  elements  of  documentary  evidence.
    However, as against this the judge clearly  attaches  very  significant
    weight to the oral evidence of the Sponsor's husband which corroborates
    that of the Sponsor. The judge also attaches significant weight to  the
    documentary evidence before reaching a decision  clearly  applying  the
    correct burden of proof.

17. I find that the summary at paragraph 33 gives a very  clear  assessment
    of the evidence the judge has taken into account and is  a  very  clear
    explanation as to why the judge found some evidence more  credible  and
    reliable. It is clear that the evidence accepted by the judge  was,  in
    the judge's view, sufficient to  tip  the  balance  in  favour  of  the
    Appellant in this case.

18. In these circumstances I am satisfied that the judge took into  account
    all of the evidence before him and reached a decision which was open to
    him on that evidence.   There  is  no  error  of  law  in  the  judge's
    decision.



Notice of Decision

    There is no material error in the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge shall stand.


Signed                              Date: 29 September 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I maintain the fee award made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.


Signed                              Date: 29 September 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
