
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/15247/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23 July 2014                               |On 4 August 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       Mrs Lalita Ramchandra Mudholkar

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Not represented


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The respondent, whom I shall refer to  as  the  appellant  as  she  was
    before the First-tier Tribunal, is a citizen of India and her  date  of
    birth is 29 August 1938.  She made an application for  entry  clearance
    as the adult dependent relative  of  her  son,  the  sponsor,  Mr  Uday
    Mudholkar.

2.   The application was refused by an Entry Clearance Officer in Mumbai  in
    a decision of 23 July 2013.   The  reason  for  refusal  was  that  the
    appellant had stated in her application that she did not have a medical
    condition and that she was able to care for herself. An Entry Clearance
    Manager reviewed the decision on 7 January 2014 and conceded  that  the
    appellant was suffering from  a  medical  condition,  but  refused  the
    application on the basis that care is available  to  the  appellant  in
    India.

4.   The appellant appealed against the  decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer and the appeal was allowed of Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    Gillespie in a determination that was promulgated  on  22  April  2014,
    following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 7 April 2014, when  the  sponsor
    attended  and  gave  evidence.  The  Secretary  of  State  was  granted
    permission to appeal by Judge Heynes on 28 May 2014.  Thus  the  matter
    came before me.


The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

5.   The Judge made findings at paragraphs 7 to 10 of the  determination  as
    follows:

         "7.  Under this head are embraced various requirements labelled  E-
             ECDR.2.1 to E-ECDR.2.5.  The specific provisions at issue  are
             stated as follows:


                  'E-ECDR.2.4.      The applicant ... must as  a  result  of
                               age, illness or disability require long-term
                               personal care to perform everyday tasks.


                  E-ECDR.2.5.   The applicant ... must be unable, even  with
                               the practical  and  financial  help  of  the
                               sponsor, to obtain  the  required  level  of
                               care in the country where they  are  living,
                               because -


                               (a)  it is not available  and  there  is  no
                                   person   in   that   country   who   can
                                   reasonably provide it; or
                               (b)  it is not affordable.'

             There can be dispute as to rule E-ECDR.2.4.   I  am  satisfied
             that as a result of  age,  the  appellant  requires  long-term
             personal care to perform everyday tasks.   She  has  described
             her  inability  to  carry  her  shopping  upstairs.   She  has
             recently suffered accident, fall and fracture of limbs in  her
             attempts to go about her daily life.  The  respondent  accepts
             that she 'may be suffering from several  medical  conditions'.
             Indeed, the basis of the respondent's  decision  is  that  the
             appellant can obtain the care she requires in a care  home  or
             from a personal carer  in  India.   She  needs  the  long-term
             personal care under 2.4.  The only issue is  whether  she  can
             obtain it in India in the terms provided under 2.5.  I turn to
             address this rule.


         8.   Rule 2.5 provides that the inability of an applicant to access
             the necessary long-term personal care must be caused by one of
             two reasons.  Either it is  not  available  and  there  is  no
             person in the country who can reasonably provide it; or it  is
             not affordable.  The use of  the  expression  'even  with  the
             practical and financial help of the sponsor' in the rule shows
             that one must take into account in applying the provision  the
             financial or other assistance available from  the  sponsor  by
             which such care might be facilitated.


         9.   It is clear to me that the appellant does not, and if she did,
             could  not  properly  rely  upon  the  assertion  that  it  is
             'unaffordable'.  She has her own  income  and  enjoys  support
             from her children abroad.  The case for the appellant is  that
             the help is 'not available and there  is  no  person  who  can
             reasonably provide it'.  The case for the respondent  is  that
             legislation and provision in India for the care of the elderly
             is such that the care is available and must be accessed by the
             respondent in India rather than  seeking  to  migrate  to  the
             United Kingdom.  This, however, is not a complete answer.


         10.  Rule 2.4, on a proper reading of its terms, requires  that  an
             adult dependant relative abroad should  be  expected  to  seek
             long-term personal care in her own country, rather  than  join
             in the United Kingdom a relative upon whom she  is  dependant,
             only to the extent that it is reasonable to expect her  so  to
             do.  An element of reasonability is  expressly  imported  into
             the  rule.   The  position  of   the   respondent   is   that,
             notwithstanding that the appellant has an adult son in settled
             circumstances  in  the  United  Kingdom,  able  to  take   the
             appellant into his home, the appellant must enter a care  home
             or rely on a servant, and not even a trained carer, to provide
             long-term  personal  care.   I  hold  that  this  is  in   the
             appellant's individual  circumstances  unreasonable.   She  is
             elderly, with a history of recent falls  causing  injury,  she
             has strong family connections to the relative  in  the  United
             Kingdom, despite the distance.  He,  and  other  relatives  in
             other countries, travel regularly to see the  appellant.   Her
             circumstances are now that  increasingly  frequent  travel  is
             required.  It is  no  longer  reasonable  to  expect  this  to
             continue.  The purpose of immigration regulations  remains  to
             facilitate family  connections.   Recognition  of  a  duty  of
             support by children to parents is not confined to  any  single
             or few races or cultures but is part of the  human  condition.
             While that support might well be  given  in  a  care  home  or
             through servants, where the natural children are  at  hand  to
             support and assist, and to intervene where  necessary,  it  is
             scarcely reasonable to hold that  a  child  who  has  lawfully
             migrated, and how has made his life and livelihood in  another
             country, is barred from taking his parent into his own home in
             his own country where he can maintain her without recourse  to
             public funds.  It might be reasonable so to do,  depending  on
             the circumstances, if there were another child or close family
             member in India and able to provide the care.  I hold that  it
             is not reasonable to expect  the  appellant  to  rely  upon  a
             stranger to  provide  the  long-term  personal  care  she  now
             requires.  I hold that the appellant meets the requirements of
             rule 2.4 and 2.5.  No other requirement being at issue, she is
             entitled to entry clearance as sought."



The Grounds Seeking Leave to Appeal and Oral Submissions

6.   The  grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal  assert  that  the  Judge
    misapplied the guidance in Gulshan (Article 8 -  new  Rules  -  correct
    approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC).  Mr Tarlow  sensibly  withdrew  this
    ground of appeal accepting that the Judge allowed the appeal under  the
    Immigration Rules. However, it is argued by the Secretary of State that
    the Judge misapplied the Immigration Rules.    The Judge accepted  that
    care was affordable and that facilities were available. A  carer  would
    provide a reasonable level of care for the appellant.

7.   The hearing was  attended  by  the  sponsor  who  submitted  a  written
    response under Rule 24 of the 2008 Rules. The essence of this  is  that
    the reasonable requirement in the Rules requires consideration  of  the
    emotional and mental needs of an appellant who has a genuine need to be
    physically close TO and cared for by relatives.  Mr Mudholkar  accepted
    that care was available to the appellant for her  physical  needs,  but
    not her mental needs because she needs to be with her family with  whom
    she can talk and reminisce. In the Rule 24 response reference  is  made
    to Mark Harper MP, Minister for Immigration,  and  his  response  to  a
    letter from the prime minister.  In relation to the  Immigration  Rules
    Mark Harper MP stated that only those who have a  genuine  need  to  be
    physically close to and cared for by a close relative  in  the  UK  are
    able to settle here.  In Mr Mudholkar's view the appellant is precisely
    the kind of person that the minister was referring to.

The Immigration Rules and IDI

8.   The decision was made pursuant to the Immigration  Rules  contained  in
    Appendix FM relating to entry clearance as  an  adult  dependant.   The
    relevant Rule in issue is E-ECDR.2.5. which reads:

         "The applicant or, if the  applicant  and  their  partner  are  the
         sponsor's parents or
         grandparents, the applicant's partner, must be  unable,  even  with
         the practical and financial help of  the  sponsor,  to  obtain  the
         required level of care  in  the  country  where  they  are  living,
         because -


         (a)  it is not available and there is no person in that country who
             can reasonably provide it; or


         (b)  it is not affordable."

9.    There  are  Immigration  Directorate  Instructions  relating  to   the
    relevant Immigration Rule contained in guidance which has  effect  from
    13 December 2013 and the guidance reads as follows:

         "2.2.2   Unable to receive  the  required  level  of  care  in  the
                country where they are living

                The ECO needs to establish that the applicant has no  access
                to the required level of care in the country where they  are
                living, even with the practical and financial  help  of  the
                sponsor in  the  UK.   This  could  be  because  it  is  not
                available and there is no person in  that  country  who  can
                reasonably provide it, or because it is not affordable.  The
                evidence required to establish this is set  out  below.   If
                the required level of care is available or  affordable,  the
                application should be refused.


         2.2.3    No person in the country who can reasonably provide care


                The ECO should consider  whether  there  is  anyone  in  the
                country where the applicant is  living  who  can  reasonably
                provide the required level of care.  This  can  be  a  close
                family member:


                  . son

                  . daughter

                  . brother

                  . sister

                  . parent

                  . grandchild

                  . grandparent


                or another person who can provide care, e.g.  a  home  help,
                housekeeper, nurse, carer or care or nursing home.  The  ECO
                should bear in mind any relevant cultural factors,  such  as
                in countries where women are unlikely to be able to  provide
                support."

Conclusions

10.  In my view the Judge erred in law by importing reasonableness into  the
    Rules in relation to the type of care available to  the  appellant  and
    whether or not it is reasonable to expect the appellant to be cared for
    by a third party.  Third party care is available to  the  appellant  in
    India.   In my reasonableness relates to whether the  third  party  can
    reasonably provide the care and this is to be considered in the context
    of whether it is practicable for that person to provide care. The  IDIs
    make reference to cultural factors which do not apply here. There is no
    requirement under the Rules as they now stand (or  the  IDIs)  for  the
    appellant to decide who should care for her and where this care  should
    take place.  In my view the Judge materially erred and I set aside  the
    decision to allow the appeal under the Rules and  remake  the  decision
    dismissing the appeal on the  basis  that  care  is  available  to  the
    appellant in India.

11.  There are no  compelling  circumstances  that  would  justify  granting
    leave outside the Immigration Rules. The appellant requires  long  term
    care as a result of her age and it is affordable  and  available.  That
    she would prefer to be with her family in the UK does not, in my  view,
    amount to compelling circumstances. I appreciate that  the  appellant's
    condition may have deteriorated and further evidence was relied upon by
    the sponsor.  However, this is an application for entry clearance and I
    must consider the circumstances at the date of  the  decision,  and  in
    these circumstances the appeal is dismissed under Article 8 of the 1950
    Convention on Human Rights. It is open  to  the  appellant  to  make  a
    further application for entry clearance.






Signed            Joanna McWilliam                    Date 30 July 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam


