
[pic]
IAC-TH-CP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/15543/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 12th May 2016                           |On 19th May 2016               |
|                                           |                               |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                            Mrs Mariama Cire Bah
                         (anonymity ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. N. Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr D. Ball, Counsel.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this case is the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department.  However, for the sake of clarity, I shall use  the  titles
    by which the parties were known before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  with
    the Secretary of State referred to as "the respondent" and Mrs  Bah  as
    "the appellant".

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who made  application  for  entry
    clearance as a partner under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.   It
    was considered by the respondent and refused.

 3. The appellant appealed that decision and following a hearing at  Taylor
    House Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  N  M  Paul,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 14 October 2015, allowed  the  appeal  to  the  "limited
    extent that it is remitted for the Entry Clearance Officer  to  conduct
    the interview which was due to  take  place  as  part  of  the  initial
    process of this application".

 4. The respondent sought  permission  to  appeal.   This  application  was
    considered by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Mark Davies  who  on  29
    March 2016 gave his reasons for granting permission.  They state:-

         "1.  The Respondent seeks permission to appeal against  a  decision
             of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge) promulgated on 14th October
             2015 who allowed the Appellant's appeal against  the  decision
             to refuse her entry clearance as a partner under  Appendix  FM
             of the Immigration Rules.

         2.   The Judge's reasoning is wholly inadequate.

         3.   On the one hand he states (paragraph 22) 'I am  not  satisfied
             the case has been properly made out' but then goes on to allow
             the appeal.

         4.   Whilst indicating that 'the burden is on the appellant to show
             that her application meets the requirements of the Rules'  the
             Judge makes no reference to the standard of proof being on the
             balance of probability.

         5.   The grounds and the decision do disclose an arguable error  of
             law."

 5. Thus the appeal came before me today.

 6. I heard submissions from both Mr  Bramble  and  Mr  Ball.   Mr  Bramble
    relied on the grounds seeking permission to appeal which he went on  to
    amplify.   Mr  Ball  put  forward  various  arguments  in  relation  to
    differing strands within the  judge's  decision.   His  conclusion  was
    twofold; that firstly there was no material error of  law  but  in  the
    alternative in light of paragraph  23  of  Judge  Paul's  decision  (in
    relation to which both representatives argued that there was a lack  of
    adequate reasoning for the decision made) the judge's  decision  should
    be set aside and I should remit the decision to the First-tier Tribunal
    for a de novo hearing.  Having  listened  to  Mr  Ball's  arguments  Mr
    Bramble agreed with the final submission and urged me to remit for  the
    reasons suggested by Mr Ball.

 7. That is an analysis which I share.  The decision discloses  a  material
    error of  law  with  particular  reference  to  paragraph  23  and  the
    inadequate reasoning therein contained for the ultimate decision made.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law.  The decision is set aside.   The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be dealt  with  afresh,  pursuant  to
Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Statement 7.2(b), before any judge aside from Judge Paul.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 18 May 2016.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard

