
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: OA/15410/2013
                                                               OA/09434/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 20th October 2015                 |On 3rd December 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                               Bhupinder Kaur
                                 Kiran Kiran
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer, New Delhi
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Alim, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are both nationals of India.  They  are  respectively  a
    mother, date of birth 20th May 1970 and a daughter date of  birth  18th
    December 1994. They seek  entry  clearance  to  settle  in  the  United
    Kingdom with Mr Manjir Kaur, a British national. Mr Kaur is the husband
    of the First Appellant and the father of the Second Appellant.

 2. This determination concerns the Appellants' linked appeals against  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Miles)  to  dismiss  their
    appeals against  the  decisions  of  the  Respondent  to  refuse  entry
    clearance. Permission to appeal was granted on the 7th  September  2015
    by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Archer.

    Background and Matters in Issue

 3. This is a matter with a complex chronology,  and  it  is  in  part  the
    timing of the various applications and decisions which give rise to the
    issues in this appeal.

 4. Mr Kaur came to the United Kingdom in 2001. Having been refused  asylum
    he overstayed for many years, finally being  granted  indefinite  leave
    under the 'legacy' scheme in October 2011. He is now a British citizen.



 5. On the 18th October 2012 both Appellants completed online  applications
    for entry clearance to join the Sponsor  Mr  Kaur.   They  awaited  the
    relevant documentary evidence to be sent from the  Sponsor  in  the  UK
    before attending the Visa Post in Jalandhar to  attend  a  pre-arranged
    appointment to submit said evidence.

 6. Before they went to the post, they realised that  the  First  Appellant
    could not succeed in her application  because  she  did  not  have  the
    relevant  English  Language  test  certificate.  However   the   Second
    Appellant could not delay in submitting her documents since she was due
    to turn 18 on the 18th December 2012.   She therefore attended the post
    on the 1st November 2012 and  submitted  the  documentary  evidence  to
    support her application for entry clearance as the child  of  a  person
    present and settled in the United Kingdom.

 7. The First Appellant's online application then lapsed. In  the  meantime
    she re-sat her English exam.

 8. On the 12th March 2013 the Second Appellant's application was  refused.
    The Respondent noted that at that time the Second Appellant  was  still
    living with her mother in India; absent there  being  any  serious  and
    compelling  reasons  why  her  exclusion  would  be  undesirable,   she
    therefore failed to qualify under  paragraph  297  of  the  Immigration
    Rules. She lodged an appeal against the refusal.

 9. On the 8th April 2013 the First Appellant made  a  second  application.
    She completed the form online and again made an appointment  to  attend
    the post in order to give her  biometric  information  and  submit  the
    relevant documents.

10. On the 1st July 2013 the First Appellant was refused  entry  clearance.
    She was refused with reference to Appendix FM, on the grounds that  the
    marriage was not subsisting and that the maintenance requirements  were
    not met.  The First Appellant lodged an appeal, which  at  her  request
    was linked to that of her daughter[1].

11. The determination records that at the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Mr Alim conceded that both appeals were pursued on  Article  8
    grounds only. At the hearing before me Mr Alim confirmed this to be the
    case. He said that was because in his view the Sponsor  Mr  Kaur  would
    "never" be able to meet the requirements of the  Rules  in  respect  of
    maintenance; although he earned in excess of the  income  threshold[2],
    and had done for the year preceding the applications, the nature of his
    seasonal employment meant that  he  could  never  meet  the  'specified
    evidence' requirements of the Rules.

12. The First-tier Tribunal found as fact  that  there  is  a  family  life
    between the Appellants and Mr Kaur. It was accepted that  the  marriage
    between Mr Kaur and the First Appellant is genuine and subsisting,  and
    that he has a parental relationship with  his  daughter.   It  was  not
    however  accepted  that  the  decision  would  have   consequences   of
    sufficient gravity to engage Article 8. Both Appellants  had  extensive
    family in India, including Mr Kaur's two elder children who were  still
    living in the family home with the Appellants.  Mr Kaur had  chosen  to
    remain in the United Kingdom rather than returning to India  after  his
    asylum claim was  rejected  and  this  went  to  the  strength  of  his
    relationship  with  his  daughter.  Family  life  had  been  maintained
    notwithstanding the physical separation of Mr Kaur from  his  wife  and
    daughter and it could be continued in this way.  It  was  suggested  on
    behalf of the Appellants that the prolonged separation was the fault of
    the Secretary of State who had taken "too long" to grant Mr Kaur leave.
    The Tribunal rejected that, finding that the decision to remain in  the
    United Kingdom illegally was his, and that he bore  responsibility  for
    any interference with his family life during this period.  There are no
    obstacles to him visiting India to returning to live there permanently.



    Grounds of Appeal and Response

13. Mr Alim relies on his detailed written grounds and oral submissions  to
    contend that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is flawed and must
    be set aside for the following reasons:

          i) The timing of  the  applications  had  been  relevant  to  the
             decisions made under the Rules but not under Article  8:  when
             assessing Article 8 the Tribunal should  have  approached  the
             matter from the starting point that both  Appellants  intended
             to travel together.

         ii) The Tribunal erred in including in its reasoning the fact that
             the Sponsor Mr Kaur was a failed asylum  seeker  who  spent  a
             long time living in the United Kingdom illegally. The fact was
             that now he was a British citizen.  He should  not  have  been
             "blamed" for his previous conduct  in  the  context  of  these
             appeals and the determination errs in seeking to  "go  behind"
             the grant of nationality.

        iii) The determination  fails  to  recognise,  or  give  sufficient
             weight to, the positive obligation on the  United  Kingdom  to
             respect Article 8 rights of its citizens.

         iv) There was a failure to recognise that the Appellants  met  the
             spirit  if  not  the  letter  of  the  Rules  in  respect   of
             maintenance.   The Sponsor could  not  produce  the  specified
             evidence set out at paragraph 2 of Appendix  FM-SE  because  a
             good proportion of his income comes from  seasonal  employment
             (fruit picking). He is given a P45 at the end of  each  season
             so there would be an interruption in his employment.  This was
             relevant  in  two  ways.  First  it  produced  a  "near  miss"
             situation  (although  Mr  Alim  distanced  himself  from  that
             terminology) and secondly it went to  whether  there  was  any
             Article 8(2) legitimate aim in refusing entry clearance.

14. For the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  Ms  Isherwood  submitted  that  the
    decision was justified on the evidence. The Sponsor had chosen to  live
    separately from his family for over a decade. He had  no  international
    protection needs  and  there  had  never  been  any  obstacles  to  him
    returning to India. His separation from his  wife  and  child  was  the
    result of these actions. The Appellants  had  failed  to  identify  any
    compelling reasons why entry clearance should be granted outside of the
    Rules.  The Entry Clearance Officer relies on SS (Congo) v SSHD  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 387.

15. In reply Mr Alim submitted that the  compelling  reason  was  that  the
    Second Appellant would never be able to be with her father.  He is  now
    a British national and it would be perverse to take away  that  benefit
    from him.

    Findings on Error of Law

    Preliminary Observations

16. These linked appeals had, as I  note  above,  a  complex  history.  The
    determination does not assist the reader in understanding that history,
    since it refers throughout to "the appellant" without identifying which
    appellant is being  discussed.   I  am  grateful  to  Mr  Alim  and  Ms
    Isherwood for assisting me in navigating through the facts.

17. Mr Alim was correct to concede that the appeals could not succeed  with
    reference to the Rules. At the date that  the  decision  was  taken  in
    respect of the Second Appellant she could not qualify  under  paragraph
    297(1) since she was living with her mother in India,  and  her  mother
    had not, at  that  time,  made  an  application  for  entry  clearance.
    Further, neither application  had  been  supported  by  the  'specified
    evidence' required to show Mr Kaur's income.  Mr Alim was  not  however
    correct in his submission that Mr Kaur would never be able  to  produce
    such evidence.   Had the nature of his employment placed  him  in  some
    peculiar position so that he simply could not rely on his income,  that
    would clearly be relevant to the Article 8 consideration.  That is  not
    however the case. Paragraph 2 of Appendix  FM  -  SE  states  that  the
    maintenance requirements in  Appendix  FM  must  be  evidenced  by  the
    production of:

         (a)      Payslips covering

             (i) a period of 6 months prior to the date of application if
             the person has been employed by their current employer for at
             least 6 months (and where paragraph 13(b) of this Appendix
             does not apply); or

             (ii)      any period of salaried employment in the period of
             12 months prior to the date of application if the person has
             been employed by their current employer for less than 6 months
             (or at least 6 months but the person does not rely on
             paragraph 13(a) of this Appendix), or in the financial year(s)
             relied upon by a self-employed person.

         (b)      A letter from the employer(s) who issued the payslips at
         paragraph 2(a) confirming:

             (i) the person's employment and gross annual salary;

             (ii)      the length of their employment;

             (iii)     the period over which they have been or were paid
             the level of salary relied upon in the application; and

             (iv)      the type of employment (permanent, fixed-term
             contract or agency).

         (c)      Personal bank statements corresponding to the same
         period(s) as the payslips at paragraph 2(a), showing that the
         salary has been paid into an account in the name of the person or
         in the name of the person and their partner jointly.

18. Mr Alim told me that the Sponsor has three jobs, one of which  consists
    of seasonal work. Although he does the same job each year to supplement
    his income, his employer always issues a P45 at the end of the  period.
    Mr Alim believed that this would mean that  the  Appellants  could  not
    satisfy the requirements set out above.  I do not agree, and nor did Ms
    Isherwood  for  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer.  She  agreed  with   my
    assessment that all the Sponsor need do is a) produce a years worth  of
    payslips from all of his employments, letters  from  each  employer  as
    specified in the Rule, and bank statements  showing  that  all  of  his
    income had been deposited. In these cases these requirements had simply
    not been met. That did not mean that there was any lacuna in the Rules.

19. These appeals could only be allowed with  reference  to  Article  8  if
    there was some compelling reason to do so: SS (Congo).

20. Against that background I make the following findings in respect of the
    grounds of appeal.

    The Chronology

21. As I set out above the timing of the  applications  was  fatal  to  the
    application of the Second Appellant under 297(1). She could  not  show,
    at the date of decision, that she was seeking entry  with  her  mother.
    That was because at the date that   the  application  was  decided  her
    mother did not have an outstanding application. I  have  some  sympathy
    with Mr Alim's position that this was not of any great relevance to the
    Article 8 consideration. It was quite apparent from the facts that  the
    two Appellants wished to  come  to  the  United  Kingdom  together  and
    regardless of the timing, that was the substantive  fact  which  should
    have been considered.  Any error in approach here is however  not  such
    that the decision should be set aside. That is because the presence  of
    her  mother  in  India  was  not  the  only  relevant   factor.     The
    determination expressly recognises that for both  these  women  'family
    life' has existed for the past 11 years on the basis of a  family  unit
    consisting of the Appellants and two other children of the  family  all
    living in the family  home  together.   That  was  a  factor  that  the
    Tribunal was entitled to take  into  account  regardless  of  when  the
    applications were made and refused.

    The British Sponsor

22. Mr Kaur is British and no-one is  suggesting  otherwise.  Mr  Alim  was
    vociferous in his attack on the determination and its  alleged  attempt
    to "go behind" the grant  of  nationality.  It  is  submitted  that  in
    referring as it did to the Sponsor's immigration history  the  Tribunal
    took irrelevant facts  into  account  and/or  diminished  the  positive
    weight to be attached to the right of a British citizen  to  live  with
    his wife and child.

23. This submission is wholly  misconceived.  The  Tribunal  addressed  the
    history of the Sponsor because it went to the nature and quality of his
    family relationships. Had he been, for instance, an asylum  seeker  who
    had waited a long time for a positive  decision  in  his  international
    protection claim,  that  would  clearly  be  relevant  to  the  ongoing
    interference and why he had suffered such a long  separation  from  his
    family in the first  place.  In  this  case,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    observes, there is no obstacle to family life continuing in  India,  or
    in the manner that the Sponsor and Appellants have chosen  to  continue
    it thus far, by long-distance communication and when possible,  visits.
    It cannot be said to be an error of law that these matters  were  taken
    into account.

24. Mr Alim sought in  his  submissions  to  emphasise  that  in  an  entry
    clearance  case,  the  decision-maker  should  be  concerned  with  the
    positive obligation on the contracting state to respect family life.  I
    do not perceive that the First-tier Tribunal  misunderstood  that  this
    was an entry, as opposed to a removal, case. Nor am  I  satisfied  that
    there  was  somehow  a  failure  to  recognise  that  family  life  was
    important. There is no error of law  identified  here.   The  'positive
    obligation' on the  state  is  not  to  be  understood  as  a  positive
    obligation  to  grant  entry  clearance  in  any  circumstances.   That
    positive obligation is  reflected  and  expressed  in  the  Immigration
    Rules: SS (Congo).

    The Legitimate Aims set out in Article 8(2)

25. In his oral submissions (I could not identify the point in the  written
    grounds) Mr Alim relied on the fact that the  Sponsor  was  earning  in
    excess of �22,400 per year and that both  Appellants  were  willing  to
    take "any job" once in  the  UK  to  contend  that  there  was  nothing
    weighing on the Entry  Clearance  Officer's  side  of  the  scales.  He
    submitted that there being no criminality in this  case  (save  perhaps
    the illegal entry and decade of overstaying by the  Sponsor)  the  only
    Article 8(2) aims that could be said to be pursued by the decision were
    the protection of the economy and/or the rights and freedoms of others.
      Since this family were going to  be  self-sufficient  the  Respondent
    could show neither was engaged.

26. It is established principle that the Respondent does not need, in  each
    and every  case,  to  identify  in  what  manner  the  presence  of  an
    individual claimant in the United Kingdom will impact upon the economy:
    Shahzad (Art 8: legitimate  aim)  [2014]  UKUT  00085  (IAC).  That  is
    because it is a matter of fact that there will be some impact.  Whether
    or not the family are financially self-sufficient for  the  foreseeable
    future that it so, for the reasons Stanley Burnton LJ sets  out  in  FK
    and OK (Botswana) [2013] EWCA Civ 238:

         "The maintenance of immigration control  is  not  an  aim  that  is
         implied for  the  purposes  of  article  8.2.  Its  maintenance  is
         necessary in order to preserve or to foster the economic well-being
         of the country, in order to protect health and morals, and for  the
         protection of the rights and freedoms of others. If there  were  no
         immigration control, enormous numbers of persons would be  able  to
         enter this country, and would be entitled to claim social  security
         benefits, the benefits of the National Health Service, to be housed
         (or to compete for housing with  those  in  this  country)  and  to
         compete for employment with  those  already  here.  Their  children
         would be entitled to be educated at  the  taxpayers'  expense...All
         such matters (and I do not suggest that they are the only  matters)
         go to the economic well-being of the country. That the  individuals
         concerned in the  present  case  are  law-abiding  (other  than  in
         respect of immigration controls) does not  detract  from  the  fact
         that the maintenance of a generally applicable  immigration  policy
         is, albeit indirectly, a legitimate aim for the purposes of article
         8".

27. There is therefore absolutely no merit in this ground.





    The 'Near Miss'

28. Although Mr Alim declined to refer to his point  on  maintenance  as  a
    'near miss' this is in fact what it was.  A near failure  to  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules is not capable in and of itself of justifying
    entry outside of the Rules, but it may  be  relevant  where  there  are
    already compelling circumstances: per Richards LJ  in  SS  (Congo)  [at
    56]. Where such circumstances exist it might tip  the  balance.  It  is
    submitted that the determination of the First-tier Tribunal  is  flawed
    for a failure to give sufficient weight to its own  findings  that,  in
    substance,  the  Sponsor  was  earning  enough  money.  I  reject  that
    submission for two reasons. Firstly, as  I  note  above,  Mr  Alim  was
    simply wrong in his analysis that the Sponsor could  "never"  meet  the
    evidential requirements of the Rules. He had just failed to  do  so  on
    this occasion. Secondly the applications, the grounds of appeal to  the
    First-tier Tribunal, and indeed to this Tribunal, had completely failed
    to identify what if any 'compelling circumstances' there might be so as
    to justify departure from the Rules.  Driven to identify such a feature
    by Ms Isherwood's submissions Mr Alim said  that  the  result  of  this
    refusal would be that the Second  Appellant  can  "never  be  with  her
    father".  The First-tier Tribunal found that she has not been with  her
    father for the past decade. That was their - or in all probability  his
    - choice. If they now wish to change that arrangement it  remains  open
    to Mr Kaur to go and live with her in India.  Alternatively  she  could
    make an application under the Immigration Rules for entry clearance  to
    come to the UK in some other capacity.  It is not therefore correct  to
    suggest that she will never see her father again.   The Appellants have
    not identified what feature of  their  circumstances  would  justify  a
    grant of leave to enter outside of the Rules and it cannot be said that
    the First-tier Tribunal erred in failing to treat the  financial  'near
    miss' as determinative.

    Decisions

29. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error of law and it
    is upheld.

30. I was  not  asked  to  make  a  direction  for  anonymity  and  in  the
    circumstances I see no reason to do so.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           21st October 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] The linked appeals were dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge D Ross
on the 29th April 2014 but this decision was set aside by Upper Tribunal
Judge JG MacDonald on the 21st August 2014. The matter was remitted to the
First-tier Tribunal for remaking.
[2] This is accepted at paragraph 23 of the determination

