
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/15431/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 2nd September 2014                           |On 9th September 2014      |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD

                                   Between

                            mrs syeda tushi begum
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Bhanji, Counsel instructed by East London Law
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh who applied to  come  to  the
    United Kingdom as a spouse of a British national and whose  application
    was refused and a subsequent appeal dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Seelhoff in a determination promulgated on 14th March 2014.

 2. Grounds of application were lodged on three grounds.  I refer  only  to
    Ground 3 as this is the only ground on which  permission  was  granted.
    This ground refers to  the  rights  of  the  child  and  says  that  in
    considering whether the Respondent's decision is lawful the  judge  had
    materially erred in failing to adequately,  or  at  all,  consider  the
    rights and interests of the child.  Reliance was  placed  on  T  (entry
    clearance - S55 BCIA) [2009] Jamaica [2011] UKUT 483 (IAC).  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Andrew who granted  permission  said  that  although  it
    would seem that there were no submissions in relation to Article 8  the
    judge considered this.  In so doing he should have considered the  best
    interests of the child as a primary consideration.  He did  not  do  so
    and thus "I find there is an arguable error of law in relation  to  the
    Article 8 point".

 3. Before me Mr Bhanji sought to lodge a witness statement of the  Sponsor
    dated 2nd September 2014 and also reapplied for permission to appeal in
    respect of Grounds 1 and 2.

 4. Given the fact that permission had only been granted on one ground only
    and that I was being asked to extend the grounds very late in  the  day
    indeed, namely on the date of the hearing, I refused this application.

 5. Accordingly, the appeal before me was limited to the extent of  whether
    or not the judge had erred in law in his findings under  Article  8  of
    the ECHR.

 6. Mr Bhanji said that the best interests  of  the  child  was  that  both
    parents should be with the child and the family should be together.  It
    was a commonsense point and went to proportionality.   There  was  post
    decision evidence  which  would  assist  the  Appellant  in  a  further
    application but I was asked to set the decision aside on the basis that
    the judge had not properly considered the best interests of  the  child
    and order a re-hearing.  In  response  in  submissions  from  the  Home
    Office it was agreed that the existence of a British child  was  not  a
    "slam dunk" in terms of the appeal.

 7. For the Home Office it was  said  that  this  was  a  slightly  strange
    application given that Article 8 had not even been  argued  before  the
    judge.  Nevertheless the judge had taken the  issue  on  board,  albeit
    briefly. It was clear that having a British child was a salient feature
    but on its own was not a "slam dunk" winner.  The recent case of MM  in
    the Court of Appeal had indicated that the maintenance requirements  as
    set out in the Immigration Rules were lawful and this was a case before
    the judge where the maintenance requirements had not been met.   I  was
    asked to uphold the decision.

Conclusions

 8.  What  is  slightly  odd  about  this  case  is  that  the  Appellant's
    representative before the judge did not ask  the  judge  to  allow  the
    appeal on Article 8 grounds.  The point might be said  to  be  Robinson
    obvious (R v SSHD ex-parte Robinson) [1997]  3WLR  1162)  but  a  judge
    generally cannot be expected to say very much about a point that is not
    specifically argued before him.  What the judge did note was  that  the
    Respondent made the point in the decision letter that the Sponsor chose
    to marry someone who had no right to live here  and  thus  the  Sponsor
    could never have had a legitimate expectation that his  wife  would  be
    allowed to live with him here if he did not meet  the  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules.  The judge said  that  this  was  a  case  where
    refusing the application  in  light  of  the  shortfall  of  funds  was
    entirely proportionate and legitimate even although  there  was  now  a
    British child.

 9. As has often been found and as parties acknowledged  having  a  British
    child is not necessarily a trump card in the outcome of an appeal  even
    although  the  best  interests  of  the  child  must   be   a   primary
    consideration.  That having been  said  it  seems  to  me  that  absent
    further information being given to the judge  and  given  the  lack  of
    argument by the Appellant's representative  on  this  point  the  judge
    cannot be said to have fallen into error in his dismissal of the  claim
    under Article 8. Indeed given the paucity of evidence on this issue  it
    is difficult to see how the  judge  could  possibly  have  allowed  the
    appeal.

10. In addition given that the Appellant failed  to  meet  the  maintenance
    requirements of the Rules and following what was said by the  Court  of
    Appeal in R (on the application of  MM)  Lebanon)  and  Others  v  SSHD
    [2014] EWCA Civ 985 the judge was clearly entitled to go on and dismiss
    the appeal.  Absent legal error by the judge the decision  must  stand.
    The remedy for the Appellant is to make a  fresh  application  which  I
    understood from Mr Bhanji might have reasonable prospects of success.

Decision

11. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

12. I do not set aside the decision.







Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald


