
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/15868/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29 October 2014                            |On 14 November 2014          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                           DESIGNATED JUDGE MURRAY


                                   Between

                         MS KOSISOCHUKWU VANESSA OBI
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ABUJA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Chikwe, St Valchikwe, Solicitors, Ilford
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born  on  20  August  2010.   She
    appealed against the decision of the  respondent  dated  13  June  2013
    refusing her leave to enter the United Kingdom  pursuant  to  paragraph
    310 of HC395 (as amended).  Her appeal was heard by Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Carroll and was dismissed in a determination  promulgated
    on 27 May 2014.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    refused by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hollingworth  on  7  August
    2014.  However, permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Warr  on
    17 September  2014.   The  permission  states  that  the  judge  should
    consider the whole of any relevant rule (Kwok  on  Tong  1981  Imm.A.R.
    214) but a proper opportunity must be given to  deal  with  the  point.
    Judge Warr noted that Rule 309B was drawn to the judge's  attention  at
    the hearing. However, he found that that aspect of the case might  have
    been conceded by the Entry Clearance Officer or  expressly  not  relied
    upon or that it might be a bad point.  He also found that there  is  an
    Article 8 issue.

The Hearing

 3. The appellant's representative submitted that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge should not have considered Rule 309B.  There is no mention of  it
    in the refusal letter of the Entry Clearance Officer.

 4. I referred him to paragraph 7 of the determination.  This  states  "The
    sponsor must obtain and provide a certificate of eligibility  in  order
    to meet the requirements of paragraph 310 of HC395".  He submitted that
    as Rule 310 was accepted as having been satisfied this issue should not
    have been considered.

 5. I asked the representative if looking at  this  case  holistically,  he
    accepts that if there is a certificate of eligibility  the  claim  will
    succeed under the Immigration Rules and he said he accepts that is  the
    case.

 6. The representative submitted that the Entry Clearance  Officer  refused
    the application on 14 June 2013 making reference to  paragraph  310  of
    the Rules.  There was then the Entry Clearance Manager's  review  dated
    18 March 2013.  He submitted that Rule 309B was not mentioned in either
    of these refusals.  He submitted that the judge  found  that  paragraph
    310(i) (e) (f) and (ix)  have  been  satisfied.   At  the  hearing  the
    Presenting Officer submitted that paragraph 309B is applicable  as  the
    adoption of the appellant is not a de  facto  adoption.   He  submitted
    that the Entry Clearance Officer must have considered Rule 309B when he
    made his decision on paragraph 310.

 7. The representative submitted that the  sponsor  has  dual  nationality,
    British and Nigerian.  He referred me to paragraph 309A which sets  out
    the requirements of the Rules and submitted that  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer must have had paragraph 309 in  mind  when  he  considered  the
    application.  He submitted that a de facto adoption is where on  parent
    has spent time in the country where the child is being adopted from and
    he submitted that in this case bonding  has  taken  place  between  the
    child and the sponsor and the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  has  accepted
    this.  He submitted that the sponsor has been to Nigeria to be with the
    appellant.

 8. He submitted that at the hearing on 16 May 2014 the  judge  should  not
    have  accepted  the  Presenting  Officer's  submissions   relating   to
    paragraph 309B as this was the first time that this paragraph had  been
    mentioned and at the date of the hearing  it  was  not  an  issue.   He
    submitted that he is not suggesting that the judge should not take  all
    of the relevant Immigration Rules into account but the  refusal  letter
    makes it clear that the Entry  Clearance  Officer  was  aware  of  this
    paragraph and the introduction of paragraph 309B is a  separate  issue.
    He submitted that as the refusal letter  was  not  on  that  basis  the
    judge's determination contains a material error of law.

 9. He submitted that the Entry Clearance Officer relied on the certificate
    of abandonment.  I pointed out to him that this has been provided.   He
    submitted that  this  therefore  makes  it  clear  that  Rule  309  was
    considered by the Entry Clearance Officer and was found  to  have  been
    satisfied.

10. The representative then referred to Article 8 and the fact that this is
    not referred to in the determination.   He  submitted  that  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer found that this was  a  genuine  adoption.    He  was
    satisfied with the finances and the emotional support  for  the  child.
    He submitted that the appellant's grandmother cannot  continue  looking
    after her because  of  ill  health  and  that  her  maternal  uncle  is
    presently helping to look after her but he is American and will  return
    to the USA after Christmas this year.  He submitted therefore that even
    if Rule 309B applies, the application should be allowed  under  Article
    8.

11. The representative referred to the Rule 24 response by  the  respondent
    and submitted that this makes no mention of Article 8.

12. I was asked to set aside Judge Carroll's determination.

13.  The  Presenting  Officer   submitted   that   what   the   appellant's
    representative is asking me to do is ignore statute.  He submitted that
    the judge accepted the submission relating to Rule 309  and  that  Rule
    309A makes it clear that a certificate of eligibility must be  provided
    under Rule 310.  He submitted that you cannot say that the  certificate
    is not required as it is stated in the Rules that it must be  provided.
    He referred me to the Children's Act.

14. With regard to Article 8 he submitted that the Article 8 claim  has  to
    be considered at the date of the decision.  He submitted that there  is
    nothing in the evidence to indicate that the judge's  decision  is  not
    proportionate.

15. He submitted that the appellant's representative has accepted  that  if
    the eligibility certificate is provided, the application will  succeed.
    He submitted therefore that the  claim  should  not  be  allowed  under
    Article  8  and  that  there  is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination.

16. I was asked to uphold the judge's decision.

Determination

17. The judge at the First-tier hearing did not object  to  the  Presenting
    Officer making submissions relating to Paragraph  309B  of  the  Rules.
    Neither did the appellant's representative. It was not clear  from  the
    evidence  before  the  judge  that  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  had
    considered its terms but it is likely he had not as the certificate  of
    eligibility is required before all the terms of Paragraph  310  can  be
    satisfied. The judge, before making his decision has  to  consider  the
    whole of the relevant Rule. Statute cannot be ignored.

18. Paragraph 309B  requires  that  all  prospective  adoptive  parents  be
    assessed as suitable to adopt, by a competent authority in  the  United
    Kingdom and for a certificate of eligibility to be  obtained  from  the
    Department of Education.  This certificate has to be provided with  all
    entry  clearance  applications  under  paragraph  310  of  HC395.  This
    certificate  was  not  supplied  by  the  sponsor  and  there  was   no
    explanation from the sponsor as to why she had not  obtained  this,  so
    although the judge accepted that the requirements of paragraph 310  (i)
    (e) (f) and (ix) had been satisfied, this  certificate  of  eligibility
    has to be submitted before all the requirements of paragraph  310  have
    been satisfied.

19. The judge has set this out in his determination and for that reason  he
    dismissed the appeal.

20. It  was  accepted  by  both  parties  at  the  hearing  that  when  the
    certificate of eligibility is produced the application will succeed.  A
    new application should  therefore  be  made  with  the  certificate  of
    eligibility.  This appeal cannot succeed based on Article 8 when it can
    succeed under the Rules when this document  is  submitted  with  a  new
    application. Article 8 is not a means of circumventing the Rules.

                                  DECISION

21.  There  is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier   Judge's
    determination and his decision of 22 May 2014 stands.


Signed                                  Date 29 October 2014


Designated Judge Murray
Judge of the Upper Tribunal






