
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA153122014
                                                                 OA153132014
                                                                 OA153142014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 18 May 2016                             |On 15 June 2016                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                              MRS CHAHNAZ MALAS
                              MR HUSSAM BAKDACH
                               MS SARA BARAZI
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr C Yeo of Counsel, instructed by AA
Immigration Lawyers
For the Respondent:          Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1) These appeals are brought against a decision by Judge of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal Stott dismissing on human rights  grounds  appeals  against  the
   refusal of entry clearance.

2) The  appellants  are  Syrian  nationals.   They  comprise  a  mother  and
   daughter and the daughter's  stepfather.   They  originally  applied  for
   entry clearance along with the two younger children of the family,  whose
   appeals were allowed by the First-tier Tribunal.

3) The appeals by the two younger  children  were  allowed  under  paragraph
   297(i)(f) of the Immigration Rules on the basis that they had a relative,
   namely their brother ("the sponsor"), present and settled in the  UK  and
   there  were  serious  and  compelling  considerations  which  made  their
   exclusion from this country undesirable.  According to  the  findings  of
   the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal they were unable to  continue  their
   education or carry on what could be described as a normal life in  Syria.
   There was a  constant  fear  of  kidnapping  and  of  a  continuation  of
   fighting.  The judge found  that  the  two  younger  children  were  both
   teenagers and with their brother's support they could form a family  unit
   while maintaining contact with their parents by phone and the internet.

4) The judge reached a different decision in  respect  of  the  three  older
   appellants, who are the parties to this appeal.  They were found to be in
   contact with the sponsor on a regular basis  and  were  able  to  collect
   financial support which was being given without  difficulty.   The  judge
   described the three older  appellants  as  living  under  "difficult  and
   unimaginable circumstances" but considered that they were able to conduct
   family life by means of electronic communications as they had been  doing
   since 2007.  The appellants and the sponsor  could  not  currently  meet,
   although they had met in 2009 and 2011.   The  judge  accepted  that  the
   inability of the three appellants to meet the sponsor was an interference
   with normal family life but there was a possibility that the situation in
   Syria would eventually change for the better  and  that  full  unfettered
   family life could resume.  The judge considered that the three appellants
   were  older  and  more  capable  of  looking   after   themselves.    The
   interference with their family life would not be disproportionate.

5) In the grant of permission  to  appeal  it  was  observed  that  the  two
   younger children of the family had been granted leave to enter the UK but
   their mother,  stepfather  and  older  sister  had  been  refused  leave.
   According  to  the  grounds  of  the  application  this  was   either   a
   disproportionate interference with the family life  of  all  five  or  it
   frustrated the grant of leave to the successful younger  children,  which
   would itself be a disproportionate interference.  There was considered to
   be an arguable error.

Submissions

6) At the hearing before me, Mr Yeo, on behalf of the appellants,  submitted
   that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal had not taken all the  relevant
   factors into  account.   The  judge  referred  at  paragraph  20  to  the
   inability of the three appellants to meet the sponsor  as  not  being  of
   such an exceptional and compelling nature for it to be a disproportionate
   breach.  It was pointed out, however,  that  this  did  not  address  the
   relationship between the two younger children and  the  three  appellants
   themselves.

7) Mr Yeo referred to the decision of the Upper Tribunal in  PD  and  Others
   (Article 8 - conjoined family claims) Sri Lanka [2016]  UKUT  00108.   In
   this decision it was said that in considering conjoined Article 8  claims
   by multiple family members the decision  maker  should  first  apply  the
   Immigration Rules to each individual applicant and, if appropriate,  then
   consider Article 8 outside the  Rules.   This  exercise  would  typically
   entail the consideration and determination of all claimants  jointly,  so
   as to ensure that all material facts and considerations were  taken  into
   account in each case.  Mr Yeo pointed out that in  that  case  the  child
   appellant qualified under the  seven  year  rule  and  the  parents  were
   successful  under  Article  8.   The  circumstances  of  that  case  were
   different from  the  present  appeals,  in  which  a  stronger  case  was
   presented.  In relation to the present family, two of the appellants  had
   succeeded under the Rules.  Unlike the position in  PD  and  Others,  the
   parents of the children were not in the UK unlawfully.  The question  was
   whether the older sister, now aged 26,  and  the  mother  and  stepfather
   should be admitted.

8) Mr Yeo continued that nowhere in the decision did the judge grapple  with
   the consequences of splitting the family.  The judge said only  that  the
   older  appellants  could  look  after  themselves.   The  importance   of
   splitting the family was not considered and this was a clear error.

9) On  behalf  of  the  respondent  Mr  Wilding  submitted  that  the  judge
   acknowledged that the family unit would be separated into two groups  but
   came  to  the  decision  at  paragraph  17  that  this   would   not   be
   disproportionate.   The  decision  in  PD  and  Others  was  of   limited
   assistance as what was under consideration in that case was  the  removal
   of a family group.  By contrast this was an entry  clearance  case  where
   there was established family life between all five of the appellants  and
   the sponsor.  The two younger children met the requirements of  paragraph
   297(i)(f) of the Immigration Rules but this did not apply to the  adults,
   who were treated as adult  dependent  relatives.   The  position  of  the
   adults had been outside the Immigration Rules from the  outset.   It  was
   not disproportionate for the appeals of the  three  older  appellants  to
   have been refused.

10) Mr  Wilding  acknowledged  that  at  paragraph  20  the  judge  used  an
   unfortunate turn of phrase by stating that the interference  with  family
   life was not exceptional but the judge did not appear to  be  applying  a
   test of exceptionality.  The judge's findings on proportionality were not
   undermined.

11) Both parties were agreed that in the event of  an  error  of  law  being
   found, such that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  should  be  set
   aside so far as the three appellants were concerned,  then  the  decision
   should be re-made at the same hearing.

Error of law

12) I  agreed  with  Mr  Wilding  that  the  wording  at  paragraph  20  was
   unfortunate but in my view it was not in itself fatal to the decision  in
   respect of the three appellants.  At paragraph 20 the judge was referring
   to the relationship between the three appellants and the sponsor, who  is
   the son of the first appellant, the stepson of the second  appellant  and
   the brother of the third appellant.  The error made by the judge was  not
   in relation to consideration of family life between the three  appellants
   and the sponsor  but  in  relation  to  family  life  between  the  three
   appellants and the two younger children.  The three  appellants  and  the
   two younger children had formed a family unit in Syria and the  Judge  of
   the First-tier Tribunal failed to consider properly the  significance  of
   the interference with family life arising from the two  younger  children
   being allowed to enter the UK and the older members of the family  having
   to remain behind in Syria.

13) The judge made some passing  references  to  this  issue,  stating,  for
   example, at paragraph 15 that the younger children could maintain contact
   with their parents by  phone  and  the  internet,  and  then  stating  at
   paragraph 17 that the three older appellants were more capable of looking
   after themselves.  Nowhere, however, did the  judge  systematically  make
   any assessment of proportionality to the interference  with  family  life
   arising from the splitting of the family unit and the separation  of  the
   two children from the rest of their immediate family in Syria.   This  is
   the error of law by the judge.  On the basis of this  error  I  concluded
   that the appeals in respect of the three remaining appellants  should  be
   set aside and re-made.

Further submissions

14) I invited the parties to address me on the re-making of the decision  in
   respect of the three appellants.  On their behalf  Mr  Yeo  relied  on  a
   skeleton argument which was before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   He  also
   referred me to the decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  in  AT  and  another
   (Article 8 ECHR - child refugee - family  reunification)  Eritrea  [2016]
   UKUT 00227.  It was stated in this decision that  while  the  Immigration
   Rules made no provision for family reunification in the UK in the case of
   a child who had been granted asylum,  a  refusal  to  permit  the  family
   members of such a child to enter or remain in the UK might  constitute  a
   disproportionate breach of the right to respect for family  life  enjoyed
   by all members.

15) Mr Yeo submitted that it was necessary to look at  family  life  between
   the two younger children and the rest of the family.  The judge had found
   at paragraph 19 that there was family life between the sponsor in the  UK
   and the family in Syria.  The issue was one  of  proportionality.   There
   was a gap  between  the  Immigration  Rules  and  the  situation  of  the
   remaining appellants.  Reliance was placed on Article  8.   Referring  to
   the case of AT and another, Mr Yeo said that in that case the sponsor had
   been a child at the date of the application but not at the  date  of  the
   hearing.  Mr Yeo acknowledged that section 55 of the  2009  Act  did  not
   apply outside the UK, but in terms of T (entry  clearance  -  s  55  BCIA
   2009) Jamaica [2011] UKUT 00483, the best interests of  children  outside
   the UK were a highly relevant consideration.  This was a  family  divided
   by civil war.  There had been a high level of fighting in their  city  of
   Hama, which was the scene of offensives in 2013, 2014 and  2015  and  was
   subject to Russian airstrikes.  The fighting had not reached the city but
   it was in a conflict zone.  The sponsor had heard gunshots and explosions
   when on the phone to his family.

16) For the respondent, Mr Wilding said that given  the  findings  that  had
   been made in respect of the two younger  children  there  was  little  on
   which he might address me.  One of the statements contained  a  reference
   to Damascus but this might be an error.

Discussion

17) It is accepted that  the  three  appellants  cannot  succeed  under  the
   Immigration Rules and their appeals must be considered under  Article  8.
   The appeals  by  the  two  younger  children  have  succeeded  under  the
   Immigration Rules and, as Mr Yeo submitted, their best  interests  are  a
   relevant factor for the remaining appellants,  notwithstanding  that  the
   family are outside the UK.  As Mr Yeo submitted,  the  issue  is  of  the
   proportionality either of splitting the two younger  children  away  from
   the rest of the family in Syria or requiring the two younger children  to
   forego their entitlement to enter the UK in order to  remain  with  their
   family in Syria.  The decision on proportionality  must  be  made  having
   regard to the factors  set  out  in  section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
   Immigration & Asylum Act 2002 , as amended.

18) Among the three remaining appellants the key figure  is  the  mother  of
   all three children.  It has been accepted  that  there  are  serious  and
   compelling considerations which make the exclusion  of  the  two  younger
   children from the UK undesirable.  Is it proportionate that  they  should
   enter the UK without their mother and leave her behind  in  Syria  in  an
   area which may be further affected by the continuing civil war?  There is
   nothing to indicate that it is not in  the  best  interests  of  the  two
   younger children for their mother to accompany them to the UK, where  the
   sponsor is capable of providing accommodation  for  and  maintaining  the
   family.  Indeed it is very difficult in a case such as this  to  envisage
   on what basis it would not be disproportionate for the  younger  children
   to have to leave their mother behind in Syria while they avail themselves
   of their right of entry.

19) I did not hear any oral evidence but the witness statements  which  were
   before the First-tier Tribunal were before me, as were  the  findings  by
   the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal as to the family's circumstances  in
   Syria.  Mr Wilding referred to a question as to where the  family  reside
   in Syria.  According  to  the  sponsor's  witness  statement  the  family
   originate from Hama but in the witness statements themselves the family's
   address is given as Jamiet Maktabet, Al-Assad, which appears to be in the
   countryside around Damascus.

20) Nevertheless, the family have clearly been  affected  by  the  conflict.
   The second appellant records that he had  to  close  his  clothing  store
   because the shop was between two checkpoints,  which  made  it  virtually
   impossible for customers to reach him.  The third appellant  states  that
   prior to the civil war  she  was  attending  university  but  due  to  an
   increase in the kidnapping of girls and other problems she had  to  stop.
   She cannot go out freely and does not leave her home at all.   The  first
   appellant  in  her  statement  records  that  in  their  area  there  are
   continuous shootings on a daily basis and  they  are  unable  to  live  a
   normal life.  The children cannot attend school and are at home.

21) In order to succeed under Article 8, the three remaining  appellants  do
   not have to show a real risk of serious harm by remaining  in  Syria,  as
   they would under Article 3.  They rely instead on their relationship with
   the two  younger  children,  who  have  the  right  to  enter  under  the
   Immigration Rules because there are serious and compelling considerations
   which make their exclusion from this country undesirable.   Where  it  is
   clearly in the best interests of the two younger children to come to  the
   UK, it would be a disproportionate interference with  family  life,  both
   for them and for their mother, were their mother not allowed to accompany
   them.

22) Where it would be disproportionate  not  to  allow  the  mother  of  the
   younger  children  to  accompany  them  to  the  UK,  it  would  also  be
   disproportionate not  to  allow  the  mother's  partner,  the  children's
   stepfather, to accompany the family to the UK also.   The  children  have
   not seen their natural father since 2009.  There is  nothing  to  suggest
   that the relationship between the first and second appellants is anything
   other than genuine and subsisting or that the second appellant is not  in
   a genuine parental relationship with the children.  Both because  of  his
   relationship with the first  appellant  and  his  relationship  with  the
   children, it would be disproportionate not to allow him to accompany  the
   children to the UK.

23) The position of the third appellant is a little different as  she  is  a
   grown up child.  In the circumstances prevailing in Syria,  however,  she
   cannot work or study and is, according to the evidence, confined  to  the
   family home because of fear of kidnapping and  other  dangers.   Although
   she is an adult, her relationship with her mother and stepfather  clearly
   falls within the type of dependency considered in the  cases  of  Ghising
   [2012] UKUT 160 and Gurung [2013] EWCA Civ 8, where  it  was  found  that
   there may be circumstances in which a child over the age of 18 still  has
   family life with her parents and forms  part  of  the  family  unit.   In
   circumstances where her siblings,  mother  and  stepfather  are  able  to
   travel to the UK, it would be disproportionate  to  exclude  her  and  to
   leave her on her own as a single woman in a situation in  which  she  was
   wholly dependent upon her  mother  and  stepfather  and  even  unable  to
   venture out of the family home by  herself.   She  is  in  fact  entirely
   dependent in Syria upon her mother and stepfather and should  be  treated
   as such.

24) Where the Tribunal is determining whether a decision breaches Article  8
   it is necessary to have regard to the public interest considerations in s
   117B of the 2002 Act.  The first of these refers to the  public  interest
   in maintaining effective immigration  controls.   In  relation  to  these
   appeals the two younger children have already been found to  satisfy  the
   requirements of the Immigration Rules and under Article  8  the  question
   arises of the potential impact on them and on the three appellants of the
   separation of the two children from the rest of the family.  There is  no
   finding that the appellants are able to speak English but they  are  able
   to rely on maintenance by the sponsor.  Their relationships with the  two
   younger children have not been formed in the UK and  the  appellants  are
   not facing removal.  The issue is then of balancing the  public  interest
   in maintaining effective immigration controls and in those  entering  the
   UK being able to speak English against the impact of splitting the family
   unit and leaving the children's mother, stepfather and  older  sister  in
   Syria.  Having regard to the findings noted above,  the  outcome  of  the
   balancing exercise in relation to these three appellants falls heavily in
   their favour.

25) Accordingly, I am satisfied that  in  the  circumstances  of  this  case
   there are compelling circumstances, as discussed  in  SS  (Congo)  [2015]
   EWCA Civ 387, for the appeals to be allowed under Article 8 on the  basis
   that it would be disproportionate to separate the three  appellants  from
   the two younger children following the finding that there are serious and
   compelling considerations which make the exclusion  of  the  two  younger
   children from the UK undesirable.   Accordingly  all  three  appeals  are
   allowed under Article 8.

Conclusions

26) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  involve  the
   making of an  error  on  a  point  of  law  in  respect  of  these  three
   appellants.

27) I set aside the decision.

28) I re-make the decision in the appeals by allowing them.

Anonymity

29) The First-tier Tribunal made an  order  for  anonymity  to  protect  the
   identity of the two younger children.  Their identity is not referred  to
   directly in this decision and I do not consider it necessary to renew the
   anonymity order.  Indeed, no application to this effect was made  to  me.
   Accordingly I lift the anonymity  order  (pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the
   Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.)

Fee Award        Note: This is not part of the determination

The First-tier Tribunal declined to make a fee award in respect of  the  two
successful appellants.  The reasons why no fee award was made have not  been
challenged before me and no application has been made for a fee award.   For
the same reasons given as given by the First-tier Tribunal  I  make  no  fee
award.





Signed                                             Date 14 June 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Deans

