
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/15930/2012
     oa/15931/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17th December 2014                         |On 2nd January 2015           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                             (1) miss ndey njie
                             (2) miss namie njie
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONs not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ACCRA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Y Darboe (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, (HOPO)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge NMK Lawrence,  promulgated  on  27th  August  2014,  following  a
    hearing at Hatton Cross on 19th August 2014.  In the determination, the
    Judge dismissed the appeals of Miss Ndey Njie and Miss Namie Njie.  The
    Appellants subsequently applied for, and were  granted,  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellants

 2. The Appellants are two sibling sisters.   Both  are  nationals  of  the
    Gambia.  The first Appellant was born on 17th June 1999 and the  second
    Appellant was born on 14th July 1997.  These are their stated dates  of
    birth.  On 21st June 2012, they made applications to enter  the  UK  as
    dependent daughters of Ms Amie Faye (their alleged  sponsoring  mother)
    who is also a national of the Gambia, but is now married to Mr  Sheiffo
    Samateh, who has acquired Belgium nationality  since  his  own  arrival
    from the  Gambia,  thus  giving  both  of  them  the  right  to  reside
    permanently in the UK.

The Appellants' Claim

 3. The Appellants' claim is that they can  show  that  their  relationship
    with their sponsoring mother, Ms Amie Faye, by virtue of their recorded
    registration in the register of births in  the  Gambia,  in  the  birth
    certificate that was issued subsequently, and most importantly, in  the
    DNA evidence that was produced, after doubts were raised  with  respect
    to the registration of their births.  The DNA  evidence  is  compelling
    evidence because it is from a body accredited by both the  Home  Office
    and the Ministry of Justice.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The Judge  dismissed  the  Appellants'  appeal,  after  the  Respondent
    challenged the relationship between the Appellants and their sponsoring
    mother, Ms Amie Faye.  The Judge did so on the basis that  he  was  not
    satisfied that the DNA tests results had not been tampered with by  the
    Appellants' representative.  Second, the Judge was not  satisfied  that
    the children's birth certificates were genuine.  Third, the  Judge  was
    not satisfied that the birth registers were what they purported  to  be
    given that  the  Appellants'  representative,  Mr  Darboe  of  Windfall
    Solicitors, had made  contradictory  submissions.   In  his  concluding
    remarks, the Judge stated that,

         "the mere submissions of her report bearing the  title  'DNA  tests
         results' is insufficient unless there is evidence of continuity and
         evidence that the samples did not suffer the risk of  contamination
         at any stage.  There is no such evidence before me.  I therefore do
         not find I could attach any weight  to  these  reports"  (paragraph
         18).

 5. The Judge went on to conclude that the Appellants had  been  unable  to
    demonstrate that they are related to the Sponsor as  claimed,  for  the
    purposes of Regulation 7 of the 2006 EEA Regulations,  and  accordingly
    had failed to discharge the burden of proof upon them.




Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application make a number of clear and succinct  points.
    First, the DNA test was conducted  with  the  "DNA  Diagnostic  Centre"
    (DDC),  which  is  an  internationally  recognised  organisation,  with
    officers in both the UK  and  the  USA.   Their  reports  are  accepted
    routinely by the Home Office and the courts in the UK.

 7. Second, the Judge was specifically  referred  to  this  fact  and  only
    observed that, "I am  unable  to  comment"  (at  paragraph  18  of  the
    determination).

 8. Third, the Judge had to make a finding on the reliability  of  the  DNA
    report, given that it was from a genuine provider  accredited  by  both
    the Home Office and the Ministry of Justice, and the failure to do this
    contravene the well-established stricture in Mohd Amin  [1992]  Imm  AR
    367.

 9. Fourth, the Judge was preoccupied with his perceived suspicion  of  the
    Appellant's representative's behaviour  and  failed  to  give  adequate
    attention to the evidence before him.

10. Fifth, the Judge's preoccupation with  the  representative's  behaviour
    (at  paragraphs  13  to  14)  were  simply   inaccurate   because   the
    representative had obtained the DNA results in order to  submit  it  to
    the court and it was simply unreasonable to assume that he  would  have
    any interest in forwarding that information from the court.

11. Sixth, following the Judge's findings, the  Appellants'  representative
    contacted the DDC, who on 4th September  2014,  wrote  to  confirm  the
    reliability of their report and the contents therein.

12. Seventh, it had never been alleged by the Respondent (or  even  by  the
    Judge) that  the  Appellant's  documents  were  forged  or  lacking  in
    authenticity.  They were issued by  the  Gambian  authorities  and  the
    passports (also issued by the Gambian authorities) confirmed  the  very
    details in the birth certificates as  well.   The  passports  were  not
    contested.

13. Eighth, in the circumstances any issue with respect to how the  Gambian
    authorities kept their records,  and  how  they  referenced  them,  was
    irrelevant, unless it could be demonstrated by the Respondent Secretary
    of State that the documents produced were indeed forgeries.

14. Finally, this was a case where the two Appellant children,  being  born
    in 1997 and 1999 had found themselves in a situation where the register
    of births in Gambia had been lost or  misplaced  or  destroyed  by  the
    authorities.  A new register of births was started from the year  2000.
    The Appellants' details were on the new register that  was  started  in
    2000, but did refer to the actual  date  of  birth  (which  has  always
    remained consistent) of 1997 and 1999.  The Appellants' representative,
    Mr Darboe, had sought to explain to the Judge that the birth  registers
    are kept at the registry  office  and  that  any  person  who  requires
    another copy simply goes to the registry office and obtains a copy from
    that office.  The Judge contested the  submission  on  the  basis  that
    there was no evidence that the old register had been lost.

15. The final  Ground  of  Appeal  is  that  there  was  no  need  for  the
    Appellants' representative to produce such  evidence  because  the  ECM
    also stated in the review of the decision of the ECO that,

         "In support of  this  the  Appellants  provided  letters  from  the
         register  of  births  and  deaths  in  the  Gambia  and  new  birth
         certificates registered in 2012.  I note  that  the  letter  states
         that the births were registered in  1997  and  1999  but  that  the
         records had been lost  and  were  not  under  the  custody  of  the
         registrar".

    Mr Darboe submitted that this was all he needed to show to  prove  that
    it was indeed the case, and was accepted  by  the  ECM,  that  the  old
    register had been lost and new birth certificates  were  registered  in
    2012.  Moreover, the letter from the registrar himself  in  the  Gambia
    stated that, "according to the Births, Deaths and Marriages  Act  1980,
    laws of the Gambia, when the details of birth  are  no  longer  in  the
    records, the registrar allows a new registration, which  is  the  issue
    with the said Applicant".

16. On 6th November 2014, permission to appeal was granted by the Tribunal.

Submissions

17. At the hearing before me on 7th December 2014, Mr Darboe explained that
    the starting point in this appeal must be the ECM's  review  (contained
    in the Respondent's bundle) of 25th February  2014.   This  shows  that
    there was, for the reasons that the Judge had himself gone  into,  some
    doubt about the registration of births, which had arisen  naturally  in
    consequence  of  the  original  register  being  misplaced.   The   ECM
    accordingly records that,

         "In the Grounds of Appeal it was asserted that the Appellants  were
         related to their mother as claimed.  It was also  stated  that  the
         birth certificates provided were genuine.  In support of  this  the
         Appellants provided letters from the registrar of births and deaths
         in the Gambia and new birth certificates  registered  in  2012.   I
         note that the letter states that the births were registered in 1997
         and 1999 but that the records had been lost and were not under  the
         custody of the registrar.  However, they  have  not  explained  how
         they would know the registration numbers for when the  births  were
         claimed to have been first registered (for the issue of  the  first
         certificates provided with the applications) if  the  records  were
         not in their custody.  Also they have  not  explained  why  if  the
         first certificates were accurate and  issued  correctly  that  they
         issued  further  certificates  for  the   registration   in   2012.
         Furthermore, they have not explained why  the  registrar  initially
         issued year 2000 certificates with the  registration  details  when
         the births registered were from the 1990s.  Given all of this, I am
         caused to doubt the information contained in the birth certificates
         and  the  accuracy.   This  in  turn  causes  me   to   doubt   the
         relationships between the Appellants and their claimed mother.   It
         was also stated that to prove that the Appellants were  related  to
         their mother they were ready to take a DNA test.  However, as noted
         above, the onus is on the Appellants to  discharge  the  burden  of
         proof and not on the Entry Clearance Officer."

18. It was as a result of this ECM review, which flagged up concerns  about
    the register of births, that the Appellants  then  commissioned  a  DNA
    report.  The DNA report shows, on a balance of probabilities test, that
    the children are related as claimed.  Mr Darboe submitted that  it  was
    wrong for the Judge to then seek satisfaction about the authenticity of
    the DNA report, especially given that such doubts had not  been  raised
    by the Respondent authority, and particularly  given  that  the  report
    came from an authorised source that was internationally recognised, and
    routinely acknowledged by the UK system.

19. Mr Darboe submitted that the Judge's misgivings at paragraph 16 of  the
    determination that, "I have not been provided with cogent evidence that
    the process of taking the samples, whichever  part  of  the  body,  was
    intact and free from contamination" were justified (at  paragraph  16).
    This is because if one looks at the DDC "client identification  consent
    form", which is signed by the sampler, and dated 6th  August  2014,  it
    expressly states that,

         "I hereby affirm that I have properly identified this  patient.   I
         have collected the specimen and labelled the container and packaged
         properly in the presence of the patient.  The specimen  is  clearly
         labelled with the patient's  name,  date  of  birth,  and  date  of
         collection.  The specimen has not been tampered with and was  never
         left  unattended.   I  have  packaged  the  specimen  securely  for
         shipment".

    This was then signed off by "M. Douglas".  In the event, therefore, the
    Judge was simply wrong to cast  doubt  on  the  samples  taken  and  to
    challenge the findings made on the basis that it was for the  Appellant
    to demonstrate that there had been no tampering with this material.

20. For his part, Mr Nath submitted that the Judge had  given  reasons  for
    his concern at paragraphs 14, 15, and 16.  He is entitled to doubt  the
    authenticity of the reports provided before him.  Unless  it  could  be
    said that the matters that he flags up were wrongly identified  by  him
    as being incongruous, it must be concluded that the  findings  made  by
    him were open to him.

21. In reply, Mr Darboe submitted that  even  if  what  Mr  Nath  said  was
    correct, the details in the passport,  which  is  also  issued  by  the
    Gambian authorities, were identical to the details issued in the  birth
    certificates.  They show the date of birth.  They  show  the  place  of
    birth.  The reality was that the date of birth had never been contested
    of the two Appellants.  What was  in  dispute  was  whether  these  two
    Appellants were related to their sponsoring mother, Ms  Amie  Faye,  in
    the way contended.  It was for  this  reason  that  a  DNA  report  was
    commissioned and this now confirmed, beyond all reasonable doubt,  that
    they were related as claimed.  Neither the birth nor the age of the two
    Appellants has ever been directly questioned.

Error of Law

22. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  Judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision and remake the decision
    (see Section 12(2) of TCEA 2007).  My reasons are as  follows.   First,
    the Judge had to make a finding on the singularly most important  piece
    of evidence that  went  to  the  relationship  between  the  sponsoring
    mother, Ms Amie Faye, and these two Appellant children.  This was a DNA
    report.  Mr Darboe (see paragraph 18)  invited  the  Judge  to  make  a
    finding.  The Judge commented that,  "I  am  unable  to  comment"  (see
    paragraph 18).  The failure to make a finding of fact  in  relation  to
    this report is an error of law.  A  decision  maker  must  decide  that
    which he has to and disregard that which he must. In this case, as  the
    ECM's review makes quite clear, the  only  reason  why  the  Appellants
    proceeded to get a DNA  report,  was  because  of  doubts  raised  with
    relation to the registration of births, and the ECM at that  stage  had
    said that he had not had sight of the DNA report,  which  was  produced
    before the Judge, and required a finding of fact to be made by him.

23. Second, and even more importantly there is no rule of law to the effect
    that, "the mere submissions of the report bearing the title 'DNA  Tests
    Results' is insufficient unless there is  evidence  of  continuity  and
    evidence that the samples did not suffer the risk of  contamination  at
    any stage" (see paragraph 18).  It is  for  the  Appellant  to  produce
    evidence, which on a balance of probabilities,  goes  to  proving  that
    which they must prove.  It is for the Respondent authority, should they
    wish to challenge that evidence, to produce grounds  for  showing  that
    there  has  been  a  deception,  a  forgery,  or  otherwise  fraudulent
    behaviour.  The Appellant is not required to  prove  a  negative.   The
    Appellant does not have to show that he did not  tamper  with  evidence
    material to his case.  To elevate this proposition to the level of rule
    of law is an error of law.

Remaking the Decision

24. I have remade the decision on the basis  of  the  evidence  before  the
    original Judge, the evidence before me today, and the submissions  that
    I  have  heard  today.   I  have  done  so  notwithstanding  Mr  Nath's
    submissions that I should adjourn this matter, following a  finding  of
    whether or not there was an error of law, for the  substantive  hearing
    to be  argued  later,  whereupon  the  Respondent  authority  can  make
    enquiries about the evidence submitted, including that contained in the
    DNA report.  The reason I have not heeded this submission is  that  the
    evidence relating to the registrar of births and  deaths,  produced  by
    Omar Ceesay (see paragraph 9) which the  Judge  takes  issue  with  (at
    paragraphs 9 to 11) was evidence in the Respondent's  bundle,  and  has
    long been known to the Respondent such that enquiries could  have  been
    made long before now.

25. In point of fact, this evidence has not  been  directly  challenged  as
    being fraudulent by the Respondent authorities.

26. Second, the Procedure Rules make it quite  clear  that  the  overriding
    objective is met by the  fair  and  expeditious  despatch  of  a  court
    business.  All the evidence  that  is  to  be  called  is  before  this
    Tribunal and the Tribunal is well able to  deal  with  it  without  any
    further adjournment.

27. That being so, and having considered the matter fully,  I  am  allowing
    this appeal for the following reasons.  The only issue in  this  appeal
    is the relationship of these two Appellants with the sponsoring mother,
    Ms Amie Faye.  It is accepted that the original register of  birth  was
    unavailable.  The reason is given by the registrar in his  letter  who,
    in referring to the Births, Deaths and Marriages Act 1990, states  that
    "when the details are no longer in records, the registrar allows a  new
    registration, which is the issue with the said  Applicant".   Why  this
    should not be in the records is not a matter that these Appellants  are
    able to answer.  As Mr Darboe repeatedly stated before me, all  that  a
    person in the Applicant's position can do is to repeatedly return  back
    to the office of the register of births  and  deaths  and  request  for
    information.  The information is what it was.

28. What is important is that once that information was found to be such as
    would not satisfy the authorities in the UK, the Appellants procured  a
    DNA test result.  This was procured  from  the  DNA  Diagnostic  Centre
    (DDC), an internationally recognised organisation,  which  has  offices
    both in the UK and USA.  When the DNA test report is issued by the DDC,
    it shows the "probability of maternity" at 99.99997%  with  respect  to
    Ndey Njie, and it shows the "probability of maternity" of 99.9998%  for
    Namie Njie.  The Appellants only have to prove their claim on a balance
    of probabilities.  This is the civil standard of proof.   Arguably  the
    DNA report proves their case beyond all  reasonable  doubt.   There  is
    nothing in the DNA test report that is remotely suspicious and no issue
    has been taken by the Respondent authority.  Were an issue to be taken,
    it has not shown, as a result of any  enquiry  undertaken,  that  these
    reports, issued by  an  internationally  recognised  organisation,  are
    fraudulent.

29. However, there is an even better reason.  Following  the  determination
    of Judge Lawrence, which was promulgated on 27th August 2014, Mr Darboe
    promptly wrote through his firm of solicitors to the DDC asking them to
    comment on the DNA report.  One might have thought that this was not  a
    matter for him.  He had done all he had  to  do  for  the  purposes  of
    proving his case on a balance of probabilities.  If doubts were  to  be
    cast on the DNA report the obligation to so do fell on  the  Respondent
    authority.

30. Nevertheless, to his credit, Mr Darboe wrote to the DDC.   In  a  reply
    dated 4th September 2014, the concerns of the  Judge  are  specifically
    answered.  For example, it is stated that,

         "Dr Adama Sallah in Gambia collected Ndey Njie and  Namie  samples.
         The tested parties were appropriately identified at the time of the
         sample collection.  Passports for the Appellants  were  copied  and
         sent back with the samples.  I have enclosed the DNA testing report
         with the chain of custody documentation".

    The Judge had also raised concerns about the  nature  of  the  samples.
    The letter for September 2014 explains that,

         "The samples taken for Ms Faye and the children  are  mouth  swabs.
         The case reference of CC116950 is to identify the  legal  maternity
         test for mother and two children.  We  do  not  provide  individual
         case reference numbers for individual clients. (which  answers  the
         concerns of the Judge at paragraph 16 of the determination)

    The report then goes on to say that

         "The DNA kits are sent to a  certified  doctor  in  the  Gambia  by
         courier.  Mouth samples are taken and securely placed  with  tamper
         proof tape.  They are sealed and sent back  to  us  in  the  UK  by
         courier with their tracking number.  The client did  not  have  any
         access to the samples; therefore there has been no contamination or
         tampering".

    This a complete answer to any suggestion of contamination or tampering.
     All in all, therefore, the Appellants prove their case on a balance of
    probabilities, and this appeal must be allowed.

Notice of Decision

31. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original Judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    allowed for both Appellants.

No anonymity order is made.




Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 2nd January 2015

