
[pic]

Upper Tribunal    Appeal Number: OA/15396/2013
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    OA/15397/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|                                                 |                              |
|Heard at Field House                             |                              |
|On 17 July 2014                                  |                              |
|                                                 |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between


                           Entry Clearance Officer
                                   beijing

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               Mengfei lin lin
                               XIAOYU LIN LIN

                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


                            ORDER AND DIRECTIONS

 1.  The  Secretary  of  State  appeals   with   permission   against   the
    determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Sweet,   allowing   the
    claimants' appeal against her refusal to issue them entry clearance  as
    adult dependant relatives of their sponsor father, Mr Xi Lin,  who  has
    indefinite leave to remain in the United  Kingdom.  The  claimants  are
    Chinese citizens.

 2. In an error of  law  decision  made  by  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Phillips on 17 July 2014, that determination  was  set  aside  and  the
    Judge adjourned the appeal for the decision to be remade in  the  Upper
    Tribunal, limited to Article 8 ECHR outside the  Immigration  Rules  HC
    395 (as amended).

 3. He considered that it might be necessary for witness statements  to  be
    provided on behalf  of  the  claimants,  as  well  as  updated  witness
    statements from his United Kingdom sponsor and his wife.  I  note  that
    by letter dated 15 July 2014, the sponsor indicated  that  although  he
    speaks some English, it  might  not  be  sufficient  for  him  to  give
    evidence  at  the  hearing,  and  that  he  will  require  a   Mandarin
    interpreter.

 4. I do not consider that it is appropriate for this appeal to be retained
    in the Upper Tribunal, since further findings of fact will be required.
     I also have regard to the public interest considerations introduced as
    part 5A of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 by  s.19  of
    the Immigration Act 2014 with effect from 28 July 2014, and which  will
    have to be considered when this determination is remade.

 5. I therefore make the following order and direction:

      1) I order that the appeal be transferred for hearing  in  the  First-
         tier Tribunal (Hatton Cross); and
      2) I direct that a Mandarin interpreter be provided for the rehearing.



 6. Any additional directions  required  for  the  hearing  to  remake  the
    determination will be given by that Tribunal in due course.



Date                                   Signed
                                    Judith Gleeson
                                    Judge of the Upper Tribunal

