
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/15507/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 6th August 2013                              |On 16th August 2013        |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                           mr GABRIEL AMOFAH MARFO
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K Fursdon, Solicitor of Fursdon Knapper
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Ghana whose appeal to be allowed to enter
    the United Kingdom under paragraph 281 of  the  Immigration  Rules  was
    refused by the Entry Clearance Officer and his subsequent appeal  under
    the immigration Rules allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Walker in  a
    determination promulgated on 4th June 2013. Given that the  appeal  was
    being allowed under the Rules the judge said it was not  necessary  for
    him to consider further Article 8 ECHR. The grounds of application were
    lodged essentially on the basis that the judge had taken  into  account
    post-decision evidence  when  he  considered  the  IELTS  test  result.
    Permission to appeal was therefore granted.

 2. Before me Ms Fursdon stated that she had appeared at the hearing before
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge and had asked him not to allow  the  case
    under the Immigration Rules because the Appellant as  at  the  date  of
    decision - the critical date - was not rule compliant, in that  he  had
    not passed the English language  test.   Accordingly  she  acknowledged
    that the judge had fallen into error in allowing the appeal  under  the
    Rules.

 3. The parties were in agreement that there was an error  of  law  in  the
    judge's decision and therefore that the decision had to  be  set  aside
    and remade.

 4. Ms Fursdon urged me to allow the appeal  under  Article  8  ECHR.   The
    Appellant now met the requirements  of  paragraph  281  of  the  Rules.
    Reference was made to the skeleton argument. This was an Appellant  who
    had worked for the British  army  from  2007  to  2009.  His  wife  was
    pregnant and due to give birth on 21st August 2013. No  useful  purpose
    would be served in refusing the appeal.

 5. For the Home Office Mr Nath said that there  was  arguably  a  lack  of
    information in relation to Article 8.

 6. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

 7. None of the facts are in dispute. The application of the  Appellant  is
    now compliant with the Rules and his wife is about to give  birth.   It
    seems to be that no useful purpose can be identified in  requiring  the
    Appellant to reapply for entry clearance to the United Kingdom when  he
    now fulfils all the requirements of paragraph 281 and where his wife is
    heavily  pregnant  with  their  child.   In  her  circumstances  it  is
    manifestly unreasonable to  expect  her  to  travel  to  Ghana.  It  is
    accepted that the marriage is genuine and subsisting.

 8. On these facts it therefore seems to me to be disproportionate in terms
    of Article 8 ECHR to refuse the Appellant entry to the United  Kingdom.
    No legitimate public end can be achieved by compelling the Appellant to
    start the application process afresh. For these reasons the  appeal  is
    allowed.











Decision

 9. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

10. I set aside the decision.

11. I remake the decision in the appeal by  allowing  it  on  human  rights
    grounds, namely Article 8 ECHR.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald

