
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: OA/16275/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields            |     Decision & Reasons           |
|                                  |Promulgated                       |
|On 28 January 2016                |     On 4 February 2016           |
|Prepared on 28 January 2016       |                                  |

                                   Before


                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    M. K.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER MANILA
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     The Appellant in person
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant is a citizen of Japan. She was granted ILR  on  10
           April 2000, but returned to Japan to live in 2005.  She  applied
           for entry clearance as a returning resident on 20 November 2014,
           and her application was refused on 4 December 2014 by  reference
           to the requirements of paragraphs 18 and 19 of  the  Immigration
           Rules.
        2. The Appellant duly appealed against  that  immigration  decision
           and her appeal was heard on the papers by Judge CM Phillips  and
           allowed in a decision promulgated on 16 July 2015.
        3. The Respondent's application to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
           permission to appeal was granted by First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge
           Ford on 29 October 2015.
        4. The Appellant filed no  Rule  24  response,  and  neither  party
           applied to introduce further evidence.  Thus  the  matter  comes
           before me.

      The grant of entry clearance
        5. The Appellant was able to appear at the hearing because she  was
           granted entry clearance by the Respondent on 8 July  2015.  This
           date fell between the date of the hearing of the appeal and  the
           date of promulgation of  the  Judge's  decision.  The  Appellant
           produced her passport to me, which is endorsed  with  the  visa,
           and which records that she has leave until 22 March  2018  as  a
           spouse.
        6. Mr Diwnycz accepted that neither the ECO, nor  subsequently  the
           ECM, had made any reference to the relevant IDIs, and that their
           decisions contained no analysis of whether the  Appellant  would
           meet the substantive requirements of either  paragraph  281,  or
           Appendix FM. He accepted that the ECO's decision was not made in
           accordance with the law as a result.
        7. After  a  brief  discussion  of  whether  the  grounds  actually
           disclosed a material error of law in the  Judge's  decision,  or
           amounted merely to a disagreement with it, Mr  Diwnycz  accepted
           that no error of law was disclosed by the decision that required
           it to be set aside and remade. He accepted in  consequence  that
           the Appellant's application as a returning resident should  have
           been granted so that she should have been granted ILR. No  doubt
           the position will now be rectified, and the appropriate grant of
           ILR  will  now  be  recorded  in   the   Appellant's   passport,
           superceding the limited grant of leave that has been made.
        8. It follows that,  despite  the  terms  in  which  the  grant  of
           permission to appeal was framed, this is a challenge  that  must
           be dismissed. I reject the Respondent's argument that the  Judge
           made any material error of law that requires his decision to  be
           set aside and remade.


   DECISION


      The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated  on
      16 July 2015 did not involve the making of an  error  of  law  in  the
      decision to allow the appeal that requires that  decision  to  be  set
      aside and remade. The decision to  allow  the  appeal  is  accordingly
      confirmed.


Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
      Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
        granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
        indirectly  identify  her.  This  direction  applies  both  to  the
        Appellant and to  the  Respondent.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
        direction could lead to proceedings being brought for  contempt  of
        court.






Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes                     Dated  28  January
2016




