
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/16940/2012
                                                               OA/16941/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 14th February 2014                           |On 25th February 2014      |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                               ibrahim sanneh
                                fatou ceesay
                        (nO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ABUJA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr A Jafar, Counsel instructed by Windfall
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms P Hastings, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

1. The Appellants are Fatou Ceesay, a female citizen of Gambia born  on  6th
October 1977, and her son, Ibrahim Sanneh, also  a  citizen  of  Gambia  and
born on 13th July 2009.  They both applied to the British  High  Commission,
Abuja, for entry clearance as the spouse and  child  of  the  Sponsor,  Babu
Sanneh.  Those applications were refused for the reasons  given  in  Notices
of Decision dated 14th August 2012.   The  Appellants  appealed,  and  their
appeals were heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Telford  (the  Judge)
sitting at Hatton Cross on 26th June  2013.   He  decided  to  dismiss  both
appeals for the reasons given in his Determination  dated  19th  July  2013.
The Appellants sought permission  to  appeal  that  decision,  and  on  13th
January 2014 such leave was granted.

Error of Law

2. It is first necessary for me to decide  if  the  decision  of  the  Judge
contained an error on a point of law so that it should be set aside.

3. The Judge dismissed the appeals because he  found  the  evidence  of  the
Appellant not to be credible. As regards the  subsistence  of  her  marriage
with the Sponsor the Judge found that  there  had  been  little  "meaningful
contact" between the Sponsor and his wife, and took into  account  the  fact
that the Sponsor had been married before and that that marriage had been  of
short duration, although a child had been born of  that  union.   The  Judge
also found that there would be inadequate maintenance and accommodation  for
the Appellants in the UK.  Finally, the Judge decided that the  Respondent's
decision did not amount to a  disproportionate  breach  of  the  Appellants'
Article 8 ECHR rights.  The  latter  decision  was  not  challenged  in  the
grounds of application.

4. At the hearing, I head submissions from both  representatives  which  are
recorded in the Record of Proceedings.  As regards accommodation,  Mr  Jafar
argued that the Judge had erred in law because evidence now  available  from
Reading Borough Council  showed  that  the  Sponsor  would  be  rehoused  in
suitable accommodation on the arrival of the Appellants in the UK.

5. In response, Ms Hastings argued that the Judge had not erred in law.   In
reaching his decision as regards accommodation, the Judge had taken  account
of all the documentary and  oral  evidence  available  at  the  hearing  and
relating to the date of decision which had not included  the  correspondence
from Reading Borough Council.  This had been  submitted  subsequent  to  the
hearing  and  indeed  subsequent  to  the  promulgation   of   the   Judge's
Determination.

6. I  find  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  Judge.
Unfortunately the Determination contains a number of errors.   For  example,
as regards the subsistence  of  the  marriage,  the  Judge  failed  to  take
account of the evidence before him of money transfers  between  the  Sponsor
and the  Appellants,  and  as  regards  maintenance,  the  Judge  completely
overlooked the income which the Sponsor derived  from  his  employment  with
G4S Security Company.   However,  it  is  trite  law  that  to  succeed  the
Appellants need to show that  they  satisfy  all  the  requirements  of  the
relevant Immigration Rule.   There  is  no  error  of  law  in  the  Judge's
decision concerning accommodation.  The Judge dismissed the  appeal  because
he found that requirement not to be  satisfied,  and  it  therefore  follows
that any error in respect of the subsistence of the marriage or  maintenance
is immaterial.

7. There is no error of law in respect of the  Judge's  decision  concerning
accommodation for this reason.  The evidence from  Reading  Borough  Council
was not before the Judge and therefore it cannot be an error of law for  him
not to have taken it into account.  The only evidence before the  Judge  was
that the Sponsor lived in a bedsitting room which  he  would  soon  have  to
vacate as the building was to  be  demolished.   He  had  been  informed  by
Reading Borough Council that if the Appellants joined  him  he  could  apply
for more substantial accommodation, but there was  no  evidence  as  to  the
potential success of such an application.  The Sponsor had not sought  other
alternative accommodation.  On the basis of that  evidence,  the  Judge  was
entitled to come to the conclusion that the Appellants had  not  shown  that
there would be adequate accommodation for them in the UK.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.


Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005  and  I  find  no
reason to do so.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
