
IAC-HW-MP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/16387/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 January 2015                             |On 14 January 2015            |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GIBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 MERFA ZYKA
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kerr, Counsel, of Karis Law


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is  an  appeal  that  was  allowed  at  the  First-tier,  and  the
    appellant before the Upper  Tribunal  is  therefore  the  Secretary  of
    State.  For clarity and convenience,  however,  I  will  refer  to  the
    parties as they were at the original appeal.

2.   The appellant, a citizen of Albania, applied  for  entry  clearance  to
    join her husband in the UK.  At the time of the application her husband
    was a British citizen, but he has subsequently  been  deprived  of  his
    British citizenship on the basis that he attained it by  pretending  to
    be Kosovan,  when  he  was  in  fact  Albanian.   The  entry  clearance
    application was submitted in 2007, but was not refused  until  February
    2013.  The refusal included an allegation  that  false  representations
    had been made, through  reliance  on  the  sponsor's  British  passport
    (paragraph 320(7A) of the Immigration Rules).

3.   The appeal was allowed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Metzer,  in  a
    determination promulgated on 1 October 2014.  Permission to appeal  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Levin, on 2 December 2014.

4.   At the start of the hearing it was agreed, by the parties,  that  there
    was a misunderstanding of the findings made by the judge  that  allowed
    the appeal, at paragraph 4  of  the  permission  decision.   The  judge
    granting permission suggested that the judge who allowed the appeal had
    made a finding that the appellant was unaware of the deception when the
    application was made in 2007.  As was agreed at the  hearing  this  was
    not the case.  In fact the judge's  finding  had  been  that  both  the
    appellant and the sponsor  were  not  only  aware  of  the  history  of
    deception, but had decided to be open about the sponsor's background in
    the application, whatever the consequences of this might be.

5.   The grounds seeking permission to appeal  had  referred  to  the  judge
    failing to provide adequate reasoning for his findings.  The actions of
    the  couple  were   said   to   demonstrate   a   reliance   on   false
    representations.

6.   At the hearing before me Mr Avery, for  the  Secretary  of  State,  put
    forward his challenge on a somewhat different basis, namely that  these
    were circumstances in which no reasonable judge could have allowed  the
    appeal.  The whole basis of the application was  deceptive.   This  was
    because the act of presenting the British passport,  which  had  itself
    been obtained by deception, in itself amounted to  deception,  even  if
    the couple were being open about the sponsor's origins.

7.   Mr Kerr, for the appellant, referred to the words "in relation  to  the
    application" in paragraph 320(7A).  The judge had  been  clear  in  his
    findings that in the course of this particular  application  there  had
    been no deception. By that time the couple had decided  to  come  clean
    about the sponsor's background.  They provided  evidence  showing  that
    the sponsor had been born in Albania, and by  the  time  of  the  entry
    clearance application there was no deception  involved.   The  passport
    was submitted, but the sponsor and appellant both  disclosed  that  the
    sponsor had obtained it by falsely claiming to be a Kosovan.  The judge
    was clear in his findings on this point.

Error of Law

8.   I have decided that the judge did not err in law  in  his  approach  to
    paragraph 320(7A).  The reasoning at paragraphs 15 and 16 appears to me
    to be clear.  The judge addressed himself correctly to the  test  in  A
    [2010] EWCA Civ 773.  The key finding was that the couple, by the  time
    of the application, had admitted the sponsor's previous deception.   As
    the judge noted this had rendered the  sponsor  potentially  liable  to
    losing his British citizenship.   The  submission  put  forward  by  Mr
    Avery, that no reasonable judge could have made this finding, does  not
    appear to me to be made out.  Given the unchallenged finding  that  the
    decision had already been taken by the couple to admit to the sponsor's
    past deception, it appears to me that it  was  certainly  open  to  the
    judge to make the finding that he did, namely that there was  no  false
    representation in the course of this entry clearance application.

9.   The determination appears to  me  to  have  dealt  with  the  facts  in
    detail; to have dealt with the submissions put forward by  both  sides;
    to have given full consideration to relevant authorities; and  to  have
    reached factual findings that were  open  on  the  evidence,  and  were
    adequately reasoned.

10.  Whether the challenge is on the basis of inadequate  reasoning,  as  in
    the grounds, or on the basis of perversity, as at the  hearing  and  in
    the decision granting permission to appeal, it does not  appear  to  me
    that a material error of law has been made out.  As a result  there  is
    no basis to interfere with the judge's  decision  allowing  the  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules.

11.  I was informed at the hearing that matters  have  moved  on  since  the
    First-tier hearing that took place in September 2014.   At  that  stage
    the sponsor had not yet been deprived of his British  citizenship.   He
    now has been.  In addition a decision has been made to remove him  from
    the UK.  This decision attracted a right of appeal, and there is due to
    be a hearing in May 2015.   As  a  result  of  these  developments  the
    outcome of this appeal will not be of benefit  to  the  appellant.   No
    direction was made, and the Entry Clearance Officer  is  in  any  event
    entitled to consider the current circumstances.   These  are  that  the
    sponsor is no longer a  British  citizen,  and  neither  does  he  have
    settled status.  It is likely that the overall position as far  as  the
    appellant is concerned will now  have  to  await  the  outcome  of  the
    sponsor's appeal process, which may lead to him being required to leave
    the UK, or leave him without settled status if allowed to stay at  all.
    Only if his appeal is allowed and he is  granted  settled  status  will
    there be a basis for entry clearance for the appellant.

12.  Neither side mentioned anonymity or a fee award.  The  fee  award  made
    by the First-tier Judge remains undisturbed, along with the rest of the
    decision.  I see no basis for any anonymity order.

Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

No error of law having been shown, the judge's decision allowing the  appeal
(but with no direction made) stands.

No anonymity order is made.



Signed        Date 14 January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Gibb

