

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/16807/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26th November 2014                        |On 8th January 2015           |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAIRD


                                   Between

                              miss Bindiya rana
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Ball - Counsel, instructed by Howe & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by Miss Bindiya Rana, a citizen  of  Nepal  born  9th
    December 1989.  She appeals against the decision of the Entry Clearance
    Officer (ECO) made on 30th July  2013  to  refuse  entry  clearance  to
    settle in the UK as the dependent of her father, an ex-Gurkha  soldier.
    The application was made on 20th  May  2013.   The  Appellant  appealed
    against that decision and her appeal was allowed by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge David Clapham on human rights grounds following a hearing on 28th
    May 2014.

 2.  The Secretary of State appealed  against  that  decision  and  on  4th
    September 2014 having heard submissions, I found that Judge Clapham had
    made a material error of law in his determination and I  set  it  aside
    with no preserved findings of fact.

 3. I now proceed to remake the decision.

 4. The position of the ECO in this case is as follows.

 5. He accepted that the Appellant's father, her Sponsor,  is  present  and
    settled in the UK.  At the time the decision was made  the  Appellant's
    mother was still in New Delhi but a visa for entry clearance to the  UK
    had been issued to her on 18th July 2013 and she subsequently travelled
    to the UK.  The Entry Clearance Officer considered the Appellant to  be
    a fit and capable 23 year old adult female able to look after  herself.
    She had just completed a Bachelors Degree in Social Sciences.  He noted
    that there was a discrepancy in her date of birth  in  that  her  birth
    certificate and other documents put this as 9th December 1989  and  her
    father's Army Kindred Roll says she was born  on  10th  December  1990.
    The view of the ECO was that her father would have had to have provided
    documentation to support the date of birth of 10th December 1990 at the
    time of registration onto the Kindred  Roll  and  the  discrepancy  was
    unexplained.  He took into  account  that  she  had  not  provided  any
    evidence of her father's income or means of support in the UK.

 6. He went on to consider her application under the Secretary  of  State's
    policy for dependants over the age of 18 of  Foreign  and  Commonwealth
    and Other HM Forces members as set out  in IDI Chapter  15  Section  2A
    13.2.  He noted that this policy allows for  applications  where  there
    are exceptional circumstances and said that he was not  sure  what  the
    exceptional  circumstances  were  in  the  Appellant's  case   so   her
    application would fail.  She had not shown  anything  beyond  a  normal
    relationship between  parents  and  adult  children  and  that  is  not
    sufficient.  There is nothing that would lead to a discretionary  grant
    of leave outside the Rules.  She lives in her  father's  property  with
    her mother and brother and has just completed a degree which will stand
    her in good stead in getting a job.  Her mother could remain  with  her
    in Nepal.  It is a matter of choice whether she does or not.

 7. He said that it would have been clearly understood by her  father  that
    he would not have the right to settle in the UK on  completion  of  his
    service.  He is now entitled to reside in the UK but is not obliged to.
     Ex-Gurkhas cannot bring their adult  children  to  the  UK  with  them
    unless they can either satisfy  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules or bring themselves within the ambit of the applicable  published
    policy of the Secretary of State.

 8. He acknowledged the historic injustice and its consequences suffered by
    former members  of  the  Brigade  of  Gurkhas  and  accepted  that  the
    Secretary of State had made special provisions for their entry  to  the
    UK outside the Immigration Rules as an acknowledgement that  it  is  in
    the public interest to remedy the injustice but went  on  to  say  that
    there is no guarantee that the Appellant's father would have  taken  up
    the opportunity to settle immediately upon his discharge from  service.
     Her parents had chosen to apply  for  settlement  visas  knowing  that
    their adult children would not  automatically  qualify  for  settlement
    here.  There is no bar to one or other or both  of  them  remaining  in
    Nepal with her.

 9. The decision was reviewed on 20th January 2014 by the  Entry  Clearance
    Manager (ECM) who upheld it.

10. The position of the Appellant as set out in the Grounds of  Appeal  and
    in the skeleton argument provided  at  the  hearing  before  me  is  as
    follows.  Reliance is placed on the IDI referred to above at Chapter 15
    Section 2A 13.2.  This policy is the  same  as  that  considered  in  R
    (Gurung) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 8.  In that case it was said:

         "In  exceptional  circumstances  discretion  may  be  exercised  in
         individual cases where the dependant is over the age of 18."

         "For many years, Gurkha veterans were treated less favourably  than
         other comparable non-British Commonwealth soldiers serving  in  the
         British Army.   Although  Commonwealth  citizens  were  subject  to
         immigration control the SSHD had a concessionary policy outside the
         Rules which allowed such  citizens  who  were  serving  and  former
         members of the British Armed Forces to obtain  on  their  discharge
         indefinite leave to enter and remain in the UK.  Gurkhas  were  not
         included in this policy.   They  were  therefore  not  entitled  to
         settle in the UK."

    The caselaw has established that Gurkhas were  unfairly  excluded  from
    this concession and that they suffered a "historic injustice" in  being
    deprived of their right to settle in the UK.

11. At paragraph 42 of Gurung the Court of Appeal said:

         "If a Gurkha can show that, but  for  the  historic  injustice,  he
         would have settled in the UK at a time  when  his  dependent  (now)
         adult children would have been able to accompany him as a dependent
         child under the age of 18, that is a strong reason for holding that
         it is proportionate to permit the adult child to  join  his  family
         now."

    In doing this the Court of Appeal affirmed the decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in KG (Gurkhas - over age dependants - policies) Nepal  [2011]
    UKUT 137 where it was held that the historic injustice suffered by  the
    Gurkha veterans and their families reduces the weight to  be  put  into
    the public interest side of the  balance  when  considering  Article  8
    ECHR.

12. Reliance is then placed on the decision of the Upper  Tribunal  Ghising
    and Others (Gurkhas/BOCs: historic wrong; weight) [2013] UKUT 00567  in
    particular headnotes 4 and 5 which say:

         [4]  Where it is found that Article 8 is engaged and, but  for  the
             historic wrong, the Appellant would have been settled  in  the
             UK long ago, this will ordinarily determine the outcome of the
             Article 8 proportionality assessment in an Appellant's favour.

         [5]  ... If the Respondent can point to matters over and above  the
             public interest in  maintaining  a  firm  immigration  policy,
             which argue in favour of removal or the refusal  of  leave  to
             enter, these matters must be given appropriate weight  in  the
             balance in the Respondent's favour.  Thus, a  bad  immigration
             history and/or criminal behaviour may still be  sufficient  to
             outweigh the powerful factors bearing on the Appellant's  side
             of the balance.

13. With regard to Article 8 paragraphs 51 to  61  of  Ghising  are  relied
    upon.

14. I have statements from the Appellant and  her  family.   The  Appellant
    says  that  she  is  totally  dependent  on  her  parents  financially,
    emotionally and in all basic things.  Culturally Gurkha girls remain at
    home with their parents until they are married.  She  and  her  parents
    speak three times a week on the phone.  They cannot do  it  more  often
    because of the expense.  She wants to live with her parents.

15. In his statement the Appellant's father confirms that  he  was  granted
    indefinite leave to remain on 25th May 2010 under  the  Gurkha  policy.
    He was a British Gurkha soldier for over seventeen years.  When he  was
    discharged in 1984 there was no settlement policy in place but  had  he
    been allowed to apply for settlement at that time he  would  have  done
    so.  The Appellant would then have been born in  the  UK.   He  submits
    that there are exceptional circumstances in his daughter's  application
    i.e. the historic injustice suffered by Gurkha veterans.  He  maintains
    a family life with his daughter.  In their culture an  unmarried  child
    is the sole responsibility of her  parents  until  such  times  as  she
    marries.  The right to remain in the UK would be a hollow one if  their
    daughter could not join them.

16. I heard oral evidence from  the  Appellant's  father  who  adopted  his
    statement.  He confirmed that he was discharged  from  the  Brigade  of
    Gurkhas in October 1984 and went to Brunei to join a Reserve Unit.   At
    that point his wife was in Nepal.  His daughter was  born  in  December
    1989.  She is studying at a  college  in  Kathmandu  and  is  currently
    living there - away from home.  He arranged  rented  accommodation  for
    her there.  He pays for her education and her living costs.  He came to
    the UK in 2010 and his wife  joined  him  in  February  2014.   In  re-
    examination he confirmed that he did not come to the UK  to  settle  in
    1984 because there was at that time no scheme that would enable him  to
    do that.

17. The Appellant's mother gave evidence adopting her statement.

18. In his submissions Mr Tarlow said that the Appellant's daughter was not
    born at the time her father was discharged from the Brigade of  Gurkhas
    so it is perverse to suggest that he could have come here with  her  at
    that point.

19. Mr Hall submitted that Mr Tarlow is wrong.  The Appellant's father  was
    clear in his evidence that had he been allowed to apply to come to  the
    UK when he was discharged he would have done so.  If he had  done  this
    his daughter would have been born here.   The  fact  that  he  went  to
    Brunei is indicative of the fact that  he  was  willing  to  move  from
    Nepal.  The fact that the Appellant was not born at  the  time  is  not
    fatal to her application.  Article 8 is engaged.  The interference with
    her family life is disproportionate because the only reason she is  not
    able to come is that her father was wrongly and unfairly disbarred from
    coming to the UK in the first place, a wrong that  was  not  put  right
    until 2009.  The historic injustice of itself is sufficient  to  render
    the decision to refuse her  leave  disproportionate  to  the  need  for
    effective immigration control in the UK.  There are  no  countervailing
    reasons in this case.  She has no poor immigration history.

My Findings

20. I have given careful consideration to all the evidence put before me in
    this case.

21. The Appellant's father retired from the Gurkhas  in  1984,  five  years
    before the Appellant was born at which time he had  one  child,  a  son
    born in 1978 who according to the evidence lives with the Appellant  in
    the family home. He says that had it been possible to come  to  the  UK
    then he would have come and his daughter,  the  Appellant,  would  have
    been born here.

22. What the Upper Tribunal panel in Ghising said, having  noted  that  the
    Secretary of State had made special  provision  for  entry  to  the  UK
    outside the Immigration Rules of Gurkha veterans and their families  as
    an acknowledgement that it is in the  public  interest  to  remedy  the
    historic injustice perpetrated upon them, was:

         "Given that the Gurkhas are Nepali nationals, it is not  inherently
         unfair or in breach of their human rights  to  distinguish  between
         Gurkha veterans, their wives and minor children on  the  one  hand,
         who will generally be given leave to remain, and adult children  on
         the other, who will only be given leave to  remain  in  exceptional
         circumstances.   The  scheme  that  the  Secretary  of  State   has
         developed  is  capable  of  addressing  the  historical  wrong  and
         contains within it a flexibility that, in  most  cases  will  avoid
         conspicuous unfairness."

23. I note that the court in Ghising took into account that  the  Appellant
    in that case, a young adult male, was still  living  at  home  and  was
    studying.  The court took into account that he  enjoyed  a  close  knit
    family life with his family and they depended on each other for  mutual
    support and affection.  Even when  he  came  to  the  UK  to  study  he
    remained financially and emotionally dependent on his parents and their
    normal family life resumed as soon as his parents were able  to  settle
    in the UK.

24. In Entry Clearance Officer, New Delhi v KG [2011] UKUT  117  the  Upper
    Tribunal held that the public interest in  maintaining  fair  and  firm
    immigration control was not as strong as usual because of the existence
    of a policy outside the Immigration Rules  provided  for  admission  of
    those such as the Appellant and because the Appellant could  have  come
    to the UK as a minor if Gurkha veterans had not been wrongly  prevented
    from settling here at an earlier date.  It was in  May  2009  that  the
    Secretary of State announced that any Gurkha with more than four years'
    service who had been discharged from the Brigade of Gurkhas before  1st
    July 1997 would be eligible for settlement in the UK under the terms of
    a discretionary policy set out in the IDI Chapter 15 Section  2A  Annex
    A.  This permitted the spouse and minor children of eligible Gurkhas to
    settle in the UK  but only  allowed  adult  children  to  settle  on  a
    discretionary basis. Mrs Justice Lang indeed said  in Ghising:

         "The scheme  that  the  Respondent  has  developed  is,  therefore,
         capable of addressing the historical wrong and contains within it a
         flexibility that in most cases will avoid  conspicuous  unfairness.
         Furthermore, although not an Immigration Rule the Respondent  could
         not properly fail to adopt the obligation set out in paragraph 2 of
         the Rules, namely that decision-makers within the Home  Office  and
         UKBA  should  perform  their  duties  so  as  to  comply  with  the
         provisions  of  the  Human  Rights  Act  1998,  in  particular  the
         judicious recognition of exceptional circumstances in the  case  of
         an adult dependant. "

    She went on to say at paragraph 120 that the  impact  of  the  historic
    injustice and its consequences on  proportionality  as  assessed  under
    Article 8 is limited.

25. In Gurung  the Court of Appeal said,

      i) 'The general rule stated in the policy in relation to the dependant
         adult children of Gurkhas is not so ambiguous in its scope as to be
         misleading as to what would be a sufficient reason to  substantiate
         a discretionary claim to settlement. On the contrary,  the  general
         rule is clearly stated in Annex  A.  It  is  that  dependant  adult
         children will not "normally qualify for the exercise of  discretion
         in line with the main applicant". The normal position is that  they
         are expected to apply for  leave  to  enter  or  remain  under  the
         relevant provisions of the Rules  (Rule  317(i)(f))  or  under  the
         provisions of article 8 of the ECHR. There is nothing ambiguous  or
         unclear about this. That is the general position.

     ii) We accept the submission of Ms McGahey that the historic  injustice
         is only one of the factors  to  be  weighed  against  the  need  to
         maintain a firm and fair immigration policy. It is not  necessarily
         determinative. If it were, the application of every adult child  of
         a UK-settled Gurkha  who establishes that he has a family life with
         his parent would be bound to succeed. Mr Drabble does  not  contend
         for this extreme position and it is not supported by  the  approach
         adopted in the BOC cases to which we have referred.'

26. I accept therefore that in considering  Article  8  ECHR  the  historic
    injustice and its consequences are to be taken into account. I  do  not
    accept the implication in the submission made by the Appellant's father
    in his statement and by  Mr  Ball  on  his  behalf  that  the  historic
    injustice of itself constitutes an  exceptional  factor  warranting  an
    automatic grant of leave to adult children under Article 8. Neither the
    Home Office Policy nor of the caselaw supports such an argument.

27. The first question that must be addressed is whether the Appellant  and
    her parents enjoy family life together and if they do what the strength
    of that family life is. Ultimately, the question whether an  individual
    enjoys  family  life  is  one  of  fact  and  depends  on   a   careful
    consideration of all the relevant facts of the particular case.

28. In Gurung the Court said,

         'The critical issue was whether there  was  sufficient  dependence,
         and  in  particular  sufficient  emotional   dependence,   by   the
         appellants on their parents to justify  the  conclusion  that  they
         enjoyed family life. That was a question of fact  for  the  FTT  to
         determine. In our view, the FTT  was  entitled  to  conclude  that,
         although the  usual  emotional  bonds  between  parents  and  their
         children were present, the requisite degree of emotional dependence
         was absent.'

29. Lord Bingham in EB (Kosovo) v Home Secretary [2008] UKHL 41 [2009] 1 AC
    1159 at paragraph 12 said:

         "There is in  general  no  alternative  to  making  a  careful  and
         informed evaluation of the facts of the particular case. The search
         for a  hard-edged  or  bright  line  rule  to  be  applied  to  the
         generality of cases is incompatible with the  difficult  evaluative
         exercise which Article 8 required."

30. In Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha  policy)  [2012]  UKUT  00160
    (IAC) there is a discussion of family life between adults. Of  Kugathas
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 31  it  is
    said,

       'We observe at the outset that the facts in Kugathas were strikingly
       different from the facts in this case.  Mr Kugathas was  a  national
       of Sri Lanka, aged about 38, who  had  moved  to  Germany  with  his
       mother and siblings,  as  refugees,  about  17  years  earlier.   Mr
       Kugathas had been living on his own in the UK for about 3 years, and
       the only contact he had had with his family was one visit of 3 weeks
       duration from his  sister,  her  husband  and  child,  and  periodic
       telephone calls.  The Court of Appeal held that  he  did  not  enjoy
       family life with his  family  in  Germany,  within  the  meaning  of
       Article 8(1).



         In  Kugathas,  at  [14],  Sedley  LJ  cited  with   approval   the
        Commission's observation in S v United Kingdom (1984) 40 DR 196:

             "Generally the protection  of  family  life  under  Article  8
             involves cohabiting dependents,  such  as  parents  and  their
             dependent,  minor  children.  Whether  it  extends  to   other
             relationships depends on the circumstances of  the  particular
             case. Relationships between adults, a mother and her  33  year
             old son in the present case, would not necessarily acquire the
             protection of Article 8 of the Convention without evidence  of
             further elements of dependency, involving more than the normal
             emotional ties."

       Sedley LJ accepted the submission that 'dependency' was  not  limited
       to economic      dependency, at [17].  He added:

             "But if dependency is read down as meaning  "support"  in  the
             personal sense,  and  if  one  adds,  echoing  the  Strasbourg
             jurisprudence, "real" or "committed"  or  "effective"  to  the
             word "support", then it represents in my view the  irreducible
             minimum of what family life implies."

               Arden LJ said , at [24] - [25]:

             "24. There is no presumption that a person has a family  life,
             even with the members of  a  person's  immediate  family.  The
             court has to scrutinise the  relevant  factors.  Such  factors
             include  identifying  who  are  the  near  relatives  of   the
             appellant, the nature  of  the  links  between  them  and  the
             appellant, the age of the appellant, where and  with  whom  he
             has resided in the past, and  the  forms  of  contact  he  has
             maintained with the other members of the family with  whom  he
             claims to have a family life.

             25. Because there is no presumption  of  family  life,  in  my
             judgment a family life is not  established  between  an  adult
             child and  his  surviving  parent  or  other  siblings  unless
             something more exists than normal emotional ties...  Such  tie
             might exist if the appellant were dependent on his  family  or
             vice versa."





31. The Tribunal went on to consider decisions of  the  European  Court  of
    Human Rights noting that some of the Court's  decisions  indicate  that
    family life between adult children and parents will readily  be  found,
    without evidence of exceptional dependence. They noted that  the  ECtHR
    had reviewed the case law, in  AA  v  United  Kingdom  (Application  no
    8000/08), finding that a significant factor will be whether or not  the
    adult child has founded a family of his own.  If he is still single and
    living with his parents,  he  is  likely  to  enjoy  family  life  with
    them. They accepted that  it has been recognised that family life  may
    continue between parent and child even after the child has attained his
    majority:

32. The Tribunal also cited  Sedley LJ in  Patel & Ors  v  Entry  Clearance
    Officer Mumbai [2010] EWCA Civ 1330 -

         "You can set out to compensate for  a  historical  wrong,  but  you
         cannot reverse the passage of time. Many of these children have now
         grown up and embarked  on  lives  of  their  own.  Where  this  has
         happened, the bonds which constitute family life will no longer  be
         there, and art. 8 will have no purchase".

33. I accept that the Appellant is financially dependant on her parents and
    bearing in mind the mores of her culture I accept  that  she  has  some
    emotional dependency on them.  I do however have  some  concerns  about
    the claimed strength of any family life  they  can  be  said  to  enjoy
    together. I feel that I was  not  given  clear  information  about  the
    Appellant's life in Nepal and in particular   about  her  personal  and
    private life there. There is  nothing  in  any  of  the  statements  to
    indicate that she was living away from home. This only came to light as
    a result of questions asked of her father in the  course  of  his  oral
    evidence.  The Appellant did not in her statement give any  detail   of
    her studies. According to a chronology provided she started her  course
    in 2011 so presumably had been away during term  time  for  around  two
    years before her mother left Nepal. It seems reasonable to assume  that
    she has friends and a  private life  in Kathmandu, a large  city  which
    according to her father's evidence is a day's bus ride from  her  home.
    This would have been the situation at the date the decision  was  made.
    There was also  only a passing mention of the Appellant's brother  with
    whom it is said she lives in the family home. The Appellant is 25 years
    old. She has been living  in  rented  accommodation  in  Kathmandu  and
    attending college. Her mother made the decision to  leave  her  pending
    the outcome of this appeal  presumably  in  the  knowledge  that  entry
    clearance may not be granted. She did indeed say  that they  could  not
    afford the application  fees for her to come to the UK at the same time
    as her husband. The Appellant  is not alone even when she is living  in
    the family home. I am urged to give great weight to the cultural  mores
    of Nepal but I  not  satisfied  in  all  the  circumstances  that  such
    considerations detract sufficiently from  the  other  relevant  factors
    such as her independent life as a student, her age and  the  fact  that
    her brother also occupies the family home  to justify  a  finding  that
    her relationship with her parents as a 25 year old  adult  goes  beyond
    normal emotional ties and thus engages Article 8.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal has  been  set  aside  and  replaced
with this decision.

The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date: 6th January 2015

N A Baird
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal









