
IAC-YW-LM-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/16687/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 November 2014                  |On 27 November 2014                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          THE HONOURABLE LORD BURNS
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GIBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Promise Temitope Soleye
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    None (the respondent's father attended the hearing
in person)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal that was allowed on Article 8 grounds in  the  First-
    tier.  The appellant in the Upper Tribunal is therefore  the  Secretary
    of State.  For the sake of clarity and convenience,  however,  we  will
    refer to the parties as they were at the First-tier hearing.

2.   The appellant,  a  citizen  of  Nigeria,  was  14  years  old  when  an
    application for her to return to the UK to live  with  her  father  and
    some of her siblings was refused by an Entry Clearance Officer.  At the
    time of the decision the appellant  was  living  with  her mother  and
    sister in Nigeria, but the appellant had earlier spent time in  the  UK
    with a Tier 1 dependant child visa.  The appellant's  mother  had  also
    been in the UK, but returned to study  for  a  postgraduate  degree  in
    health and epidemiology in Nigeria, taking the  appellant  and  another
    child with her.  The appellant's father is now naturalised as a British
    citizen.   The  application  was  made  with  the  intention  that  the
    appellant would return to the UK in advance of her mother and sister.

3.   The appeal was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Wellesley-Cole,  in
    a determination promulgated on 1 September 2014.  Permission to  appeal
    was granted by Designated  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  McClure,  on  8
    October 2014.  The grounds seeking permission to appeal argue that  the
    judge had failed to identify compelling or  exceptional  circumstances;
    that there had been inadequate reasoning in support of the  conclusions
    on Article 8; and that there had been a  lack  of  evidence  concerning
    accommodation, which was an issue in the refusal.

4.   At the hearing Mr Whitwell, for the Secretary of  State,  sought  leave
    to add two further grounds.  The first was that the  judge  should  not
    have dealt with Article 8 at all, because it had not been raised in the
    grounds of appeal.  The second was that maintenance  and  accommodation
    had not been conceded as an issue  in  the  Entry  Clearance  Manager's
    review, and the judge had failed to make findings on  material  matters
    under the Immigration Rules, that were  also  relevant  to  Article  8.
    These matters consisted  of  accommodation;  maintenance;  and  whether
    there were compelling family or other considerations  making  exclusion
    undesirable (paragraph 297(i)(f) of the Immigration Rules).

5.   We gave leave for the grounds to be amended in this way,  and  did  our
    best to  explain  the  issues  to  the  appellant's  father.   We  also
    indicated, however, that in our view the jurisdictional point was not a
    strong one, because of the  general  duty  of  the  judge  to  consider
    Article 8, and also because it appears likely that the  representatives
    at the hearing addressed her on the subject.

6.   At the hearing we did everything that we could to  draw  out  from  the
    appellant's father the reasons for the family's decision to  apply  for
    the appellant to return in advance of her mother and sister.   We  also
    tried to explain the significance of  this  decision  within  paragraph
    297.  The reasons put forward by the appellant's father were  that  the
    decision to opt for a phased relocation was  partly  to  do  with  cash
    flow, taking into account the application fees; and there  was  also  a
    concern about the appellant  being  unhappy,  and  restless,  and  this
    affecting her ability to concentrate on her studies.   The  appellant's
    father also mentioned her fear of kidnapping in Nigeria, because of the
    publicity about the group of girls kidnapped in  the  north.   He  also
    suggested that he had not expected there to be a problem,  because  she
    had been in the UK before, and the family would all be reunited in  the
    UK in due course.

7.   Mr Whitwell made the point that there had been no mention of  the  fear
    of kidnappings or disruption to education at  the  First-tier  hearing.
    He also made the point that the  kidnappings  happened  in  the  north,
    whereas the appellant is living in Lagos.

Error of Law

8.   As we indicated at the hearing, we came to the view  that  the  judge's
    determination allowing the appeal on  Article  8  grounds  did  involve
    errors on points of law, and the decision  therefore  fell  to  be  set
    aside.

9.   The first difficulty, in our view, is that the judge did  not  complete
    the assessment of paragraph 297 before turning to consider  Article  8.
    The determination appears to move from  a  consideration  of  paragraph
    297(i)(f) to a consideration of Article 8 without a clear  distinction,
    and without any finding as to whether there were in  fact  any  serious
    and  compelling  family  or  other  considerations   making   exclusion
    undesirable. This was an aspect of the second amended ground.

10.  Within the Article 8 proportionality  assessment  itself  there  are  a
    number of points of concern.  In paragraph 12 the judge refers to  part
    of Appendix FM, but it appeared to be agreed between the parties before
    her that the only Immigration Rule in issue was paragraph  297.   There
    is a factual error about the appellant's age, at the start of paragraph
    13.  The judge refers to her as being 17, whereas in fact she was 14 at
    the date of decision.  By the date of the  hearing  before  us  it  was
    agreed that she was 15, but that she would turn 16  in  December  2014.
    This was clearly a significant point in the judge's  thinking,  because
    she refers, in paragraph 16, to the appellant being "just under the age
    of 18", and refers to the reality  of  the  situation  being  that  the
    appellant would be left on her own in Nigeria  with  no  close  family.
    This appeared to be a concern that the appellant would not be  able  to
    make an application as a child, and would therefore somehow be stranded
    in Nigeria whilst the rest of her immediate family return  to  the  UK.
    If the judge had proceeded on a correct  understanding  of  the  facts,
    namely that the appellant was 14, this would not have been  a  concern,
    because her 18th birthday was some years away.

11.  In our view, therefore, the second of the original  grounds  of  appeal
    put forward by the Secretary of State, as well as  the  second  of  the
    amended  grounds,  are  made  out.   The  Article   8   proportionality
    assessment has to be  regarded  as  having  been  conducted  within  an
    incorrect legal framework, on the basis that a proper consideration  of
    the Immigration Rules had not been completed, and on the basis that  it
    was conducted on an incorrect understanding of the facts, in particular
    the central issue of the appellant's age, and the potential for her  to
    be left alone, separated from the rest of her family.

12.  For these reasons, without  considering  the  other  grounds,  we  have
    decided that the decision allowing the  appeal  on  Article  8  grounds
    falls to be set aside, and that a remaking of the decision is required.

Remaking

13.  As we indicated at the hearing, we took  the  view  that  the  decision
    could be remade at once.  We explained this to the appellant's  father.
    We gave him a further opportunity to put forward any  reasons  for  the
    appellant returning to the UK in advance of her mother and sister.  The
    appellant's father added that he was concerned about the overall delay.
     He had now been engaged in trying to bring her to the UK for one  year
    and seven months, bearing  in  mind  the  delays  in  the  appeal.   He
    indicated that he would shortly be making applications for his wife and
    the appellant's sister to return to the UK.

14.  We have decided that, in remaking the decision, the appeal falls to  be
    dismissed under the Immigration Rules, and under Article 8.

15.  Under the Immigration Rules the central question was whether  the  test
    of  serious  and  compelling  family  or  other  considerations  making
    exclusion undesirable could be met.  As we  tried  to  explain  to  the
    appellant's father, the design of paragraph 297  is  such  that,  in  a
    situation where both parents are involved in a child's life, it is  not
    easy to meet the requirements of the Rules in a situation where a child
    is living  with  one  parent  abroad,  and  that  parent  will  not  be
    travelling to the UK with the child.  The issue here is not that of the
    child travelling unaccompanied.  We accept that the appellant's  father
    would have gone to collect her.  The issue is  that  paragraph  297  is
    designed in such a way that the expectation  will  be  that  the  child
    living abroad with one parent will stay with  that  parent  until  such
    time as that parent comes to the UK.

16.  We gave the  appellant's  father  every  opportunity  to  explain  what
    circumstances might be seen to amount to serious and compelling  family
    or other considerations.  We  could  see  nothing  in  the  appellant's
    father's answers that could be said to meet that test.  We would accept
    that the appellant was keen to return to the UK ahead of her mother and
    sister.  We would also accept that she may have certain fears, and that
    her state of mind may be impacting on her studies,  but  we  note  that
    these are all matters unsupported by documentary evidence, and it  does
    not appear to us that they reach a level where it could  be  said  that
    there is an arguable case, on these facts,  to  meet  the  serious  and
    compelling family or other considerations test.  In essence it  appears
    that this was a matter of family choice, perhaps made  without  a  full
    understanding of the nature of the Immigration Rules,  but  that  there
    were no serious problems for the family in the appellant  returning  to
    the UK with her mother and sister, rather than coming ahead of them  on
    her own.  The disruption to education point was not  detailed,  and  we
    note that the appellant's father had said, at the  First-tier  hearing,
    that he would arrange for her to continue her education in  Nigeria  if
    she was unable to come to the UK.

17.  We note the other points raised, about maintenance  and  accommodation.
    It does not appear that the appellant's father will  face  difficulties
    in this regard in obtaining evidence for a future application, but even
    if satisfactory evidence could be provided about the  position  at  the
    date of decision, the appellant could  not  succeed  under  the  Rules.
    This is because, if the appellant  was  unable  to  meet  the  test  in
    297(i)(f) at the date of decision, then the appeal would  be  bound  to
    fail under the Immigration Rules, even if all other aspects were met.

18.  In  remaking  the  decision  it  is  therefore  our  finding  that  the
    appellant did not meet the requirements of paragraph 297, in particular
    the serious and compelling  family  or  other  considerations  test  in
    paragraph 297(i)(f), at the date of decision.  As a result the decision
    was in accordance with the law  and  the  Immigration  Rules,  and  the
    appeal falls to be dismissed on that basis.

19.  Turning to Article 8 it appears  to  us  that  the  Article  8  outcome
    follows in line with that under the Rules, for  similar  reasons.   The
    Rules, through 297(i)(f),  potentially  cover  circumstances  in  which
    there would be some compelling need for the appellant to return  alone,
    and there are no separate matters that would become relevant only under
    Article 8 outside the Rules. We note, first,  that  the  appellant  was
    living with her mother and younger sister at the date of decision,  and
    that she was in education.  It was necessary for the decision maker  to
    observe the need to respect the appellant's right to private and family
    life, and to take into account her best interests as a child.  If there
    had been some prospect of her being left alone  in  Nigeria,  separated
    from the rest of her family, then that  would  have  raised  a  serious
    issue.  As we have already said, however, in our  view  this  decision,
    taken in July 2013, could not have produced circumstances of this sort.
     The appellant's mother and sister had not yet applied to return to the
    UK.  It is significant in this  respect  that  these  applications  had
    still not been made by the date of the hearing before us.

20.  The consequences of the decision therefore amounted  to  the  appellant
    being required to stay in Nigeria with her mother and sister, until her
    mother applied  to  return.   The  facts  as  presented  to  the  Entry
    Clearance  Officer  suggested  that  it  was  the  intention   of   the
    appellant's mother to return  to  the  UK  within  a  relatively  short
    period.  This has turned out to be somewhat longer than was  suggested,
    but the appellant's age was such that the family had plenty of time  to
    make further applications for the appellant to return to  the  UK  with
    her mother.  If the appellant's parents had been properly advised  from
    the start it may well have been that they would have chosen  to  ensure
    that whichever children returned to Nigeria with their mother would not
    be disadvantaged in any way by remaining with their mother  in  Nigeria
    until the date of her return.

21.  We understand the appellant's father's  frustration,  in  that  it  was
    clear that he thought that the fact that his daughter had been  in  the
    UK before meant that there should be no problem with her  returning  on
    her own, but once it is clear, because of the way that the  Immigration
    Rules are designed, that those Rules cannot be met, the  engagement  of
    Article 8 would have to relate to issues of  much  greater  seriousness
    than what effectively amounts to a matter of choice for the  family  as
    to the timing of the return of one of their children.

22.  We would accept that the appellant enjoys family life with both of  her
    parents, and with her siblings.  The  family  have  chosen  to  arrange
    matters in such a way that she returned to Nigeria with her mother.  At
    the date of decision she was therefore living with one parent  and  one
    of her siblings.  The same reasoning that we have applied to the  issue
    of serious or compelling family considerations  also  applies,  in  the
    same way, to the issue of whether the decision amounted to an Article 8
    breach, through being a disproportionate interference with the right to
    respect for family and private life.  Even if we were to take the  view
    that the issues involved amounted  to  an  interference  of  sufficient
    seriousness to engage Article 8, which appears to us  to  be  doubtful,
    none of the potential issues put forward in  support  of  the  family's
    wish for her to return in advance of her mother appear to  us  to  come
    close to showing that any interference would be disproportionate.

23.  Looking at the date of decision it is therefore our  finding  that  the
    Entry Clearance Officer's refusal did not breach  Article  8,  and  the
    appeal, in being remade, therefore falls to be dismissed on that basis.

24.  It was not suggested before us that there was any  need  for  anonymity
    in this appeal.  Despite the appellant's age it does not appear  to  us
    that any of the matters raised require anonymity.  We also note that no
    anonymity direction was made at the First-tier hearing.  We  note  that
    the First-tier Judge made a full fee award.  Since the appeal falls  to
    be dismissed, on remaking, it follows that there  can  now  be  no  fee
    award.  As we explained  to  the  appellant's  father  at  the  hearing
    nothing now prevents applications being made  for  the  appellant,  her
    sister and her mother to return together.  If  the  appellant's  mother
    will be returning with her Paragraph 297(i)(c) will  apply,  and  there
    will be no need to meet the test in 297(i)(f).

Notice of Decision

25.  The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed.

26.  The decision of the First-tier Judge allowing the appeal on  Article  8
    grounds is set aside.  The decision is remade as follows.

27.  The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules.

28.  The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

29.  No anonymity order is made.



Signed        Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Gibb

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

We have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed        Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Gibb

