
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/16904/2012
                                                               OA/16905/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 16 July 2013                                 |On 7 August 2013           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                             Mahmuda Akhtar Reha
                                Shayek Ahmed
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - DHAKA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr B Caswell, instructed by Cartwright King
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants (a brother and sister) were born on 25 May  1994  and  1
    June 1996 respectively and are citizens of  Bangladesh.   On  9  August
    2012, the ECO decided to refuse their applications for entry  clearance
    to the United Kingdom for settlement.  The appellants appealed  to  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Sarsfield)  which,  in  a   determination
    promulgated on 30 April 2013, dismissed the  appeals.   The  appellants
    now appeal, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The applications fell to be considered under paragraph 297  of  HC  395
    (as amended):

         "297.    The requirements to be met by a person seeking indefinite
             leave to enter the United Kingdom as the child of a parent,
             parents or a relative present and settled or being admitted
             for settlement in the United Kingdom are that he:

             (i)  is seeking leave to enter to accompany or join a parent,
                  parents or a relative in one of the following
                  circumstances:

                  (a)  both parents are present and settled in the United
                      Kingdom; or

                  (b)  both parents are being admitted on the same occasion
                      for settlement; or

                  (c)  one parent is present and settled in the United
                      Kingdom and the other is being admitted on the same
                      occasion for settlement; or

                  (d)  one parent is present and settled in the United
                      Kingdom or being admitted on the same occasion for
                      settlement and the other parent is dead; or

                  (e)  one parent is present and settled in the United
                      Kingdom or being admitted on the same occasion for
                      settlement and has had sole responsibility for the
                      child's upbringing; or

                  (f)  one parent or a relative is present and settled in
                      the United Kingdom or being admitted on the same
                      occasion for settlement and there are serious and
                      compelling family or other considerations which make
                      exclusion of the child undesirable and suitable
                      arrangements have been made for the child's care; and



             (ii)     is under the age of 18; and

             (iii)    is not leading an independent life, is unmarried and
                  is not a civil partner, and has not formed an independent
                  family unit; and

             (iv)     can, and will, be accommodated adequately by the
                  parent, parents or relative the child is seeking to join
                  without recourse to public funds in accommodation which
                  the parent, parents or relative the child is seeking to
                  join, own or occupy exclusively; and

             (v)  can, and will, be maintained adequately by the parent,
                  parents, or relative the child is seeking to join, without
                  recourse to public funds; and

             (vi)     holds a valid United Kingdom entry clearance for
                  entry in this capacity; and

             (vii)    does not fall for refusal under the general grounds
                  for refusal."

 3. The First-tier Tribunal heard evidence from the appellants' sponsor and
    mother, Malekan Bibi (hereafter referred to as the sponsor).   At  [15]
    Judge Sarsfield wrote:

         "Following the above [findings of fact], I find the appellants have
         always lived with their father and continue to do  so.   There  has
         been contradictory evidence and attempts  to  enhance  their  case.
         Overall, I am not satisfied  that  their  mother  is  credible.   I
         consider that the brother, Shamin, their father and the witness are
         unreliable and not credible too.  I consider they have  done  their
         best to try and procure entry to the UK for the appellants  at  all
         costs.  I do not find that  their  father  has  abandoned  them  or
         abdicated responsibility at all.  I do not find that the mother has
         had sole  responsibility  for  their  upbringing  or  welfare,  nor
         continues to do so.  There are no serious  and  compelling  reasons
         for the appellant to come to the UK, with their father and siblings
         in Bangladesh.  I found that all the requirements of paragraph  297
         have not been met."

 4. As regards the refusal under the Immigration Rules, the grounds  assert
    that the judge had "relied heavily" on the fact that the appellant  had
    lived in the same house as their father when it was not in dispute that
    their father has another to support with whom  he  shortly  intends  to
    emigrate.  It was alleged that the judge had  wrongly  failed  to  take
    into account the extent of contact between the mother and her  children
    by way of daily telephone calls.  It is asserted that the judge  failed
    to deal entirely with the requirements as to  the  maintenance  of  the
    appellants in the United Kingdom.

 5. Judge Sarsfield noted that DNA evidence had been  obtained  to  confirm
    that the appellants are the children of the  sponsor.   He  found  that
    there was "no issue over accommodation" in the United Kingdom.  He  was
    not, however, satisfied that there had been any financial support  from
    the sponsor to the children since March 2012.   He  also  rejected  the
    sponsor's claim that the children's father in Bangladesh "had  no  part
    in their lives".  He did not accept that that could be the  case  given
    that the children lived with the father.   He  found  that  the  school
    letter did not indicate that  the  school  had  any  contact  with  the
    sponsor in the United Kingdom "in relation to the appellants' education
    at all".  Most seriously, from the  point  of  view  of  the  sponsor's
    credibility, the judge found that the second appellant claimed that  he
    was unemployed, whilst the sponsor claimed he was working  on  a  farm.
    Mr Caswell argued that the judge had attached "undue  weight"  to  that
    inconsistency.

 6. Judge Sarsfield was best  placed  to  assess  the  credibility  of  the
    witnesses who appeared before him, in particular,  the  United  Kingdom
    sponsor.  He observed that some of the important facts in the case only
    emerged at  the  hearing  and  had  not  been  dealt  with  in  written
    statements.  Mr Caswell did not submit that the judge had misunderstood
    the evidence or that his findings that the  second  appellant  and  the
    sponsor had given inconsistent evidence about  the  second  appellant's
    employment was in  any  way  inaccurate.   In  those  circumstances,  I
    consider that it had been open to Judge Sarsfield to conclude,  on  the
    basis of all the evidence before  him,  that  the  sponsor  was  not  a
    credible witness and to find that the appellants  have  not  discharged
    the burden of proving that their sponsor/mother had sole responsibility
    for their upbringing and welfare. The  criticism  of  attaching  "undue
    weight" to plainly discrepant evidence is not, in my opinion, made out.
    The United Kingdom sponsor claimed  to  have  sole  responsibility  for
    upbringing of the second appellant; the fact that she appears not  even
    to have known whether or he was employed  in  Bangladesh  was,  by  any
    standards, a telling comment on their relationship.  That  finding  was
    sufficient  to  dispose  of  the  paragraph  297  appeal  because   the
    appellants were required to satisfy each of the sub-paragraphs  of  the
    Rules.

 7. The grounds also challenge the judge's  findings  regarding  Article  8
    ECHR.  It is asserted that the judge failed to have regard to the  best
    interests of the children as required by Section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.  That  ground,  however,  ignores
    the fact that the children are outside the United Kingdom  and  Section
    55 does not apply to such children  (see  T  (s55  BCIA  2009  -  entry
    clearance) Jamaica [2011] UKUT 00483 (IAC)).  Having regard to T, there
    was nothing in these appeals which  indicated  that  exclusion  of  the
    appellants from the United Kingdom would jeopardise their welfare.   It
    appears that the children were satisfactorily  accommodated  and  cared
    for by their father in Bangladesh; there appeared to be  no  threat  to
    their welfare posed by the father's wish to emigrate.

 8. The judge's  determination  of  the  Article  8  ECHR  appeal  is  also
    challenged on the basis that he wrongly found that there was no  family
    life between the  United  Kingdom  sponsor  and  the  appellant.   That
    challenge ignores the judge's finding that the United  Kingdom  sponsor
    was an unreliable witness.  Though he does not expressly say so, it  is
    clear from the determination that the judge  placed  no  reliance  upon
    anything  which  the  United  Kingdom  sponsor   said   regarding   her
    relationship with the appellants (including her  claim  to  have  daily
    telephone contact  with  them).   On  the  facts  of  these  particular
    appeals, I find that it was open to the judge to  conclude  that  there
    was no family life.  However, even if the judge  was  wrong  in  making
    that finding, any error is redeemed by the fact that he  has  proceeded
    at [20] to consider proportionality.  The  judge  concluded  that  "any
    refusal would be proportionate to the legitimate aim of the maintenance
    of immigration controls and in accordance with the  law".   Given  that
    the judge had found that the children were living with their father who
    cared for them and (in the absence of any recent evidence such as money
    transfers from the United Kingdom) maintained them, it is difficult  to
    see why the judge should not have reached that conclusion.  It  was  an
    outcome clearly available to him on the evidence.

 9. I find that the judge has not erred in law such that his  determination
    should be set aside.  These appeals are set aside.

DECISION

These appeals are dismissed


Signed                              Date 30 July 2013

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
