
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/16073/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On 8 September 2014                      |On 15 December 2014       |
|Prepared 8 September 2014                |                          |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER BOMBAY
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                           VINAYA VIDYADHAR PATNE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Bustani, Counsel, instructed by Paul John & Co
                       Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent, born on 21 May 1946 is a citizen of India. On 10  April
    2013 she applied for a grant of entry clearance as a  dependent  parent
    pursuant to paragraph EC-DR.1.1 (d) of Appendix FM to  the  Immigration
    Rules.

 2. In her application the Respondent said that she suffered from  diabetes
    and high blood pressure, which was treated with  medication.  She  said
    she found it very difficult to care for herself on a daily  basis,  and
    there was no one who  was  able  to  provide  her  with  the  care  and
    emotional support that she required. She said  that  she  had  required
    care (including emotional support) since being widowed  in  June  2010,
    and that she had no-one in India who could care for her. Whilst she did
    have a sister in India, she lived "far away", and had her  own  family,
    so that she was unable to care for the Respondent, or meet  her  needs.
    It  was  asserted  that  the   Respondent   required   "personal   care
    emotionally, physically and financially" and that  such  care  was  not
    available to her in India. She had two sons; one who lived  in  the  UK
    and was the sponsor to the application, and the other who lived in  the
    USA. Her sons  shared  her  financial  support  equally  between  them,
    although she had some financial resources of  her  own  in  India.  She
    visited her two sons and their families every year.

 3. The application was refused on 10 July 2013 on the basis the  Appellant
    was not satisfied that the Respondent met the requirements of paragraph
    EC-DR.1.1(d) of Appendix FM of the  Immigration  Rules.  The  Appellant
    took a number of points.

 4. The Appellant noted that in a previous application for entry  clearance
    made in June 2011 the Respondent  had claimed to  be  financially  self
    sufficient, although she now claimed to financially dependent upon  her
    son living in the UK, the sponsor, and a second son living in the  USA.
    She had not provided adequate evidence of her  financial  circumstances
    to explain any change, or to  identify  precisely  what  her  financial
    position was.

 5. Although the Respondent claimed to suffer from diabetes and high  blood
    pressure, which was treated  with  medication,  she  had  not  provided
    evidence to suggest that due to age illness or disability  her  medical
    condition was such that she required long term personal care to perform
    everyday tasks. The medical evidence did not indicate a need  for  long
    term personal care, or explain why  if  she  did,  such  care  was  not
    available to her within India. On the face of the evidence provided the
    medical care that she required was available to her, and was accessible
    by her, in India.

 6. Although the Respondent claimed to require emotional support  from  the
    sponsor and his family, and the Appellant accepted that there would  be
    a negative impact consequent upon one son having emigrated to  the  UK,
    and another having emigrated to the USA, she had offered no explanation
    as to why neither of those sons were able to return to settle in  India
    in order to provide the support that she claimed to  need.  Indeed  the
    evidence was that when she did from time to time live in India she  was
    accompanied by a member of the extended family, from either the USA  or
    the UK. Nor did the decision prevent the Respondent from continuing  to
    visit her sons and their families in the UK and the USA as she had been
    doing to date.

 7. In her grounds of appeal against that decision  the  Respondent  baldly
    asserted that she did meet the requirements of  paragraph  EC-DR.1.1(d)
    of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules. It was argued that the sponsor
    had provided an undertaking that the Respondent would have no  recourse
    to public funds for a period of five years after  the  grant  of  entry
    clearance, and thus Article 8 was raised  on  the  basis  the  decision
    constituted a disproportionate interference in the Respondent's ability
    to pursue her "family life".

 8. The ECM reviewed the refusal in the light of the grounds of  appeal  on
    17 January 2014. He noted that no new evidence  had  been  produced  in
    support of the appeal, and thus maintained the decision to  refuse  the
    application.

 9. The appeal was dismissed under the Immigration Rules but it was allowed
    on Article 8 grounds in a Determination promulgated on 26 June 2014  by
    First Tier Tribunal Judge Chana.

10. By a decision of First Tier Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchinson promulgated
    of 17 July 2014 the Appellant was granted permission to appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.

11. The Respondent filed no Rule 24 Notice. Neither party has  applied  for
    permission to rely upon further evidence pursuant to Rule 15(2A) of the
    Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules 2008.

12. Thus the matter comes before me.




    The Immigration Rules

13. The  Judge  found  at  paragraph  19  of  the  Determination  that  the
    Respondent did not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules. That
    finding was couched in the present tense rather than being directed  to
    whether she met the requirements on 10  July  2013.  In  my  judgement,
    although that displays an error of law in the Judge's approach,  it  is
    not a material error because Ms Bustani is recorded as having  conceded
    before the Judge on behalf of the Respondent that the  requirements  of
    paragraph E-ECDR.1.1(d) of Appendix FM were not met.

14. Upon enquiry of Ms Bustani in the course of the hearing, the concession
    is maintained, specifically in relation to the date of the decision  on
    two bases. It is conceded that the Respondent failed  to  establish  on
    the balance of probabilities that at the date of  decision  she  "as  a
    result of age, illness or disability require long term personal care to
    perform everyday tasks", and, that she was at that date  "unable,  even
    with the practical and financial help of the  sponsor,  to  obtain  the
    required level of care in the country where they  are  living,  because
    (a) it is not available and there is no person in that country who  can
    reasonably provide it, or, (b) it is not affordable."



    Error of law in the Judge's approach to the Article 8 appeal?

15. In my judgement a fair reading of the Determination discloses a  number
    of obvious errors of law in the Judge's approach to the evidence placed
    before her;

      First, as disclosed by paragraph 37 of the  Determination  the  Judge
    failed to restrict herself to considering the Respondent's position  as
    it was at the date of the decision under appeal (10.7.13), and embarked
    upon speculation as to what it might be, or become, at some unspecified
    point in the future. Thus on the one hand the  Judge  appears  to  have
    accepted that the Respondent was  at  the  date  of  decision  able  to
    undertake longhaul air flights to visit her sons in the UK and the USA,
    but speculated that she might be unable to continue to  do  so  in  the
    future.

      Second, again as disclosed by paragraph 37 of the  Determination  she
    approached the appeal on the basis that at the date of the hearing  the
    Respondent had no "settled status" in any country. That was wrong;  the
    Respondent has at all material times been a citizen of India.

      Third, having directed herself in paragraph 20 that her first step in
    the consideration of an Article 8 appeal under Razgar principles should
    be to determine whether the Respondent has "an existing  and  effective
    family life in the United Kingdom" she failed to make  any  finding  in
    the course of her Determination that "family life" existed between  the
    Respondent and the sponsor at the date of decision. It  was  of  course
    the Respondent's case that her adult son had left India, and  emigrated
    to the UK, as long ago as 2006. Whilst the Judge did make  the  finding
    in  paragraph  38  of  the  Determination  that  the   Respondent   had
    established that her emotional ties with her son and his family in  the
    UK were "at present" over and above normal ties between  a  mother  and
    son, that finding was entirely unreasoned, and there  would  appear  to
    have been no proper evidential basis for it.

      Fourth, having identified that it was conceded the Respondent did not
    meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules at the date of  decision
    it is not at all clear from the Determination that  the  Judge  engaged
    adequately with the reasons why the Respondent was  unable  to  do  so.
    Thus she failed to place the Article 8 appeal into its proper context.

      Fifth, having identified that  the  Respondent  had  family  in  both
    India, and in the USA, in addition to the sponsor in the UK, the  Judge
    failed to engage with why it was disproportionate to refuse  her  entry
    clearance for the purposes of settlement if she  needed  the  emotional
    support that would come  from  living  within  a  household  of  family
    members, as opposed to expecting those needs to be met in either  India
    by the family members who continued to live there, or who  could  visit
    or return there, or even in the USA by those who lived there.

      Sixth, having identified that the Respondent as a widow  had  divided
    her time between India, the UK, and the USA, the Judge  had  failed  to
    engage with the status quo that had been established thereby.  Arguably
    the reality was that the Respondent  was  living  for  periods  of  six
    months at a time in the UK and the USA, returning  to  India  only  for
    relatively short periods between such visits.




    The decision remade?

16. In the light of the concessions the decision upon the appeal under  the
    Immigration  Rules  is  confirmed.  I   am   satisfied   however   that
    individually and cumulatively the effect of the errors  set  out  above
    requires me to set aside the decision upon the Article 8 appeal, and to
    remake it.

17. The parties were agreed that if this were my conclusion there would  be
    no need for me to hear evidence, because there was no need  to  revisit
    the primary findings of fact.

18. In my consideration of the Article 8 appeal I  have  to  determine  the
    following separate questions:

       . Is there an interference with the right to respect for private life
         (which includes the right to  physical  and  moral  integrity)  and
         family life?

       . If so will such interference have consequences of such  gravity  as
         to potentially engage Article 8?

       . Is that interference in accordance with the law?

       . Does that interference have legitimate aims?

       . Is the interference proportionate in a democratic  society  to  the
         legitimate aim to be achieved?

19. Since the Judge appears to have accepted that  the  Respondent  enjoyed
    "family life" with the sponsor at the date of decision,  and  that  the
    interference would have such  consequences  as  to  potentially  engage
    Article 8, I will proceed on the basis that this is the case.

20. As set out  above  I  am  satisfied  that  the  decision  was  made  in
    accordance with the law. There can be no issue that the decision  under
    appeal was made by the Appellant in the pursuit of  a  legitimate  aim;
    the protection of the economic security of the UK, and the  maintenance
    of public confidence in immigration controls.

21. Nevertheless, given the nature of the admitted  failures  to  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules and the findings of primary  fact
    that were made by the Judge, it is extremely difficult to see any basis
    upon which the Respondent should nonetheless be entitled to succeed  in
    her appeal on Article 8 grounds. The decision  under  appeal  does  not
    affect the status quo that has been established  since  the  Respondent
    was widowed in 2010, and was being pursued at the date of decision. The
    refusal of entry clearance for the purpose of settlement did not affect
    the ability of the Respondent to continue  to  pursue  her  established
    lifestyle of visiting the USA and the UK in rotation. The decision only
    prevented  her  from  settlement  in  the  UK.  If,   and   when,   her
    circumstances  changed  she  would  be  entitled  to   make   a   fresh
    application. There is simply no place  in  a  case  such  as  this  for
    speculation  as  to  how  her  circumstances  might  change   at   some
    unspecified point in the future.

22. The evidence did not establish that the Respondent was unable to access
    any care she required in India, and  nor  did  it  establish  that  the
    sponsor was required to return to India to settle  there  in  order  to
    care for the Respondent if the decision were maintained.

23. Accordingly I am not satisfied  that  the  Judge's  findings  permit  a
    conclusion that the Respondent is entitled to a discretionary grant  of
    entry clearance outside  the  Immigration  Rules.  Ultimately,  as  the
    Appellant has argued, at the heart of this appeal is  the  choice  that
    the sponsors have made to emigrate to the UK, and to the USA, and their
    reluctance to return to live in India. The mere fact that  the  sponsor
    is now a British citizen does not entitle  him  to  insist  that  entry
    clearance be granted to his mother, even though she does not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules; MM & Others [2014] EWCA Civ 985.



24. In my judgement the evidence falls  well  short  of  establishing  that
    there were  at  the  date  of  decision  any  compelling  compassionate
    circumstances that meant the refusal to grant to  the  Appellant  entry
    clearance led to an unjustifiably harsh outcome.




    DECISION


    The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on
    26 June 2014 did not involve the making of  an  error  of  law  in  the
    dismissal of the appeal under the Immigration Rules.  The  decision  to
    dismiss that limb of the appeal is accordingly confirmed.


    The Determination did contain an error of law in the decision to  allow
    the Article 8 appeal, which requires that decision to be set aside  and
    remade. I remake that decision so as to dismiss the Article 8 appeal.




    Direction regarding anonymity  -  Rule  14  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008

    No anonymity direction was made by the First Tier Tribunal, and none is
    sought from the Upper Tribunal. There is no good reason for  the  Upper
    Tribunal to make one of its own motion.








Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes


Dated 8 September 2014
