
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/16301/2012
                                                               OA/16302/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                             |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 19th August 2013                           |on 20th August 2013          |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                          DISNEY TONDERAI MANGWANYA
                          DEAL RUWADZANO MANGWANYA
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                    ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - (PRETORIA)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Sponsor in person.
For the Respondent: Mr Spence - Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge Mensah promulgated on 29th April 2013 in which she  dismissed
        the appellants' appeals under the Immigration Rules and  Article  8
        ECHR against the refusal of an Entry  Clearance  Officer  (ECO)  to
        grant them leave to enter the United Kingdom for  the  purposes  of
        settlement with their sponsor who is also their mother.


     2. The first appellant was born on 17th February 1992 and  the  second
        appellant on 26th March 1996. Both are citizens  of  Zimbabwe.  The
        first appellant applied under the provisions of paragraph 317 as he
        was over twenty years of age and the  second  appellant  under  the
        provisions of paragraph 297 as she is under eighteen years of  age.
        Both applications were  refused.   The  first  appellant  has  made
        previous applications which were refused on the grounds of his  not
        having proved their mother has sole responsibility. It is  said  he
        lives with an aunt and although he  claim  she  is  ill  there  was
        insufficient evidence of this and exceptional and/or  compassionate
        circumstances. In relation to the second appellant her  father  was
        alive and divorce  and  custody  arrangements  did  not  mean  sole
        responsibility. Evidence of money sent by her  mother  in  October,
        November, December 2011, and January 2012 did not demonstrate  sole
        responsibility and there were no exceptional  and/or  compassionate
        circumstances. The dates are both decisions are 3rd August 2012.



Discussion



     3. Whilst I understand the sponsor may want very much to  be  reunited
        with her children I advised her  at  the  hearing  that  I  am  not
        satisfied that the Grounds on which permission to appeal was sought
        establish any arguable legal error in the determination. I now give
        my reasons.


     4. Judge Mensah  clearly  examined  the  evidence  she  was  asked  to
        consider with the degree of care required  in  an  appeal  of  this
        nature. She identified the key element under paragraph 297 for  the
        second appellant was whether her mother has sole responsibility for
        their upkeep, which was also relevant to the first  appellant  [4].
        The  sponsor  claims  that  she  has  sole  responsibility  but  in
        paragraph 7 of the determination the Judge refers to a considerable
        volume of evidence in which there is reference to an individual  as
        "Dad". The Judge asked the sponsor about the communication and  the
        reference to "Dad" but did not accept the claim by the sponsor that
        this is a reference to her sister's ex-husband who  they  call  Dad
        and who has little involvement and only  saw  them  once  a  month.
        Judge  Mensa  found  "I  absolutely  and  completely   reject   the
        explanations given by the sponsor and find the evidence plainly and
        clearly demonstrates  the  appellants  not  only  have  an  ongoing
        relationship with their real father but he plays an active role  in
        their lives and in making important decisions. I completely  reject
        the sponsor's claim to have sole responsibility for her children. I
        accept she plays a role in their children's lives but it  is  clear
        their father also plays a significant role."[8].


     5. Judge Mensa so  considered  there  was  no  credible  evidence  the
        appellants'  were  living  in  exceptional   and/or   compassionate
        circumstances and it was not established they had no  relatives  to
        whom they could turn to in their home country.


     6. The Grounds seeking permission to appeal allege at paragraph 3 that
        the Judge failed to reach a decision on grounds of appeal  properly
        before him and fully argued.   This  fails  to  identify  what  the
        alleged legal  error  is  and  is,  in  reality,  no  more  than  a
        disagreement with the findings made by the Judge.


     7. Paragraph 4 challenges the Judges' reliance on  the  printouts  and
        refers again to the explanation provided by the  sponsor  that  the
        children called her sister's ex-husband's 'Dad' and that this is  a
        reference to him and not their biological father.  I find  this  is
        an appeal in which the  Judge  considered  the  evidence  with  the
        degree of care required and gave adequate reasons for the  findings
        made. The Judge did not find the appellants' had proved  that  what
        the sponsor was saying with regard to this individual is true.  The
        sponsor confirmed today that there was no other evidence to support
        this claim. Having read all the evidence the Judge had available to
        the Judge her finding relating to this  individual  is  within  the
        range of findings open to her on the evidence. The Judge identifies
        a number of occasions when such a reference is made.  In  light  of
        the nature of the evidence a finding that this is  a  reference  to
        their biological father cannot be said to  be  either  perverse  or
        irrational.  The Ground is a disagreement with a finding the  Judge
        was entitled to make and no more.


     8. I reject the claim the Judge failed to take into  account  evidence
        that was submitted as clearly all relevant evidence was considered.
        Paragraph 6 of the Grounds is a weight challenge but  weight  is  a
        matter for the Judge - see SS (Sri Lanka) [2012] EWCA Civ 155.   No
        legal error is proved.


     9. The Grounds also allege that no proper consideration was  given  to
        Article 8 and that the determination lacks any proper consideration
        or reasons.  I find this Ground has no merit either. It  was  found
        that  the  sponsor  in  the  United  Kingdom  did  not  have   sole
        responsibility. It was also found  that  the  appellants'  are  not
        living in the most  exceptional  compassionate  circumstances.  The
        children live in the environment in which they  have  always  lived
        and it has not been shown to be in their best interests  to  change
        the status quo.  In paragraph 12 of  the  determination  the  Judge
        accepts the  sponsor's  strong  and  natural  desire  to  have  her
        children living with her, but they have lived separately from  each
        other for many years with their father's involvement.


    10. The grant of permission to appeal refers to the  case  of  T  (s.55
        BCIA 2009 - entry clearance) Jamaica [2011] UKLUT 000483 (IAC).  In
        this case the Tribunal held that (i)  Section 55 of  the  Borders,
        Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 does not apply to children who
        are outside the United Kingdom. (ii)  Where there are  reasons  to
        believe that a child's welfare may be jeopardised by exclusion from
        the United Kingdom, the  considerations  of  Article  8  ECHR,  the
        "exclusion undesirable" provisions of the Immigration Rules and the
        extra statutory guidance to Entry Clearance Officers to  apply  the
        spirit of the statutory guidance in  certain  circumstances  should
        all be taken into account by the ECO  at  first  instance  and  the
        judge on appeal. (iii)     When the  interests  of  the  child  are
        under consideration in an entry clearance case, it may be necessary
        to make investigations, and where appropriate having regard to age,
        the child herself may need to be interviewed.


    11. As stated, the Judge found that the children were being  cared  for
        in Zimbabwe and did not find there was any reason to warrant  their
        being permitted entry to the United Kingdom. There is  no  evidence
        that their welfare is being jeopardised by their exclusion  or  any
        reason why the ECO should have investigated this matter further.


    12. I have also had regard to the more recent decision of Mundeba (s.55
        and para 297(i)(f)) [2013] UKUT 88(IAC)  (Blake  J)  in  which  the
        Tribunal held that (i) the  exercise  of  the  duty  by  the  Entry
        Clearance Officer to assess an application  under  the  Immigration
        Rules as to whether there are family or other considerations making
        the child's exclusion undesirable inevitably involves an assessment
        of what the child's welfare and best interests require; (ii)  Where
        an immigration decision engages Article 8 rights, due  regard  must
        be had to the UN Convention on the Rights of the  Child.  An  entry
        clearance decision for the admission of a child  under  18  is  "an
        action   concerning    children...undertaken    by...administrative
        authorities" and so by Article 3 "the best interests of  the  child
        shall be a primary consideration";  (iii)  Although  the  statutory
        duty under s.55 UK Borders Act 2009 only applies to children within
        the UK, the broader duty doubtless explains why  the  Secretary  of
        State's IDI  invites  Entry  Clearance  Officers  to  consider  the
        statutory guidance issued under s.55.


    13. It is only the second appellant who was under eighteen at the  date
        of decision as the first appellant is an adult. The case refers  to
        the "exclusion undesirable" provisions but do I not find  that  any
        relevant considerations were not looked at either by the  Judge  or
        the ECO in this appeal. I do not find  it  proved  that  the  Judge
        should have found the decision  to  be  unlawful  by  reference  to
        section 55 or related guidance based upon  the  authorities  above.
        The facts of this case do not warrant such a finding.


    14. I accept that Article 8  ECHR  imposes  a  positive  obligation  to
        facilitate the development of family life but case law  establishes
        that even in such circumstances, when assessing the proportionality
        of the decision, the test is exactly the same as it  is  for  other
        Article 8 cases.  It has  not  been  proved  that  this  additional
        element makes a difference to this decision or allows  me  to  find
        any legal error in the Judge's conclusions.


    15. The findings under both the Rules and Article 8 ECHR are within the
        range of findings are Judge was entitled to make on  the  evidence.
        No legal error is proved. If the circumstances warrant it, a  fresh
        application will have to be made.






Decision

    16. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    17. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


          I make no such order as no application for anonymity was made  and
   the facts      do not established the need for such an order.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 19th August 2013












