
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/16857/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 3 September 2014                             |On 24 September 2014       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                 ASMA BEGUM
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Hussain, instructed by McManus Seddon Runhams,
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The respondent, Asma Begum, is a female citizen of Bangladesh.  I shall
    hereafter refer to the respondent as the appellant and to the appellant
    as the respondent (as they appeared respectively before the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The appellant applied for entry clearance as the spouse  of
    Mohammed Taj Ali  (hereafter  the  sponsor)  but  her  application  was
    refused on 23 July 2013 on the grounds that she had failed to provide a
    reliable  English  language  certificate.   That  original  ground  for
    refusal  was  withdrawn  on  review  but  the  respondent  refused  the
    application subsequently on the basis that the appellant had failed  to
    provide the required evidence of the sponsor's income and thereby  show
    that the sponsor was able adequately to maintain  the  appellant.   The
    sponsor receives Carer's Allowance which, as  Judge  Atkinson  allowing
    the appeal  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  observed  "as  a  matter  of
    convenience [has been] paid into the sponsor's mother's account  rather
    than the sponsor's account." As a consequence of this arrangement,  the
    appellant had been  unable  to  provide  the  evidence  required  under
    Appendix FM-SE.  The appellant was  unable  to  provide  at  least  one
    personal bank statement in the twelve month period prior to the date of
    the application showing payment of the benefit or  allowance  into  the
    sponsor's bank account.

 2. Both parties accept that Judge  Atkinson  had  no  alternative  but  to
    dismiss the appeal under the Immigration Rules  because  the  specified
    evidence had not been provided.  However, at [22] the judge went on  to
    consider Article 8  ECHR.   He  noted  that  the  payments  of  Carer's
    Allowance "are readily identified in bank statements  relating  to  the
    sponsor's mother's account because not only are they designated as  DWP
    payments but also specified the sponsor's national insurance number and
    correlate that award letters from the DWP."  The  judge  observed  [27]
    that the respondent's interest in refusing entry clearance  related  to
    the need to maintain an effective immigration control.  He  found  [31]
    that  the  refusal  of  the  appellant's  application  amounted  to   a
    disproportionate interference with the  appellant's  and  her  family's
    right to respect for a family life.

 3. The Secretary of State now  appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  In  essence,  the  appeal  turns  on  the  question  of  the
    sponsor's income (which the Secretary of  State  does  not  dispute  is
    adequate to meet the Rules) and his failure  to  satisfy  the  specific
    provisions of the Rules.

 4. I find that the judge has erred in law.  I say that for  the  following
    reasons.  This is not a case where the  operation  of  the  Immigration
    Rules has given rise to any unfairness or arbitrary consequence.   Most
    significantly, the provisions of the Rules should have  been  known  to
    the appellant who, before he made his application, could have  reviewed
    and altered his domestic financial arrangements in order to be able  to
    comply with the Rules.  For reasons that are not clear, he chose not to
    do so.  I cannot see why an applicant in such circumstances and in full
    knowledge that he could not meet the requirements, should expect either
    the ECO or the Tribunal to use Article 8 ECHR to assist  him  where  he
    has chosen not to help himself.  Judge Atkinson was wrong to embark  on
    an Article 8 assessment on the basis that the appellant's circumstances
    were "not recognised by the Rules"; the circumstances justifying such a
    course of action simply did not exist in  this  case.  The  appellant's
    circumstances were  "not  recognised  by  the  Rules"  because  of  the
    appellant's own failures and omissions.  Further, this is not simply  a
    case, as Mr Hussain  suggested,  of  "box  ticking".   I  can  identify
    nothing in the papers which would indicate that the sponsor's mother is
    obliged in law to account to the sponsor for the Carer's Allowance paid
    into her account.  The requirement in the Rules that the sponsor should
    be able to prove his income was simply not met. I therefore  set  aside
    the determination and remake the decision, dismissing the appeal on all
    grounds. The appellant may wish to make a further application, ensuring
    this time that the Rules may be complied  with.   However,  that  is  a
    matter for her and her advisers.

DECISION

 5. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal promulgation  on  24  June
    2014 is set aside.  I remake the decision.   The  appeal  is  dismissed
    under the Immigration Rules.  The appeal is dismissed on  human  rights
    grounds (Article 8 ECHR).






Signed                              Date 10 September 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

