
IAC-AH-CO-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: oa/16590/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 18 December 2014                             |On 21 January 2015         |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - DHAKA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     LAW
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery of the Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Mr M Hassan Solicitor of KC Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2000
and 8I make an anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a  Court
directs  otherwise,  no  report  of  these  proceedings  or  any   form   of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellant. This direction applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to  content  of  court
proceedings.



The Respondent

 1. The Respondent to whom I shall refer as "the Applicant" is a citizen of
    Bangladesh born in March 2004.  On or shortly before 13  May  2013  she
    applied through her then solicitors to the Appellant (the SSHD)  for  a
    Certificate of Entitlement to  a  Right  of  Abode.   This  application
    followed two previous applications for limited leave  with  a  view  to
    settlement.

 2. On 29 July 2013 the ECO refused the application under reference  635666
    on the basis that at the time  the  Applicant's  parents  married,  her
    father was still married to his previous wife whom he did  not  divorce
    until 16 August 2010. He went on to refuse the Certificate  because  he
    was not satisfied the Applicant was of legitimate descent.

 3. On 15 August 2013 the Applicant through her present  solicitors  lodged
    notice of appeal under Section 82 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 as amended (the 2002 Act).  The grounds assert that the
    ECO had failed to have regard to Section 1 of the Legitimacy  Act  1976
    and assert without reasons or explanation that the decision of the  ECO
    was unfair and unreasonable.

The First-tier Tribunal's Determination

 4. By a determination promulgated on 29 September 2014 Judge of First-tier
    Tribunal Canavan found the ECO's decision under the  Immigration  Rules
    was not in accordance  with  the  law  and  went  on  to  find  in  the
    alternative that it was unlawful under Section 6 of  the  Human  Rights
    Act and allowed the appeal on human rights grounds.

 5. By a decision 3 November 2014 Upper Tribunal Judge Martin  granted  the
    ECO permission to appeal because it was arguable that having found  the
    ECO's decision unlawful the Judge ought to have remitted it to the  ECO
    to make a lawful decision.  If there was no lawful decision  there  was
    nothing that could be said to engage Article 8.

 6. The grounds for appeal had referred to the judgment in Mirza & Others v
    SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 159 and in particular paragraph 46 where Sedley LJ
    had said:-

         As to Article 8, it may follow that an unjustified  deferral  of  a
         decision on removal, being contrary to law, makes it impossible  to
         justify the disruption of family or private life caused by what  Mr
         Malik submits is the presumptive removal that  follows  refusal  of
         leave to remain.  But there is no need to  travel  into  Article  8
         once unlawfulness is established and there are obvious difficulties
         about presuming a removal which, if the law is observed, may  never
         happen...

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 7. The Applicant's parents were present.  For the ECO Mr  Avery  submitted
    the Judge's determination that the ECO's decision under the Immigration
    Rules was not in accordance with  the  law  was  not  challenged.   The
    decision should therefore be remitted to the ECO to re-make.  There had
    been no cross-appeal by the Applicant against the  decision  under  the
    Immigration Rules.  The ECO relied on what had been said in  Mirza  and
    the Judge had erred in law that having concluded the decision  was  not
    in accordance with the law should not have gone on to consider  Article
    8 of the European Convention outside the Immigration Rules.

 8. For the  Applicant  Mr  Hassan  submitted  that  Mirza  was  of  little
    assistance because it had involved  a  removal  case  and  the  present
    appeal was an entry clearance case.  Sedley LJ had said  there  was  no
    "need" to consider Article 8 if the decision was  unlawful.   This  did
    not mean that a Judge could not or must  not  consider  a  claim  under
    Article 8 in such circumstances.  The Judge was entitled to  conduct  a
    consideration of the Article 8 claim and to allow it.

 9. In response Mr Avery submitted that if the decision was  unlawful  then
    there was no decision and consequently it  was  not  possible  for  the
    Judge to consider a claim under Article 8: she had lacked jurisdiction.



10. He pointed out that the decision under appeal  was  in  relation  to  a
    status application and not an  application  for  leave  to  enter,  for
    example for family reunion under the Immigration Rules as  a  dependent
    child.  He re-iterated that having found the original decision  not  to
    be in accordance with the law the Judge should have remitted it to  the
    ECO.

Consideration and Disposal

11. I noted that there was no challenge by either party to the part of  the
    determination that the original decision under  the  Immigration  Rules
    was not in accordance with the law and should be remitted to the ECO.

12. I turn to the Judge's consideration of the claim under  Article  8.   I
    note Mirza was a removal case and find the comments  of  Sedley  LJ  at
    paragraph 46 have limited application to this case.  If a  decision  to
    remove is found to be unlawful and remitted to the decision maker,  the
    appellant will remain in the United Kingdom and a fresh  decision  will
    have to be made before he can be removed.  In those circumstances there
    is no reason to consider a  claim  under  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention.  The position is different in entry clearance  cases.   The
    rights to respect for private and family life protected by Article 8 of
    the European Convention and also the duty to consider the welfare of  a
    child enacted by Section 55 of the Borders, Immigration and Citizenship
    Act 2009 extended to out of country cases as explained in Mundeba (s.55
    and para 297(i)(f)) DRC [2013] UKUT 00088(IAC) do  not  depend  on  the
    existence of an immigration decision.  They are  rights  in  themselves
    and the existence and enforceability of those rights do not  depend  on
    the refusal of leave to enter in a valid immigration decision.

13. An immigration decision may be invalid in relation  to  an  application
    under the Immigration Rules but valid in relation to a claim under  the
    European Convention outside the Rules. Such a decision will be a  "dual
    decision" and the concept of part of a dual decision  being  valid  and
    part invalid is familiar from those decisions refusing leave to  remain
    under the Immigration Rules and containing directions are removal under
    section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality 2006  before  the
    coming into force of section 51 of the Courts and Crime Act 2013.

14. Crucially in this appeal, the immigration decision is not one to refuse
    leave to enter or remain.  It is one which relates  to  status,  namely
    whether the Applicant has shown she satisfies the requirements for  the
    grant of  a  Certificate  of  Entitlement  to  a  Right  of  Abode.  An
    application for such a Certificate is not about rights to  respect  for
    private and family life or family reunion.  It is  not  an  application
    for entry clearance.  In this context it is difficult to  see  how  the
    Applicant can assert the decision is one which can be said to relate in
    law to her right to a family life.  I understand that the  issue  of  a
    Certificate to the Applicant would enable her to join  her  parents  in
    the United Kingdom and  so  put  her  private  and  family  life  on  a
    completely different level.  However,  the  Certificate  is  about  her
    status and not about a permission to enter the United Kingdom.

15. In the case of  private  life,  the  European  Convention  has  a  more
    restrictive application to out of country appeals.  Any decision  would
    not amount to an interference with the Applicant's private life because
    it simply makes no change to it so it would be  an  extremely  rare  or
    unusual set of circumstances does not amount  to  an  interference.  In
    this light the Applicant has failed to show that any obligations  which
    the United Kingdom may have under  Article  8  are  even  engaged.  The
    consequences are that the appeal so far as it is based on Article 8  of
    the European Convention must fail.

16. The Applicant is a minor.  It is understood that both her  parents  are
    in the United Kingdom.  In such circumstances the ECO is  requested  to
    deal promptly with any re-making of the decision under the  Immigration
    Rules and should the Applicant be advised to make  another  application
    on different grounds the effect of which is to seek entry clearance  to
    join her parents in the United Kingdom then again the ECO is  requested
    to deal with it expeditiously.

Anonymity

    The Applicant is a minor.  The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made an
    anonymity direction and I find it appropriate that it should continue.



NOTICE OF DECISION

    The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law
    in relation only to  its  treatment  of  the  applicant's  claim  under
    Article 8 of European Convention and  that  part  is  set  aside.   The
    effect is:-

    The decision of the ECO in relation to the Certificate  of  Entitlement
    to a Right of Abode is not in accordance with the law and so remains to
    be decided.

    The claim of the Applicant on human rights grounds is dismissed.



Signed/Official Crest  Date 31. xi. 2014

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal




TO THE ECO: FEE AWARD

I have considered whether it would be appropriate to make a fee award.   For
the reasons given in the determination of the First-tier Tribunal, I do  not
consider it appropriate to make a fee award.



Signed/Official Crest  Date 31. xii. 2014

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

