
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/16009/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 25 September 2014                          |On 9 October 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM


                                   Between

                     MRS Zeinab Abdelaziz Hassan Tahoun
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - CAIRO
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Unrepresented


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The respondent, whom I shall refer to  as  the  appellant  as  she  was
    before the First-tier Tribunal, is a citizen of Egypt and her  date  of
    birth is 28 January 1941.

2.   The appellant made an application  for  entry  clearance  as  an  adult
    dependent relative under Appendix FM of  the  Immigration  Rules.   Her
    application was refused by the ECO in a decision of 6 August 2013.  The
    reasons for the refusal are as follows:

    (i)  Documents that the  appellant  submitted  do  not  relate  to  her
         current personal circumstances and there is no  evidence  detailing
         her current health or other reasons why she  should  be  granted  a
         visa to live in the UK as a dependent relative.


    (ii) The appellant provided no evidence of her financial situation  and
         did not demonstrate  that  she  has  been  in  any  way  previously
         dependent on a UK relative.


    (iii)     There  is  no  evidence  of  a  change  in  the   appellant's
         circumstances resulting in the need for care from the sponsor.


    (iv) There is no evidence to show that the appellant is unable with the
         practical and financial help of her sponsor to obtain the level  of
         care that she requires in Egypt.


    (v)  The appellant has not established that she is the mother of the UK
         sponsor.

3.   The decision was  maintained  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Manager  in  a
    decision of 27 November 2013.  It was  noted  by  the  Entry  Clearance
    Manager that documents sent with the appeal showed that  the  appellant
    is currently resident with a sister of a similar age in Egypt and  that
    her sister's daughter is also resident there.

4.   The appellant appealed against the  decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer and her appeal was allowed by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    Lucas in a decision that was promulgated on 10 June  2014  following  a
    hearing at Taylor House on 20  May  2014.   Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted to the Secretary of State by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    TRP Hollingworth in a decision of 7 August 2014.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

5.   The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal heard evidence from  the  sponsor,
    the appellant's son  Dr  Khaled  Mohamed  Ali  Alfakh.   The  sponsor's
    evidence was that the appellant had moved in with her sister  in  Cairo
    however they are both elderly and frail.  His  cousin  the  appellant's
    sister's daughter wants her mother to live with her and this would mean
    that the appellant would remain living on her own.  She  is  frail  and
    depressed.

6.   The evidence relating to the appellant was  that  in  the  respondent's
    bundle (the letters  referred  to  above).   In  addition  the  sponsor
    attended the hearing. In the grounds of appeal that were before the FtT
    it is asserted that the appellant's niece, Nashwa Kamel  is  unable  to
    look after the  appellant  and  the  appellant's  sister  (Mrs  Kamel's
    mother) and she wishes to take her mother to live with her.   There  is
    no room in her house for the appellant and there are no other relatives
    who will be able to stay with the appellant.  Dr Alfakh is  the  eldest
    son and a consultant cardiologist in London.  It  is  stated  that  the
    appellant does not need 24 hour care and her needs could be met by  the
    sponsor's wife who only  works  part-time.   In  addition  any  limited
    outside help would be affordable.

7.   In addition to the oral evidence of the sponsor the  Judge  had  before
    him a letter of 3  September  2013  from  Dr  Ahmed  El  Khateeb  which
    indicates that the appellant had muscular skeletal problems and she  is
    unsafe on her own and can only walk about 50 metres with a walking aid.
     There is a second letter of 1 September 2013 from  Dr  Nagui  Gamil  a
    consultant psychiatrist.  He indicates that he last saw  the  appellant
    in April 2013 when she complained of anxiety and  depression  and  that
    she used to live alone which had "a remarkable negative effect on her".
     The appellant was prescribed mediation and it was recommended that she
    not live alone.   There was a third letter from Dr Ahmed El Khateeb  of
    8 November 2013 which states that the appellant has severe osteoporosis
    and chronic lower back pain and as a result she is in need of continual
    help and assistance.  There was also  a  letter  from  the  appellant's
    niece Nashwa Kamel.


8.   The Judge went on to make the following findings:

         "15. The Tribunal found the sponsor in this case to be an  entirely
             credible witness.  He is a professional  medical  practitioner
             and quite clearly had sufficient resources available  properly
             to accommodate  and  maintain  the  appellant.   There  is  no
             question that she can be accommodated and  maintained  without
             any recourse to public funds.


         16.  It is quite clear that the appellant is now frail and elderly.
              She is living  in  precarious  circumstances  in  Cairo  with
             another elderly sister.  The correct and appropriate place for
             her is to be with her own son and his family  within  the  UK.
             The fact that the sponsor  has  explored  the  possibility  of
             having to relocate his entire family until within  the  UK  to
             seek to care for the appellant, demonstrates the level of care
             and attention that he is prepared to give her.


         17.  In the view of the Tribunal, it is simply not proportionate to
             expect or require the sponsor to relocate to  Egypt  when  the
             appellant could enter the UK without any  additional  recourse
             to public funds.


         18.  The Tribunal therefore proposes to allow  this  appeal  within
             the Immigration Rules.  It is quite clear that  the  appellant
             is elderly, frail and in need of long-term  personal  care  to
             perform everyday tasks.  All of these facts can be  discharged
             in the care of her son in  the  UK  without  any  recourse  to
             public funds.


         19.  The appeal  is  therefore  allowed  and  the  Entry  Clearance
             Officer  is  directed  to  grant  entry  clearance   to   this
             appellant."



The Grounds Seeking Leave to Appeal

9.   The grounds seeking leave  to  appeal  argue  that  the  Judge  made  a
    material  misdirection  of  law.   He  failed  to   engage   with   the
    requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  contained  in  paragraph  E-
    ECDR.2.5. of Appendix  FM.   It  is  necessary  for  the  appellant  to
    establish that no person in Egypt can reasonably provide her with  care
    if she wishes to avail herself under the Rules.

10.  Ms Holmes expanded on the grounds of appeal  in  oral  submissions  and
    the sponsor who attended the hearing before me submitted  that  in  his
    view the Rules should be interpreted in a flexible manner and that  the
    Judge did not make an error of law.




The Immigration Rules

11.  Paragraph  E-ECDR  contains  the  requirements  to  be  met  for  entry
    clearance as an adult dependent relative and the relevant  part  of  E-
    ECDR are as follows:

         "E-ECDR.2.4.  The applicant or, if the applicant and their  partner
         are the sponsor's parents or grandparents, the applicant's partner,
         must as a result of age, illness or  disability  require  long-term
         personal care to perform everyday tasks.


         E-ECDR.2.5.  The applicant, or if the applicant and  their  partner
         are the sponsor's parents or grandparents, the applicant's partner,
         must be unable, even with the practical and financial help  of  the
         sponsor, to obtain the required level of care in the country  where
         they are living, because-


         (a)  it is not available and there is no person in that country who
             can reasonably provide it; or;


         (b)  it is not affordable."




Error of Law

12.  The Judge made a material error of law.  The Judge did not engage  with
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules as they stand in paragraph E-
    ECDR.  He found that the appellant was in "need of  long-term  personal
    care to perform everyday tasks" and it appears therefore that he made a
    finding in relation to E-ECDR.2.4.  (this  is  not  challenged  by  the
    Secretary of State in the  grounds  of  appeal).   However,  the  Judge
    should have gone on to consider E-ECDR.2.5 and he did not do so.  It is
    clear that on the evidence at the date of  the  decision  there  was  a
    person (either the appellant's niece or assistance that could  be  paid
    for by the sponsor) who could reasonably  provide  the  level  of  care
    required by the appellant in Egypt.

13.  The requirements of the Immigration Rules  are  stringent  and  do  not
    allow for flexibility.  It was not open  to  the  Judge  to  allow  the
    appeal on the basis of the evidence before him.  In these circumstances
    I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the appeal
    under the Immigration Rules pursuant to section 12(2)(a).  There was no
    need to go behind the primary findings of the  FtT;  however,  for  the
    reason stated above the Judge materially erred. I remake  the  decision
    pursuant to Section 12(2)(b)(ii) and dismissed  the  appeal  under  the
    Rules.

Article 8

14.  The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  not  consider  the  appeal  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR given  that  he  allowed  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules.

15.  In MM and SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 985, at  paragraph  135,  the  Court  of
    Appeal stated as follows:

         "Where the relevant group of IRs, upon their  proper  construction,
         provide a 'complete code' for dealing with  a  person's  Convention
         rights in the context of a particular IR  or  statutory  provision,
         such as in the case of  'foreign  criminals',  then  the  balancing
         exercise and the way the various  factors  are  to  be  taken  into
         account in an individual cases must be done in accordance with that
         code, although references to  'exceptional  circumstances'  in  the
         code will nonetheless entail a proportionality  exercise.   But  if
         the relevant group of IRs is not such a 'complete  code'  then  the
         proportionality test will be more at large, albeit  guided  by  the
         Huang tests and UK and Strasbourg case law."

16.  The issue is at this stage whether or not there is a further Article  8
    claim that should be determined by the Tribunal.  In  my  view  on  the
    facts in this case there is no need for an assessment outside the Rules
    as they are, on the facts in this case, Article 8  compliant.   In  any
    event, if I am wrong in that I would have to go on to consider  whether
    or not family life is engaged for the purposes of Article 8(1)  of  the
    1950 Convention on Human Rights.

17.  The sponsor has lived in the UK since 1986.  There is  no  evidence  of
    significant dependency, financial or otherwise, between  the  appellant
    and the sponsor at the date of the  decision.   Having  considered  the
    relevant case law in relation to adult dependent relatives specifically
    paragraphs 50 to 62 of Ghising (family life - adults - Ghurkha  policy)
    Nepal [2012] UKUT 160 (IAC).  It is clear that although family life may
    continue between parent and child even after  the  child  has  attained
    majority, in this case there is no  evidence  of  further  elements  of
    dependency involving more than the normal  emotional  ties.   In  these
    circumstances the relationship between the appellant and the sponsor is
    not sufficient for the applicability of Article 8(2) and the appeal  is
    dismissed under Article 8.



Signed   Joanna McWilliam                        Date 7 October 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
