
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: oa/16164/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15th July 2016                            |On 26th July 2016             |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY

                                   Between

                              MRS Maria Kausar
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISLAMABAD

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms L Kullar (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal, brought with  the
    permission of a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal, against a decision of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Shergill  hereinafter  "the  judge")
    dismissing her appeal against a decision of an Entry Clearance  Officer
    made on 20th November 2013 to refuse to  grant  entry  clearance  as  a
    spouse.

 2. By way of background, the Appellant is a national of Pakistan  who  was
    born on 28th July 1991.  Her UK based Sponsor Mr Shahban Hussain  is  a
    British citizen and a permanent UK resident.  It is said that  the  two
    met each other, for the first time, in February of 2012 and  that  they
    entered into an arranged marriage, that marriage having taken place  in
    Pakistan on 10th April 2013.  An application for  entry  clearance  was
    submitted  on  20th  August  2013  and  it  was  indicated,   in   that
    application, that the two had lived  together  in  Pakistan  from  10th
    April 2013 (the date of marriage) to 5th May 2013 when the Sponsor  had
    returned to the United Kingdom.  Since the marital visit there had been
    a further visit by  the  Sponsor  to  Pakistan,  his  arriving  on  1st
    September 2013 and returning to the  United  Kingdom  on  5th  November
    2013.  Entry clearance was refused on 20th November 2013.  On 28th  May
    2014 the Appellant gave birth to a child.  The Sponsor had not  visited
    Pakistan between the date of his return on 5th November  2013  and  the
    date of his hearing before the judge (18th August 2015).

 3. At the hearing of 18th August 2015 both parties  were  represented  and
    the Sponsor gave oral evidence.  The judge concluded that the Appellant
    had failed to  demonstrate  that  she  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with her Sponsor and had failed to  demonstrate  that  she
    and he intended to live together permanently in the  UK.   Accordingly,
    it was decided that relevant requirements contained within Appendix  FM
    of the Immigration Rules had not been met.  The judge did not go on  to
    consider the maintenance and accommodation requirements of those  Rules
    which had also formed a part of the Entry Clearance  Officer's  adverse
    decision.  The judge did,  though,  go  on  to  consider  any  possible
    application of Article 8 of the European  Convention  on  Human  Rights
    (ECHR) but, unsurprisingly,  given  the  finding  in  relation  to  the
    relationship, decided that the Appellant  was  unable  to  successfully
    rely upon that provision.

 4. In setting out relevant factual findings  and  relevant  reasoning  the
    judge had this to say;

         "15. I am satisfied that the couple met in February 2012  and  that
             they are not related except by marriage.

         16.  It is not in dispute that they  are  married;  and  that  they
             married on 10/04/03 is uncontroversial.

         17.  As at the date of application on 20/08/13 they claimed to have
             lived together for about three weeks.

         18.  The Sponsor went back to Pakistan on 01/09/13 and returned  to
             the United Kingdom on  05/11/13.   The  refusal  was  made  on
             20/11/13; therefore after that nine week period of the  second
             visit.

         19.  The Appellant had a child on 28/05/14.  The  Sponsor  has  not
             been to see the Appellant since he came  back  to  the  United
             Kingdom on 05/11/13.  He has never met the Appellant's child.

         20.  I was not persuaded by the Sponsor's reason as to why  he  had
             not been back; namely that he takes tablets.  He  has  clearly
             been to Pakistan in the past for periods of time and there was
             nothing to suggest his medical  condition  would  prevent  him
             from doing so again.  I  found  it  highly  unusual  in  those
             circumstances that he has not been back to see the child which
             he claims is his own daughter.  I was  not  persuaded  by  the
             reasons put forward.

         21.  There is no evidence to support the Sponsor's  assertion  that
             he and the Appellant maintained contact  after  their  initial
             meeting and wedding i.e. between 2012 and 2013.

         22.  The Lyca phone records which the Sponsor confirmed represented
             the contact he has maintained with his wife since marriage are
             of little evidential value.  He said  the  Appellant's  number
             ended with 68.  I have looked at the calls made  to  "[  ]68".
             There.a (sic) multiple entries for 0 seconds; multiple entries
             for very short calls of a minute or two mainly and  some  less
             than five minutes; a hand full of calls over five  minutes;  a
             handful over ten minutes and the same for over twenty minutes.
              The multiple short calls to this number are  consistent  with
             other numbers called.  There was nothing about this  telephone
             number being dialled which stood out as one which was  dialled
             up and for blocks of time for example.

         23.  I noted that the bill period spans from May to July  2013  and
             looking at the total time spent actually on the phone to  that
             number it is a relatively short period of time in total.  That
             is aside from the  fact  that  the  Appellant  was  unable  to
             recollect the wife's actual number which I have inferred would
             have to be entered manually if using a calling card.  There is
             also a lack of any evidence confirming it is her number.   All
             in all, this evidence was weak in terms of  him  remaining  in
             touch, his wife (sic).  It was also time limited to July  2013
             with no plausible explanation as  to  how  he  has  maintained
             contact in the two years since.

         24.  I was not persuaded by the money transfer slips either.   They
             only cover the post-decision period in my view [page 42  being
             04/12/13].  There were no receipts for  transfers  before  the
             wedding; or prior to the decision.

         25.  There is no evidence from the Appellant herself as to the  way
             in which she has maintained the  relationship  long  distance;
             and what her intentions are for the future.

         26.  I was not persuaded by the submissions relating to the  child.
             That is a post-decision fact and in  any  event  there  is  no
             evidence to confirm  paternity.   By  his  own  admission  the
             Sponsor has not been to see the child which is unusual.

         27.  The photographic evidence when looked at in the round with the
             rest of the evidence does not alter my conclusions  that  this
             is a weak case.

         28.  I am not satisfied that the Appellant has shown that she meets
             the requirements of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.   In
             particular, I am not satisfied that the  relationship  between
             the applicant (sic) and  Sponsor  is  genuine  and  subsisting
             (under paragraph  E-ECP.2.6).   There  was  little  persuasive
             evidence at the date of  decision  that  this  was  the  case.
             Furthermore, I was not  persuaded  that  there  was  a  "clear
             commitment from both parties  that  they  will  live  together
             permanently" in the United Kingdom.  I was not satisfied  that
             this was a "real relationship as opposed to the merely  formal
             one of a marriage which has not been terminated."

         29.  My finding against the Appellant  is  fatal  to  her  case  by
             operation of paragraph EC-P1.1.(d).  I am not satisfied it  is
             necessary to go on to consider the other aspects of the case."

 5. The Appellant, through her representatives, applied for  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  The grounds, it is fair to say, for  the
    most part comprised a detailed attempt to  re-argue  matters  of  fact.
    There were suggestions contained therein that the judge  had  erred  in
    doubting the parentage of the child,  in  failing  to  appreciate  that
    there would have been no need or reason for the Sponsor to  send  money
    to the Appellant prior  to  the  marriage,  in  failing  to  adequately
    consider medical evidence relating to the Sponsor which suggested  that
    amongst other things he  had  brain  damage,  in  failing  to  properly
    scrutinise the evidence of contact between the parties and  in  failing
    to adequately consider the possible application of  Article  8  of  the
    ECHR.

 6. Permission, as indicated above, was granted.  The salient part  of  the
    grant reads as follows;

         "For the most part the grounds on which  permission  to  appeal  is
         sought amount to disagreement with the  judge  and  an  attempt  to
         reargue the appeal.  However I consider that it  is  arguable  that
         the judge erred  in  law  by  failing  to  take  into  account  the
         correlation between the Sponsor's accepted presence in Pakistan  in
         September 2013 and the birth of the Appellant's child in May  2014.
         It is arguable that had this  been  taken  into  consideration  the
         appeal might have been decided differently."

 7. Permission having been granted there was a  hearing  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal (before me) so  that  consideration  could  be  given  to  the
    question of whether the judge had erred in law and, if so,  what  ought
    to flow from that.  Representation at that  hearing  was  as  indicated
    above.  I am grateful to both representatives for their assistance.

 8. Ms Kullar, for the Appellant, told me that  she  would  rely  upon  the
    written grounds in their entirety.  She said that the  child  had  been
    conceived when the Sponsor had visited Pakistan, that it  was  not  the
    case that there had been no evidence before the judge of  a  subsisting
    relationship, that  the  Sponsor  had  explained  his  difficulties  in
    obtaining more than a small number of telephone  calling  cards  during
    the hearing and that there was a limit to the evidence which  telephone
    companies could provide.  She submitted that the judge  had  failed  to
    have regard to cultural traditions in the sense that the Sponsor  would
    not have been expected to financially support the  Appellant  prior  to
    marriage, that there had been sufficient evidence before the  judge  to
    lead to a  favourable  conclusion  from  the  Appellant  and  Sponsor's
    perspective regarding paternity, that the Sponsor could not  have  been
    expected to recall the Appellant's telephone number  in  light  of  his
    medical problems and that the judge's findings  had  been  against  the
    weight of the evidence.  Mr Mills, for  the  Respondent,  acknowledged,
    accurately I think, that many  other  judges  would  have  decided  the
    appeal differently on the same evidence.  However,  he  contended  that
    that did not mean this judge had erred in law.  He  had  explained  his
    reasoning and had been entitled to conclude that the evidence suggested
    only limited contact between the parties.  The judge  had  not  ignored
    the Sponsor's medical condition and had taken a rational view  that  it
    was highly unusual for a father not to return to  see  his  own  child.
    Medical evidence had not demonstrated that he was unfit  to  travel  to
    Pakistan.  The conclusions, whilst tough ones, had  been  open  to  the
    judge.  Ms Kullar, replying to the those points, said  that  the  judge
    had not made a finding as to the Sponsor's presence in Pakistan at  the
    likely time of conception and should have done.  The  medical  evidence
    had shown that there were health concerns.

 9. I have no doubt at all that many judges would have resolved this appeal
    differently on the basis of the  same  evidence.   I  do  think  it  is
    accurate to characterise certain of the findings as being  tough  ones.
    Mr Mills is right, though, when he points out  that  that,  of  itself,
    does not mean that the judge has made an error of law.

10. I have carefully considered the points advanced orally and  in  writing
    on behalf of the Appellant as to the error of law  issue.   I  have  to
    say, and I mean no disrespect  in  saying  so,  that  I  find  it  very
    difficult to characterise the majority of what has  been  said  on  the
    Appellant's behalf as anything other  than  an  expression  of  factual
    disagreement with the judge's findings.  It seems to  me  that  on  the
    basis of the evidence before him the judge  was  entitled  to  conclude
    that,  given  the  claimed  length  and  claimed  seriousness  of   the
    relationship, the evidence of ongoing contact and of financial  support
    was limited.  In this context I do bear in  mind  what  was  stated  in
    Goudey (subsisting marriage - evidence) Sudan [2012] UKUT  00041  (IAC)
    and  in  particular  paragraphs  10  and  11  of  that  decision,  but,
    nevertheless, hold to my view.

11. Of particular concern to the judge was the Sponsor's failure to  return
    to Pakistan to see his child who had,  of  course,  been  born  in  his
    absence.  The judge's reference to the medical evidence, insofar as  it
    was relevant to that issue, was a little terse or  cursory  but  it  is
    right to say, as Ms Kullar accepted at the hearing, that that  evidence
    did not demonstrate that the Sponsor was unfit to  travel  to  see  his
    wife and his claimed child and, indeed, he had  travelled  to  Pakistan
    for the marriage and on one occasion thereafter.   The  judge  had  not
    been offered an explanation containing any detail as to why  there  had
    been  no  such  visits  after  the  child's   birth   and,   in   these
    circumstances, was entitled to accord significant weight to the matter.
     It may be that the judge  was  wrong  to  take  a  point  against  the
    Appellant, if that is what he  did,  through  a  lack  of  evidence  of
    financial support prior to the marriage but that was  no  more  than  a
    peripheral consideration in the judge's mind  as  is  apparent  from  a
    reading of the determination as a whole.

12. I did wonder, although the point was not put in quite this way, whether
    the judge might have erred by failing  to  make  a  sufficiently  clear
    finding regarding paternity.  Mr Mills says that,  as  a  post-decision
    event, the question is irrelevant anyway.  However, if  the  judge  had
    accepted paternity that would have been capable of informing as to what
    the strength of the relationship between the couple might have been  as
    at the date of the decision under appeal which is, of course, the  date
    to which the judge was required to have regard.  However, it  seems  to
    me that at paragraph 26 the judge was effectively saying that,  in  his
    view, the evidence before him did not meet the  requisite  standard  of
    proof regarding paternity.  Once he had decided that then there was  no
    relevance in a consideration as to whether the birth of the  child  did
    inform upon the state of the relationship at the material time.  Whilst
    he did not specifically make the  point,  as  to  paternity,  that  the
    Sponsor was in Pakistan as at the likely time of conception  that  does
    not mean he was unaware  of  it.   The  mere  fact  that  there  was  a
    correlation in that regard did  not  establish  paternity.   The  judge
    could not have materially erred with respect to Article 8  because  any
    Article 8 argument that there might have been was utterly destroyed  by
    the findings concerning the nature of the relationship.

13. In light of the above I have had to conclude  that  the  judge  reached
    rational findings, that the findings he did make were open to  him  and
    that they were adequately explained.  It is important to stress in this
    case, given the points which were put to me, that I am  not  permitted,
    in deciding an error of law issue, to substitute my  own  view  of  the
    facts for that made by  a  first  instance  Tribunal.   My  conclusion,
    therefore, albeit not without some hesitation given  the  evidence,  is
    that the judge did not err in law.   Accordingly,  his  decision  shall
    stand.

14. I do not know but perhaps a suitable way forward for the Appellant  and
    Sponsor, if they seek to continue to  assert  the  genuineness  of  the
    relationship, might be for DNA testing  to  be  conducted  and  then  a
    further entry clearance application to be lodged.   That,  however,  is
    not a matter for me and, of course, the Appellant and Sponsor may  take
    further advice from Ms Kullar.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law.  That decision shall stand.

Anonymity

I make no anonymity direction.

Signed                              Date 26th July 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.

Signed                              Date 26th July 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway
