
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/16304/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 20 June 2014                               |On 23rd July 2014            |
|Oral determination given following the hearing|                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between


                        ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, NBI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              SESEN TESFALIDET

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Cooray, Barnes Harrild & Dyer Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal  against  a  decision  made  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Majid in a  determination  promulgated  on  1
    April 2014 following a hearing at Taylor House on 19 March  2014.   For
    ease of reference I shall throughout this determination  refer  to  the
    Entry Clearance Officer who was the original respondent as  "the  Entry
    Clearance  Officer"  and  to  Miss  Tesfalidet  who  was  the  original
    appellant as "the claimant".

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Eritrea who was born on  11  January  1995
    and she applied for entry clearance to settle  in  the  United  Kingdom
    with her uncle, Mr Habton Uqbu  Tekle,  who  has  indefinite  leave  to
    remain having been accepted as a refugee.  This application was refused
    by the Entry Clearance Officer on 20 July 2012 and the  refusal  letter
    was sent to the claimant on 25 July 2012.   It is said in  the  refusal
    letter that the Entry  Clearance  Officer  considered  the  application
    under paragraphs 252B, 297, 309A, 310 and 316A of the Immigration Rules
    and reasons were given why the Entry Clearance Officer considered  that
    the claimant did not satisfy the requirements of any these Rules.   The
    Entry Clearance Officer also considered the application as a "de  facto
    adoption" but considered  that  the  claimant  had  failed  to  provide
    satisfactory evidence that she met the requirements to be granted entry
    clearance on this basis.  The Entry  Clearance  Officer  was  also  not
    satisfied that the maintenance or accommodation provisions under any of
    the Rules were  satisfied.

 3. It is also stated within the refusal letter that  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer considered whether or not the claimant might be entitled to  be
    granted permission to enter pursuant to her rights under Article  8  of
    the ECHR but was not satisfied that the claimant had  established  that
    there was family life as defined in Article 8 and considered that  even
    if there was, the interference which would follow from a refusal of the
    application was proportionate to the legitimate  purpose  of  effective
    immigration control (which is necessary for the economic  wellbeing  of
    the country).  The claimant  appealed  against  this  decision  and  as
    already noted above, her appeal was considered by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Majid at a hearing before him at Taylor House on 19  March  2014.
    His determination  in  which  he  allowed  the  claimant's  appeal  was
    promulgated on 1 April 2014.

 4. The Entry Clearance Officer has appealed against the  judge's  decision
    on a number of grounds.  It is said first, that the   judge  failed  to
    set out the relevant issues and give any or any  adequate  reasons  for
    his finding that the claimant "merits the benefit  of  the  Immigration
    Rules".  The Entry Clearance Officer's  submissions  are  put  in  bald
    terms as follows:

         "A Tribunal must give reasons for its decision; these reasons  must
         be intelligible such that a litigant or  other  interested  persons
         can see how the result has been reached."

 5. Reliance is placed on a judgment  of  the  Court  of  Appeal   in  R  v
    Immigration Appeal Tribunal ex parte Khan [1983]  QB  790,  where  Lord
    Lane CJ said as follows at page 794:

         "The important matter which must be borne in mind by  Tribunals  in
         the present type of circumstances is that it must be apparent  from
         what they state by way of reasons  first  of  all  that  they  have
         considered the point which is at issue between the parties and they
         should indicate the evidence  on  which  they  had  come  to  their
         conclusions.  When one gets a decision  of  a  Tribunal  ...  which
         either  fails  to  set  out  the  issues  which  the  Tribunal   is
         determining either  directly  or  by  inference,  or  fails  either
         directly or by inference to set out  the  basis  on  which  it  has
         reached its determination on that issue,  then  that  is  a  matter
         which will be very closely regarded by this  court  and  in  normal
         circumstances would result in the decision of  the  Tribunal  being
         quashed. The reason is this.  A party appearing before  a  Tribunal
         is entitled to know, either expressly stated by it or inferentially
         stated, what it is to which the Tribunal is addressing its mind. In
         some  cases  it  may  be  perfectly  obvious  without  any  express
         reference to it by  the  Tribunal;  in  other  cases  it  may  not.
         Second, the appellant is entitled to know  the  basis  of  fact  on
         which the conclusion has been reached. Once again in many cases  it
         may be quite obvious without the necessity of expressly stating it,
         in others it may not."

 6. With regard to this ground of appeal, it is argued  on  behalf  of  the
    Entry Clearance Officer as follows:

         "The  judge  failed  to  set  out  the  issues  which  fell  to  be
         determined.  He failed to state which were the relevant  paragraphs
         of the Rule.  He failed to set out why he found,  contrary  to  the
         respondent's case, that the appellant satisfied the Rules."

 7. The second ground which is very much a secondary ground,  is  that  the
    judge failed to give any or any adequate reasons for his  finding  that
    the Entry Clearance Officer's decision failed properly to apply Section
    55 BCIA 2009 (which is the provision dealing with the best interests of
    a child) and that the  "best  interests  of  the  child  are  that  the
    appellant ... leaves no doubt in my mind that  this  appeal  should  be
    allowed".

 8. It is submitted that the judge failed to explain what  if  any  factual
    findings he made, failed to consider the claimant's  current  situation
    in Eritrea and failed to apply any facts found  to  any  assessment  of
    where the claimant's interests lay.

 9. It is further submitted that  the  judge  failed  to  weigh  the  child
    claimant's best interests with the other factors  in  this  case.   The
    point is made that not only did the judge  fail  to  consider  "whether
    there existed an arguable case for leave  to  be  granted  outside  the
    Rules  on  account  of  compelling   circumstances   not   sufficiently
    recognised by the Immigration Rules" (as per Nagre [2013] EWHC 720) but
    also even relying on pre-existing jurisprudence it is not clear that he
    followed "the stepwise analysis derived from Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  11".
    It is noted  that  there  is  "no  reasoning  supporting  the  implicit
    conclusion that Article  8  was  engaged,  or  that  the  decision  was
    disproportionate".

The Hearing

10. Before me on behalf of the Entry Clearance Officer, Mr Deller submitted
    robustly that he  would  say  that  the  determination  was  "clueless"
    because "it does not engage in any way with any Immigration Rule it  is
    supposed to be considering" such that it was "impossible to  glean  any
    relevant circumstances in this case" except first, that the sponsor had
    refugee status and secondly, the claimant was an orphan.  There was  no
    proper consideration of Article 8 on any  proper  reasons  basis.   The
    determination did not  even  begin  satisfactorily  to  determine  this
    appeal and could not possibly stand as a satisfactory determination.

11. So far as error of  law  was  concerned,  all  the  reasons  which  are
    advanced  from  time  to  time  in  support  of  an  argument  that   a
    determination contains an error of law were  there;  lack  of  reasons,
    lack of engagement with the evidence and lack of identification of  the
    relevant statutory framework.  It was  imagined,  although  one  cannot
    tell this from the determination, from which it is not clear what  were
    the disputed matters between the parties.  It  is  impossible  to  note
    from  this  determination  what   they   were   and   manifestly   this
    determination was hopelessly inadequate.

12. On behalf of  the  claimant,  Mr  Cooray  very  sensibly  and  entirely
    properly did  not  even  seek  to  persuade  this  Tribunal  that  this
    determination was sustainable.  The best he thought he  could  say  was
    that the judge had seen the witnesses but even this  was  not  apparent
    from the determination.  This was particularly unfortunate because this
    appeal turned almost entirely on the credibility of the witnesses given
    the lack of documentary evidence.



Discussion

13. It is beyond argument in this case that this is a hopelessly inadequate
    determination and apologies are due to the sponsor in this case who  is
    now going to be put to yet further inconvenience by having to attend at
    yet another court in order that the appeal can be properly  determined.
    It is trite law that, as the then Lord Chief Justice Lord  Lane  stated
    as long ago in 1983 in Khan which is relied upon in the grounds, it  is
    incumbent  on  a  judge  to  ensure  that  when  he  or  she  writes  a
    determination it is apparent from the reasons given that the judge  had
    considered properly the matters which are in issue between the  parties
    and indicates the evidence on which the judge has come to  his  or  her
    conclusions.

14. It is not acceptable for a  judge  in  a  case  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal merely to say, as this  judge  does  at  paragraph  9  of  his
    determination, that "I reminded myself of the judgment of Henry J in ex
    parte Gondolia [1991]  ImmAR  519"  to  the  effect  that  "it  is  not
    incumbent upon me  to  isolate  every  single  piece  of  evidence  and
    indicate whether I have found it relevant to the issues".   Nor  is  it
    appropriate for a judge to  continue  by  stating  that  "there  is  no
    obligation in law upon me to refer to each and every piece of  evidence
    and it therefore does not follow that because I have  not  referred  to
    specific facts, they have not been taken into account by me".

15. While it is certainly correct that a judge need not refer to  each  and
    every piece of evidence, he is obliged to  refer  to  those  pieces  of
    evidence  which  are  material  to  his  decision.   One  of  the  many
    weaknesses or failings of this determination is that the judge does not
    refer to any evidence at all.

16. Furthermore, he does not refer  even  to  which  particular  Rules  are
    relevant to this appeal.  What he says at paragraph 3 is that

         "I put on record that in considering this appeal I  shall  bear  in
         mind the  legal  provisions  of  the  relevant  paragraphs  of  the
         Immigration Rules ... [which] are detailed but I have  borne  every
         provision of these  paragraphs  in  mind  meticulously  during  the
         assessment of the appellant's case."

17. It is quite impossible to glean from this determination whether or  not
    any and if so which provisions of the  paragraphs  have  been  properly
    taken into account.  The judge also states that he is "also taking into
    account the new changes in the Immigration Rules brought into force  on
    9 July 2012  which  have  radically  changed  the  application  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights" but again it is  quite  impossible
    to say what changes these are and why  it  is  that  even  taking  into
    account these changes, this claimant is entitled to succeed  under  the
    provisos of the ECHR.

18. Effectively all the judge says does not go beyond saying  that  he  has
    considered  all  the  arguments,  taken  into  account   the   relevant
    provisions of the Immigration Rules  and  the  ECHR  and  having  given
    consideration to all that believes  that  the  appeal  should  succeed.
    Clearly with regard to the "best interests" of "the  young   appellant"
    while setting out the judgment of the House of Lords in ZH  (Tanzania),
    to  the  effect  that  the  interests  of  the  child  are  a   primary
    consideration, it is not at all clear from this determination  that  he
    has considered properly all the other matters set out in ZH (Tanzania).



19. The conclusion that is reached at paragraph 20 that

         "in view of my deliberations in the preceding paragraphs and having
         taken into account  all of the oral  and  documentary  evidence  as
         well as the submissions at my disposal, cognisant of the fact  that
         the burden of proof is on the appellant and the standard  of  proof
         is the balance of probabilities, I am persuaded that the  appellant
         merits the benefits of the Immigration Rules  ... as  well  as  the
         provision of the ECHR"

     is clearly unsustainable.

20. In my judgement, it is apparent from this determination that the  judge
    has  failed  to  engage  with  the  issues  in  this  appeal  (or  even
    demonstrate that he knows what they are).  There is no analysis of  the
    evidence.  There is no analysis of what the issues are as  between  the
    parties and there are no findings of fact to  justify  his  conclusions
    that  the  claimant's  appeal  should  be  allowed.   It  is  a  wholly
    unsatisfactory  determination  such  that  it  is  impossible  for  any
    impartial observer reading the determination to understand what is  the
    basis of the decision. Clearly the decision must be set aside  and  the
    determination must be remade.

21. I have regard to  paragraph  7  of  the  Practice  Statements  of   the
    President in which it is made clear that although on the finding of  an
    error of law the normal approach to determining appeals would  be  that
    the  Upper  Tribunal  would  remake  the  decision,  an  appeal   might
    nonetheless be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  where  either  the
    effect of the error "has been to deprive a party before the  First-tier
    Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that  party's  case
    to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal" or "the  nature
    or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary in order  for
    the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that, having regard to
    the overriding objective in Rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case
    to the First-tier Tribunal".

22. In this case it is abundantly clear that the claimant's  case  has  not
    been "properly considered" by the First-tier Tribunal because in  order
    for the case to be properly considered it was necessary for  the  judge
    to set out what the issues were, what arguments had been  advanced  and
    what findings of fact he made. It is also clear that because there  has
    been no judicial fact finding beyond the fact that the sponsor has been
    found to be a refugee and the judge considered that the claimant was an
    orphan, all the facts are now going to  have  to  be  found.  In  these
    circumstances  this appeal must be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
    so that another judge (not Judge Majid) can now  do  what  Judge  Majid
    ought to have done in the first place, which is to  hear  this  appeal,
    determine what the issues are between the parties and make  appropriate
    findings of fact with regard to these issues.

23. I accordingly make this order.



Decision

I set aside the determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Majid  as
containing a material error of law and direct that the  appeal  be  remitted
to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Taylor House to be determined  by  any
judge other than Judge Majid.



Signed:                                 Date: 21 July 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Craig


