
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/16211/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On Friday 7 February 2014            |On Thursday 20 February 2014         |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |


                                   Before

                           MR JUSTICE HICKINBOTTOM

                                     and

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McGEACHY


                                   Between

                             JERRY CHIMA UKAIGWE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Did not appear and was not represented
For the Respondent:    Mr Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. On 12 May 2012, the Appellant Jerry Chima Ukaigwe  applied  for  United
    Kingdom entry clearance on the basis of a Right to Abode Certificate of
    Entitlement completed online by himself.  In the application, made from
    Accra, Ghana, he said he had been born on [ ] 1974, in  [  ]  Hospital,
    London.  In support, he lodged a birth certificate  (i.e.  a  certified
    copy of the Births' Register) confirming  that,  on  [  ]  1974,  [GU],
    stated to be living at [Catford], gave birth  to  a  boy,  Jerry  Chima
    Ukaigwe.  The father was named as  [MU],  said  to  have  been  a  bank
    executive.  In addition, the Appellant lodged a  number  of  supporting
    documents, to which we shall return in due course.  The  Appellant  was
    not interviewed.

 2. His application was refused on  26  July  2012.   The  Entry  Clearance
    Officer was not satisfied that he met the relevant requirements because
    the  Appellant  had  not  submitted  documents  demonstrating  (i)  his
    parent's status in the United Kingdom at the time  of  his  birth,  and
    (ii) that he was the individual whose details he  had  submitted.   The
    refusal notice also noted that the birth certificate submitted was  not
    contemporaneous with the Appellant's birth.

 3. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  He was then invited
    to an interview at the British  High  Commission  in  Accra,  which  he
    attended on 25 July 2013.  It is clear from  the  notes  of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer ("ECO") of that meeting that he was  concerned  about
    the immigration status of the Appellant's parents at the  time  of  his
    birth ("No ILR"), and the fact that the birth certificate produced  was
    not "original" ("Orig B/C sent  to  UK  1998").   In  any  event,  that
    interview  did  not  change  the  ECO's  stance  with  regard  to   the
    Appellant's application or appeal.

 4. The appeal was dealt with on the papers by Judge  Hollingsworth,  Judge
    of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  who  refused  it  in  a   determination
    promulgated on 8 October 2103.  He concluded  that,  on  the  available
    evidence, the Appellant had not shown that the application  was  within
    the Immigration Rules.  In particular:

          i) He found that the Appellant's parents did not have appropriate
             immigration status  in  the  United  Kingdom  (i.e.  leave  to
             remain), when the Appellant  was  born.   That,  he  said  (at
             paragraph 12 of his determination), was "an important  feature
             of the application as a whole".

         ii) He was unimpressed  by  the  birth  certificate  lodged.   The
             Appellant has said that his "first original" birth certificate
             was sent to the Passport Agency in London in 1998, when he had
             applied for a British Passport, and had not been returned.  He
             obtained a certified copy in 2005, which he lodged  with  this
             application.  The judge accepted that the certificate showed a
             male child bearing the same name of  the  applicant  with  the
             same parents.  However, he was sceptical about  the  document,
             because it was obtained in 2005; and no explanation  had  been
             given as to why it had been obtained then.

        iii) He expressed a degree of scepticism and doubt  about  some  of
             the other documents lodged, often on the basis of the date  on
             which they had been obtained; but he made  no  finding  as  to
             whether the Appellant was born on [ ] 1974 at [ ] Hospital.

 5. Unfortunately, the focus of the judge was misplaced.

 6. With regard to (i) (the immigration status of his parents at  the  time
    of his birth), under the British Nationality Act 1948, a person born in
    the United Kingdom became a citizen of the United Kingdom and  Colonies
    by birth, unless the individual's father was a foreign diplomat, or  an
    enemy  alien  and  the  birth  occurred  in  enemy-occupied   territory
    (sections 4 and 12(1)(a)).  The British Nationality Act 1981  abolished
    citizenship by birth simpliciter; but a person who  immediately  before
    commencement of the Act - 1 January 1983 - was a citizen of the  United
    Kingdom and Colonies and had a right of abode  in  the  United  Kingdom
    became a British Citizen under the new  Act.   By  section  2(1)(a),  a
    person had a right of abode in the United Kingdom if he was  a  citizen
    of the United Kingdom and Colonies who had that citizenship  by  reason
    of birth registration in the United Kingdom.

 7. Therefore, if the Appellant was born in the  United  Kingdom  before  1
    January 1983, as he claimed, then  he  had  a  right  of  abode  and  a
    consequent right to enter  the  United  Kingdom.   The  status  of  his
    parents was irrelevant.  There is no suggestion that his father  was  a
    diplomat or an alien.

 8. With regard to (ii) (the reliability of the birth certificate  lodged),
    by regulation 4 of the  Immigration  (Certificate  of  Entitlement  for
    Right of Abode in the United Kingdom)  Regulations  2006  (SI  2006  No
    3145), an application for a Certificate  of  Entitlement  to  Right  of
    Abode must be accompanied by (i) the  applicant's  passport  or  travel
    document, (ii) two photographs of the applicant taken no  more  than  6
    months prior to  making  the  application,  and  (iii)  the  additional
    documents which are specified in the right hand column of the  schedule
    to the regulations.  Where the basis of the application is birth in the
    United Kingdom before 1 January 1983,  the  document  is:  "Applicant's
    full birth certificate, showing parents' details".

 9. That is what the Appellant lodged, namely a copy entry of the  register
    relating to the birth, including full details of parents, certified  by
    the Superintendent Registrar.  That certificate is proper  evidence  of
    the entry details on the register (section 34 of the Births and  Deaths
    Registration Act 1953).

10.  Therefore,  the  two  matters  upon  which  the  judge  focused   were
    unfortunately not germane to the application.  The determinative  issue
    was whether the Appellant had shown, on the balance  of  probabilities,
    that he is indeed the individual born on [ ] 1974 at [ ]  Hospital,  as
    he claimed.  If he is, then he has a right of abode in, and a right  to
    enter, the United Kingdom.

11. Unfortunately, that was not an issue with which the judge grappled.  In
    that failure, he erred in law.  We should say that the analysis  of  Mr
    Deller for the Secretary of State corresponded precisely with  our  own
    as set out above: he readily and graciously  conceded  that  the  judge
    erred as we have described, and, as a result, his determination must be
    set aside.  We agree.

12. Having set aside the  judge's  determination  aside,  we  are  able  to
    consider and remake the decision, particularly as it is to be  made  on
    the papers only.

13. In addition to his passport, two photographs and his birth certificate,
    the Appellant  lodged  the  following  supporting  documents  with  his
    application:

          i) An affidavit of [GU] sworn 31 March 2006, confirming that  she
             married [MU] at Asylum Down Cathedral,  Ghana  on  4  November
             1967; that they entered the United Kingdom in  1971  and  1973
             respectively, with leave; her passport has been lost; and that
             she is the biological mother of "the applicant",  Jerry  Chima
             Ukaigwe.

         ii) A letter dated 29 August 1975 from the Society of Company  and
             Commercial Accountants confirming the student registration  of
             Mr [MU] of [Catford].

        iii) A letter dated  24  November  1996  from  [PO]  of  [Catford],
             confirming that:

                  "Mr & Mrs [MU] lived in my house at the above address when
                  they got their son Jerry Ukaigwe on [ ] 1974.   Mr  &  Mrs
                  [MU] lived in my house from 1973 to 1976."

         iv) Death certificate for [MU] of the Oxford School of Accounting,
             Imo State, Nigeria, dated 27 April 2006.

          v) A letter dated 16 June 2005 from [ ] Hospital NHS Trust  dated
             16 June 2005, confirming that [GU], who at that time lived  at
             [Catford], gave birth to a live male infant on [ ] 1974.

         vi) A baptismal certificate, dated 15 March 1997, indicating that,
             on examination of the Register of Baptisms of the  Holy  Cross
             Church in Catford, Jerry  Ukaigwe,  born  on  [  ]  1974,  was
             baptised in that church on 15 November 1975.  The parents  are
             named as [MU] and [GU].

        vii) A Record of Innoculations for Jerry Ukaigwe, born  [  ]  1974,
             the period of the inoculations being June 1975 to March  1976.
             The address of the patient is indistinct, but it is an English
             address.

       viii) The Appellant's Marriage Certificate dated 8  September  2010,
             showing his father as [MU] (Deceased).

         ix) The Appellant's Nigerian Voting Card, in  the  name  of  Jerry
             Ukaigwe, date of birth [ ] 1974.

          x) Various documents  from  Nigeria  concerning  the  Appellant's
             upbringing, including attendance at a nursery school from 1978
             to  attendance  at  Enugu  State  University  of  Science  and
             Technology from 2000 to 2004.

         xi) A letter dated 18 January 2001 from the Pension Service to Mrs
             [GU] of  [London],  confirming  her  state  pension.   In  his
             interview, the Appellant said that this had been  sent  on  to
             him by the occupant of [ ].

    It is clear from the papers that the  Appellant  also  lodged  a  staff
    identify card purportedly belonging to his  mother  whilst  working  in
    South East  London,  and  his  deceased's  father's  Nigerian  driver's
    licence; but neither of those has found there way into our papers.   We
    do not regard those documents as crucial.

14. Judge Hollingsworth appeared concerned by the fact  that  some  of  the
    documents were not "contemporaneous".  For example, in addition to  the
    birth certificate, the baptismal  certificate  was  obtained  in  1997,
    although the baptism was in 1975; the letter from the [ ]  landlord  is
    dated 1996; and the letter from [ ] Hospital confirming  the  birth  is
    dated 2005.  We do not share any serious concerns  about  this  timing.
    It is clear that the Appellant has made a number of applications  based
    on his right to abode.   For  example,  it  seems  clear  from  the  UK
    Passport Service letter of 24 January 2004, that the Appellant made  an
    application to the service in London in 1998, which  probably  explains
    the documents with dates shortly before that.  That letter informed him
    that he would have to resubmit his  application  to  the  British  High
    Commission in his country of residence, which he did: there is a record
    of him attending the High Commission on  28  June  2005.   That  record
    indicated that the High Commission wished to see "Sworn affidavit  from
    mother ...", which explains the date of her affidavit.

15. Of the available documents, none is  inconsistent  with  the  Appellant
    being born on [ ] 1974 at [  ].   Most  are  obviously  consistent.   A
    number of documents record the Appellant's date of birth as [  ]  1974;
    they all refer to him by the  name  of  the  individual  born  at  [  ]
    Hospital that day (and consistently refer to his parents by  the  names
    given in the birth certificate).  There are a number of documents which
    support the proposition that his parents lived and worked in South East
    London in 1974; and the  inoculation  record  is  consistent  with  the
    Appellant having lived in London in 1975-6.  All of the  documents  are
    consistent with him leaving the United Kingdom in  about  1976,  as  he
    claims he did.

16. Looking at all of the evidence we have  before  us,  we  are  satisfied
    that, on the balance of probabilities, the Appellant is the  individual
    who is the subject of the various documents which he has  lodged.   The
    documents are curiously disparate, and many are personal; but that,  in
    our  view,  supports  the  proposition  that  they  are  genuine.    In
    particular, on all the evidence before us, we are  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant is the individual born at [ ] Hospital on [ ] 1974.

17. Consequently, for the reasons we have given, he has a right of abode in
    the United Kingdom; and the right to enter.

Decision

18. For those reasons, the Immigration Judge erred in law; and his decision
    is set aside.  It is remade as follows: the Appellant's appeal  against
    the Secretary of State's refusal of his application for entry clearance
    is allowed.


Signed

The Hon Mr Justice Hickinbottom
Dated 17th February 2014

