
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
OA/16115/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly             |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 14 March 2016                           |On 8 April 2016            |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                      HADIJAT AYOMIDE MORENIKEJI JENYO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Sarwar
For the Respondent: Mr Duffy

DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on  24  May  1990  married  to
   Oladayo Jenyo a British citizen on 6 April 2014.The Sponsor is  a  member
   of the British Armed Forces who enlisted on 7 September 2008.
3. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Alty promulgated on  22  June  2015  which  dismissed  the
   Appellant's appeal against a refusal of entry clearance to the UK as  the
   spouse of the Sponsor.
4. The refusal which was dated 6 October 2014 was  on  the  basis  that  the
   Appellant did not meet the requirements of Paragraph 20(b) (c) and 75  of
   Appendix Armed Forces of the Immigration Rules. The refusal letter gave a
   number of reasons:
   a)  There  was  insufficient  evidence  of  a  genuine   and   subsisting
      relationship and that they intended to live together permanently.
   b) Although the Appellant states that they have been  in  a  relationship
      since 9 December 2012 the Sponsor was not divorced from  his  previous
      wife until 7 January 2014.
   c) The Sponsors evidence was that his relationship with his previous wife
      broke down in 2012 and they separated but that wife made a  claim  for
      indefinite leave to remain on 29  October  2013  on  the  basis  of  a
      subsisting marriage to the Sponsor.
   d) The tenancy agreement did not confirm that the Sponsor had  permission
      for the Appellant to live at his address.


The ECM Review
5. The Entry Clearance Manager acknowledged  that  the  refusal  letter  was
   mistaken in asserting that the Sponsor had previously been married as  it
   was the Appellant so the Respondent maintained the challenge as to how  a
   relationship was started and maintained when  one  of  them  was  already
   married; noted that the sponsr accepted he had made a mistake and that he
   separated from his first wife in  2013  not  2012;  there  was  still  no
   evidence  that  the  parties  could  live  together   in   the   Sponsors
   accommodation; there was no breach of Article 8.



The Judge's Decision
6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Alty ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal  against  the  Respondent's
   decision. The Judge found :
   a) Recorded the Appellants evidence at paragraph 18 which  explained  the
      apparent discrepancies in relation to their relationship  and  how  it
      started.
   b) Noted at paragraph 20 that:
      "As this is an appeal against a refusal of entry clearance, I can only
      consider the circumstances as they were at the date of decision. Post-
      decsion evidence can be considered to the limited extent that it sheds
      light on the circumstances as at the date of the decision and I  admit
      such evidence to that extent."
   c)  She  found  that  on  the  evidence  before  her  the   accommodation
      requirements were met.
   d) Found that the eligibility  requirements  for  members  of  the  Armed
      Forces are set out at paragraph 20 of the Appendix.
   e) Found that the Sponsor divorced his previous wife on  7  January  2014
      and married the Appellant on 6 April 2014 in Nigeria.
   f) She found that the  evidence  of  their  marriage,  photographs,  bank
      statements phone  cards  and  mobile  screen  shots  was  insufficient
      evidence of the  subsisting  nature  of  their  relationship  and  the
      reasons were set out at paragraph 35 of the decision onwards.
   g) She found although the Appellant and Sponsor  had  met  they  had  not
      spent time as a couple prior  to  their  marriage  meeting  only  once
      during the sponsors holiday in Nigeria in December  2012  not  meeting
      again until the sponsor travelled to Nigeria in March 2014.
   h) She found that there was little else in the  evidence  to  indicate  a
      relationship of real substance prior to the application.
   i) She found the evidence as to when their  relationship  began  and  the
      circumstances in which it began was inconsistent between the  evidence
      provided pre  decision  and  post  decision.  She  did  not  find  the
      explanations for these discrepancies were adequate.
   j) She found that the circumstances and speed with which the Sponsor  and
      Appellants relationship developed against his evidence of  being  100%
      committed to his former wife in October 2013 was inherently unlikely.
   k) She concluded that given the inconsistencies in the  evidence  of  the
      Sponsor and Appellant, the implausibility of the Sponsors  account  of
      the circumstances of the breakdown of his previous  marriage  and  the
      lack of evidence of face to face contact prior to their marriage  that
      the relationship was not genuine and subsisting and  the  requirements
      of the Rules were not met.
   l) Article 8 was not engaged as the relationship was not genuine.
   m) She dismissed the appeal on all grounds.


7.  Grounds  of  appeal  were  lodged  arguing  that  the  Judge  erred   in
   considering the circumstances as at the date of application and  not  the
   date of decision and challenging her findings of fact.
8. Permission was initially refused and the application was renewed  relying
   on the earlier grounds of appeal and additionally arguing that the  Judge
   had failed to take into account section 85 and  85A  of  the  Nationality
   Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 .

9. On 21 October 2015   Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Jordan  gave  permission  to
   appeal.

10. At the hearing I heard submissions from  Mr  Sarwar  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant that :

   a) The Judge in paragraph 20 stated that the requirements  of  the  Rules
      were to be met at the date  of  application  but  did  not  take  into
      account section 85 of the 2002 Act which  allowed  her  to  take  into
      account post decision evidence that was relevant to that decision.

   b) He relied  on  Sultana  and  Others  (rules:  waiver/further  enquiry;
      discretion) [2014] UKUT 00540  (IAC)  to  argue  that  the  Judge  was
      permitted to rely on post decision evidence if  it  reflected  on  the
      circumstances of the relationship at the time of the application.

   c) The evidence  that  post  dated  the  decision  was  material  to  the
      circumstances at the  date  of  the  application  in  that  while  she
      considered three money orders that were submitted with the application
      she did not consider 3 others that pre dated  the  decision  but  were
      submitted after the application and  8  others  that  post  dated  the
      decision but were placed before her.

   d) The Judge stated that she would not consider the mobile  screen  shots
      of conversations as she stated they did not evidence circumstances  at
      the time of the application. The Sponsor had his  phone  with  him  in
      court and had there been an issue about the date of the  conversations
      this could have been resolved by viewing the phone.

   e) The Judge did not take into account  evidence  that  the  Sponsor  had
      travelled to Nigeria after the date of his statement, from  12.5.2015-
      3.6.2015.

   f) The Judge did not take into account the wedding photographs.

11. On behalf of the Respondent  Mr Duffy submitted that :

   a) The Judge was required by paragraph 20 of the Armed Forces Appendix to
      assess whether the Appellant met the requirements of the Rules at  the
      date of application subject to the provisions of  section  85  of  the
      2002 Act.

   b) It was therefore open to her to find that the Appellants  and  Sponsor
      had given contradictory evidence and therefore she did not find  their
      evidence of their relationship was  credible.  As  a  result  of  this
      finding that the underlying relationship was not genuine  the  failure
      to look at screenshots of conversations or money transfers  after  the
      date of the application was not material to the outcome.
Finding on Material Error

12. Having heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made material errors of law.

13. The application the subject  of  appeal  in  this  case  was  for  entry
   clearance as the Spouse as a member of the UK armed forces and  therefore
   it was  governed  by  Appendix  Armed  Forces.  The  general  eligibility
   requirements of the Appendix found at paragraph 20 provide:

   "20. The general eligibility requirements to be met by the partner (P) of
   a member of HM Forces are that on the date the application is made:

   ...

   (b) P and P's sponsor:

   (iii) must intend to live together permanently; and

     (c)  the  relationship  between  P  and  P's  sponsor  is  genuine  and
   subsisting."

14. The main challenge to the Judges decision is that in  assessing  whether
   the Appellant had met the evidential burden of establishing that  at  the
   time of application the Appellant and  sponsor  were  in  a  genuine  and
   subsisting relationship and intended to live together permanently she had
   failed to consider evidence that post-dated the date  of  application  as
   she was entitled to by virtue of s85(4) of the  Nationality,  Immigration
   and Asylum Act 2002 which provides that in  relation  to  matters  to  be
   considered in an appeal:

   "[the Tribunal] may consider....any matter which it  thinks  relevant  to
   the substance of the decision , including a matter arising after the date
   of the decision."

15. In this case  that  meant  that  the  Judge  was  entitled  to  consider
   evidence submitted after the date of application  if  it  shed  light  on
   whether the Appellant and sponsor were  in  a  genuine  relationship  and
   intended to live together permanently at the date of  application.  I  am
   satisfied that the Judge directed herself incorrectly in the body of  her
   decision at paragraph 20 where she asserted that she could consider  post
   decision evidence "to the limited extent  that  it  sheds  light  on  the
   circumstances as at the date of that decision and  I  admit  evidence  to
   that extent" which is not an accurate summary of section 85(4) as she  is
   not concerned with the circumstances at the date of decision  but  rather
   at the date of the application. By contrast in her findings at  paragraph
   34 she asserted that the test  she  applied  to  the  assessment  of  the
   evidence was whether the parties met the requirements of the Rules at the
   date of the application.

16. I therefore accept that the Judges statement of which evidence she  took
   into account is unclear and contradictory and in  practice  she  did  not
   apply s 85(4). The Judge makes reference to only 3 money transfers  on  3
   January , 4 April and 19 May 2014 at paragraph 33 although she had before
   her 11 other transfers which, while they post-dated the  application  and
   decision,  had they been considered may have been capable  of  supporting
   an assertion that at  the  time  of  the  application  the  marriage  was
   genuine.

17. I note that the Judge also in paragraph 33 refused to take into  account
   mobile screen shots because they post-dated the application  by  a  short
   period but given that they recorded  conversations  between  parties  who
   claimed to be in a subsisting relationship may have  shed  light  on  the
   relationship at the time of the application. The Judge also did not  take
   into phone cards which she suggested were not 'conclusive that he was  in
   touch with the Appellant' which is imposing a higher burden of  proof  on
   the Appellant than the law requires.

18. In Naz (subsisting marriage - standard of proof)  Pakistan  [2012]  UKUT
   00040 (IAC) the Tribunal held that post decision visits by a  sponsor  to
   his spouse are admissible  in  evidence  in  appeals  to  show  that  the
   marriage is subsisting. I accept that there was evidence before the Judge
   of a post decision visit . There is no reference to this visit and it  is
   unclear whether the Judge determined that this was a matter she  was  not
   entitled to consider.

19. The failure of the First-tier Tribunal  to  address  and  determine  the
   evidence that she was entitled to consider  in  determining  whether  the
   Appellant and sponsor were in a  genuine  relationship  at  the  time  of
   application constitutes a clear error of law. This error I consider to be
   material since had the Tribunal conducted this exercise the outcome could
   have been different. That in my view is the correct test to apply.

20. While there are other findings  about  credibility  given  the  concerns
   about the evidential basis on which the Judge has determined this case  I
   am satisfied that they should not stand.

21. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
   of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be remitted to the First  Tier
   Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:
    (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

22. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
   the Appellant did not have a fair hearing due  to  the  failure  to  make
   clear  what  evidence  has  been  taken  into  account  in  reaching  the
   decsion.In this case none of the findings of fact are to  stand  and  the
   matter will be a complete re hearing.

23. I consequently remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal  sitting
   at Manchester to be heard on a date to be fixed , before me.

24. I made the following directions for the resumed hearing:

       . Hearing set for 2 hours.
Signed                                                              Date
4.4.2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
