

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                     Appeal
Number OA/16745/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House
              Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 25th September 2015
           On 16th October 2015


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                                 NOOR IFFAT
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:       Mr G Davison (Counsel, instructed by Adam Bernard
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant's application to enter the UK as the dependent child of
   her mother was refused. Her appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge
   Cohen at Taylor House on the 14th of October 2014 and dismissed in a
   decision promulgated on the 27th of October 2014. The initial application
   to the First-tier Tribunal for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal
   was refused but the renewed application to the Upper Tribunal was
   granted.

2. The reasons for dismissing the appeal are set out at paragraphs 14 to 24
   of the decision. The Judge did not accept that the Sponsor had had sole
   responsibility for the Appellant against the history given the delay in
   making the application suggested she did not have sole responsibility.
   The Judge did not accept that there was no contact with her ex-husband.
   There were discrepancies in the address for the Appellant. It was said
   that there was no evidence of financial support for the Appellant and
   there were other discrepancies that were not set out. The Judge found
   that the Appellant's father shared responsibility for her.

3. The grounds complain that the Judge did not have regard to the statement
   of the Appellant's father, the evidence that her mother stayed with her
   most of the time in Pakistan, in paragraph 24 article 8 was considered on
   the basis that the Appellant was an adult but was 16 when she applied,
   the Judge did not look at the case from the child's point of view and did
   not consider her best interests.

4. Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley. It was observed
   that the grounds were easy to understand. It was arguable that the Judge
   had not properly considered the contents of the Appellant's father's
   affidavit, had not considered the time that the Appellant and her mother
   had spent together, nor the evidence of her uncle and was wrong in
   stating that there had been no financial support when the Appellant's
   step-father appeared to have paid her school fees. There was also
   arguably an error in respect of article 8 as that should have been
   considered at the date of the decision when the Appellant was under 18.
   The lack of chronology and the delay in making the application were
   legitimate matters for consideration.

5. The parties made submissions in line with their respective positions and
   these are set out in the Record of Proceedings. The decision itself
   contains a number of typing errors which themselves do not inspire
   confidence. For example in paragraph 6 this line appears "The sponsor was
   asked if her husband was reluctant to apply for the appellant to come to
   the UK in 2007 what changed into thousand 13 [sic] and she responded that
   now. [sic] The appellant is grown up and she says that she doesn't want
   to live alone..." At paragraph 9 "There were no questions arising from
   mine, [sic] and I then heard all [sic] evidence from the appellant's step
   father..."

6. It is the responsibility of the Judge to check the decision for such
   errors before it is approved for promulgation and whilst there is a
   tendency to read what you expect to see the errors set out above are to
   be avoided. Those errors do not themselves amount to an error of law but
   raise concerns about the care taken in the approach to the case.

7. The judge was clearly in error in approaching the article 8 aspect of
   the case in paragraph 24 on the basis that the Appellant and Sponsor are
   both adults. In out of country appeals all matters, including article 8,
   are considered with regard to the position at the date of the decision.
   In this appeal that was on the 2nd of September 2013 when the Appellant
   had not long turned 17. If it is correct that the Appellant does not
   succeed under the Immigration Rules then she will be struggling under
   article 8 outside the rules but is still entitled to a proper
   consideration of the issue.

8. Clearly the Judge was entitled to consider the issues of delay in making
   the application and to express a degree of scepticism with regard to the
   evidence from the Appellant's father. However, the Judge confined the
   remarks to how the statement was obtained and the level of contact that
   was maintained. There was no analysis of the contents of what he had said
   or that of the Appellant's uncle either and this was evidence that went
   directly to the issue of sole responsibility.

9. The Judge also erred in the evidence relating to financial support. The
   Judge may have been entitled to reject the evidence of school fees being
   paid but if that were the case then that finding should have been made
   explicitly and reasons given for rejecting the evidence. The bald
   statement in paragraph 16 that there was no evidence of financial support
   from the Appellant's step father was insufficient given the evidence that
   the Judge had recorded.

10. Whilst it is not necessary for each and every discrepancy in the
   evidence to be set out given the concerns set out above the Judge's
   observations in paragraph 19 do not help the understanding of the case.

11. In the circumstances I am satisfied that the Judge's reasons in
   relation t the decision under the Immigration Rules are inadequate and
   amount to a material error of law such that the decision cannot be
   sustained. This is compounded by the errors in relation to the approach
   taken to article 8 outside the rules.

12. I am satisfied that the decision cannot stand and that the appropriate
   course of action is to set the decision aside and to remit the appeal to
   the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing on all matters with no findings
   preserved. Directions are given separately.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making
of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing on all
issues.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I make no
order.

Fee Award

The decision on a fee order is reserved to the First-tier Tribunal and is
dependent on the outcome of the appeal in that Tribunal.

Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Parkes (IAC)

Dated: 14th October 2015



