

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: oa 16649-12

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                            |Decision signed:   28.11.2013|
|on    28.11.2013                              |sent out:                    |
|                                              |05.12.2013                   |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN

Between:
                                  CHEN LING
                                                                   appellant
                                     and


                                                                  respondent
Representation:

For the appellant:  Alexis Slatter (counsel instructed by Maxwell Alves)
For the respondent: Miss Emilie Martin

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Bernard Andonian), sitting at Taylor House on 16  July,
    to  a dependent son appeal by a citizen of China, born 13 August  1998,
    and refused a visa on 30 July 2012. The judge was  not  satisfied  that
    the sponsor, the appellant's mother, had had  sole  responsibility  for
    him (see Immigration Rules  paragraph  297  (1)  (e));  nor  apparently
    (though he did not say so  explicitly)  that  there  were  nevertheless
    'serious and compelling  family  or  other  considerations  which  make
    exclusion of the child undesirable' (see paragraph 297 (1) (f)).

 2. The judge reached conclusions on the responsibility the sponsor herself
    had (or had not) taken for the appellant, which were  clearly  open  to
    him on the evidence before him: the same appears to be  true  with  the
    view he took (at paragraph 5) on whether or not it  was  desirable  for
    the appellant to be excluded from this country, and  particularly  from
    living with his mother here.

 3. However, the question of 'sole responsibility' required  the  judge  to
    consider who did have responsibility for  the  appellant,  if  not  the
    sponsor, and he answered this question at paragraph 8. The  judge  took
    the view that the appellant was being looked after by three  people:  a
    Miss Woo (paid to do it by the sponsor, through a third party), and his
    father and paternal grandmother.

 4. The appellant's case on the parts played by these people in his present
    care is set out by the judge at paragraph 4:  in  each  case  the  sole
    source is the evidence of the sponsor herself. Miss Woo  reported  that
    the appellant had become very unruly, and refused to take notice  of  a
    woman who was not his mother; his grandmother was "no  longer  able  to
    care due to various health issues"; and his father  has  "psychological
    and mental  problems",  described  by  Mr  Slatter  as  alcoholism  and
    schizophrenia. The arrangements were for Miss Woo to have the appellant
    in term-time, while for holidays he went to  his  grandmother's,  where
    his father also lived.

 5. The judge noted that the grandmother's incapacity  was  unsupported  by
    medical evidence; but he did not say anything more of his own  on  this
    side of the case. While it might have been hard for  the  appellant  to
    succeed before any experienced  judge  (as  this  judge  certainly  is)
    without some confirmatory evidence, either about his grandmother or his
    father's problems, in my view these were important enough issues in the
    circumstances for the judge to need to make an express reasoned finding
    on them, and the same applies to what had been said about Miss Woo.

 6. While there is nothing wrong with the judge's findings on  the  sponsor
    in themselves, it is clear that he needed to consider the whole picture
    (or perhaps, given the often-repeated  injunction  to  do  so  'in  the
    round', it should be sculpture) together, both about her, and about the
    others who might or might not have been  involved  in  the  appellant's
    care. For this reason I have come to the view  that  there  must  be  a
    fresh hearing, both on paragraph 297 (1) (e) and (f),  which  can  most
    conveniently take place before another first-tier judge.

 7. If it becomes necessary for the judge to consider article 8, that  will
    be open too; but at present I find it hard to see what  room  the  wide
    discretionary terms of paragraph 297 (1) (f) leave  for  success  under
    that provision, if not under the Rules. On 297 (1) (f), the Home Office
    must file and serve at least certificates of the convictions  on  which
    they rely, with  any  other  material  they  can  get  to  explain  the
    circumstances. If any  request  for  an  expedited  re-hearing  becomes
    necessary (which I hope it will not, given the appellant's age and  the
    unsatisfactory circumstances in which he is said to  be  living),  then
    that should be made to the resident judge at Taylor House.

Appeal
Fresh hearing at Taylor House, not before Judge Andonian
                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)
