

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/16264/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination promulgated    |
|on 24 September 2014                          |On 25 September 2014         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, Turkey
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                SAKINE GUNDUZ

                                                                  Respondent



For the Appellant:     Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr C McGinley, of Gray & Co, Solicitors

No anonymity order requested or made


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


    1. The parties are as described above, but are referred to in the  rest
       of this determination as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.


    2. On 26 April 2013, the appellant sought entry clearance as a  spouse.
       The ECO refused her application by notice dated 17 July 2013, on the
       view that the relationship was not genuine, and making  no  decision
       on the income requirements.

    3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  A review  by  an
       Entry Clearance Manager maintains the refusal, and adds some adverse
       observations on the financial evidence.  This includes  the  comment
       that the sponsor's salary is paid via BACS, but  the  receipts  into
       his bank account do not  show  that  they  come  directly  from  his
       employer (which is his own "one man" company).

    4. In his determination  promulgated  on  1  May  2014  Judge  Bradshaw
       records that the respondent  conceded  the  genuine  nature  of  the
       relationship.  However, at the hearing the Presenting Officer raised
       further issues about the  financial  evidence,  referring  (for  the
       first time in these proceedings) directly  to  the  requirements  of
       Appendix FM-SE of the Immigration Rules.    The  Presenting  Officer
       and the judge thought that paragraph 9 was the  relevant  provision,
       although Mr McGinley thought that it was paragraph  2,  because  the
       appellant relied upon a salary paid to him not as a director but  as
       an employee.  The judge found some anomalies in the evidence  (which
       certainly exist) but concluded at paragraph 44:

           ... as a question of fact [the sponsor] is indeed an employee of
           a limited company and ... the necessary documentation in respect
           of his gross annual salary has been produced ...  as  agreed  at
           the outset ... this was the only issue ...


    5. The ECO's grounds of appeal to the UT are that  the  FtT  failed  to
       have sufficient regard to the requirements  for  specified  evidence
       set out in Appendix FM-SE.  The one specific point made is that:


           ... it was unclear what the sponsor's actual income was,  whilst
           there were payslips showing payment by BACS the sponsor's salary
           was being [paid] by standing order and the source  of  this  was
           not specified ...


    6. This case has been more obscure than it  should  have  been,  for  a
       number of reasons.  Mostly, but not entirely, these are on the  side
       of the appellant and the sponsor.  The sponsor  set  out  to  run  a
       straightforward small business, but for no apparent reason chose  to
       do so by  a  relatively  complex  structure  of  a  company  and  an
       employment contract.  The original  application  (not  made  by  the
       appellant's  current  solicitors)  did  not  directly  address   the
       relevant requirements  of  Appendix  FM-SE.   The  refusal  decision
       avoided the issue.  The review went into it  in  part,  but  not  by
       direct reference to the relevant provisions.  The matter was further
       addressed at the First-tier Tribunal hearing, but, it would  appear,
       still not as clearly as it might  have  been.    As  the  First-tier
       Tribunal  Judge  found,  there  are  unexplained  anomalies  in  the
       evidence (such as the two signatories to the employment contract).


    7. To add to the confusion, the original documents  before  the  First-
       tier Tribunal had been returned to the appellant's  representatives.
       However, Mr McGinley was able to demonstrate  that  the  appellant's
       payslips correspond with payments leaving the business  account  and
       with payments arriving in his personal account.


    8. Mrs O'Brien maintained that this did not  meet  the  requirement  to
       link the origin and destination of the payments, because the  source
       of the payment is  not  named  on  the  sponsor's  bank  statements.
       Against each credit, there appears only the words "standing order".

    9. Without specialised knowledge or expert evidence, I cannot  see  any
       meaningful distinction between  a  "BACS"  and  a  "standing  order"
       payment.  I do not think any other  inference  could  reasonably  be
       drawn but that the salary is paid by the company into an account  in
       the name of the sponsor.  On the one specific point  raised  in  the
       grounds of appeal, I cannot see any failure to meet the requirements
       of the Rules.  I therefore conclude that the grounds  of  appeal  to
       the UT fail to disclose error of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       determination, and that the determination should stand.




                               [pic]
                                25 September 2014
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal


