
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/16361/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 February 2015                            |On 13 February 2015           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (ACCRA)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             master lamin touray
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the appeal of the Entry Clearance Officer but I will  refer  to
    the original appellant, a citizen of Gambia, born on 20 July  1995,  as
    the appellant herein.  The appellant applied for an entry clearance  to
    join  his  father,  Mr  Dembo  Touray,  in  the  United  Kingdom,   for
    settlement.  His application was refused by the respondent on 20 August
    2013 on the basis that  the  respondent  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant's father had sole responsibility for the appellant.   Refusal
    was under paragraph 301(i)(b).  The matter was  reviewed  by  an  Entry
    Clearance Manager on 18 December 23013 but the decision was maintained.

2.   The appellant's appeal came  before  First-tier  Judge  Clapham  on  14
    October 2014.  The judge heard oral evidence from the sponsor  and  the
    appellant's mother-in-law. The appellant was  the  son  by  a  previous
    relationship.

3.   The sponsor said he had left the Gambia in 2008.  He  had  returned  to
    get married and then had come back to the United Kingdom in  2011.   He
    had returned to  Gambia  on  two  occasions  and  had  lived  with  the
    appellant in 2011.  There was an issue about whether the appellant  had
    not been living with the sponsor but  the  sponsor  said  this  was  an
    error.

4.   The appellant's father said he was in contact  with  the  appellant  by
    telephone twice a week.  While the appellant lived with his uncle,  his
    uncle was not well and was now too old to  look  after  the  appellant.
    The sponsor had been remitting money  back  to  the  Gambia  since  his
    arrival in the United Kingdom.  He had sent money every month  for  the
    appellant's school and for food.  He made decisions in relation to  the
    appellant by calling his uncle and would speak to the appellant too.

5.   The  judge  helpfully  summarised  the  submissions  and  set  out  his
    conclusions in the following passages from his determination.

         "21. The Home Office Presenting Officer said  that  the  issue  was
             whether the sponsor had sole responsibility for the appellant.
             Her  submission  was  that  the  sponsor  did  not  have  sole
             responsibility for the appellant. Reference was  made  to  his
             visa  application   which  had  indicated  that  he  and   the
             appellant were not living together.


         22.  There was said to be no evidence that the  appellant's  father
             was exercising sole responsibility.


         23.      The Presenting Officer said there  was  nothing  from  the
             appellant's school to show that the school was in contact with
             the appellant's father or  indeed  to  show  any  relationship
             between the school on the one  hand  and  the  father  on  the
             other. There was said to be no  information  from  the  father
             about when the appellant last attended  the  hospital  and  it
             appeared that contact with the appellant was in  fact  through
             the uncle.


         24.  In relation to the remittances that  had  been  produced,  the
             Presenting Officer said these were from 2014 so they were  all
             recent and there  was  said  to  be  no  medical  evidence  in
             relation to the appellant's father's uncle's  health.  It  was
             also submitted that the appellant's great uncle has a wife.


         25.      The representative said he  would  rely  on  his  skeleton
             argument.  He said it  was  clear  from  the  entry  clearance
             application that various documents had been provided including
             money transfer receipts and he said that there must have  been
             receipts in relation to  transfers  of  money  that  pre-dated
             2014.  He said the recent remittances simply added clarity.


         26.      I accept the submission on the  part  of  the  appellant's
             representative that it does appear  that  there  were  earlier
             money transfers.


         27.  In relation to the answer on the entry  clearance  application
             form which the appellant's  father  thought  might  have  been
             erroneous, the representative explained that the  witness  had
             gone to the Gambia in order to apply for  entry  clearance  to
             allow him to come back to the United Kingdom and he  had  used
             an  agent.  However  at  the  precise  point  at   which   the
             application form was completed, the appellant and  his  father
             were not residing together  so  the  representative  suggested
             that the answer that had been given might in fact have been an
             accurate one.


         28.  It was also submitted that it was respectful on  the  part  of
             the father of the appellants for him to communicate  with  his
             son via the uncle. It was submitted  that money  is  sent.  In
             relation to correspondence from the school it  was  submitted,
             and I have to accept this, that the school  system  in  Gambia
             may not be the  same  as  the  school  system  in  the  United
             Kingdom.  There  may not be a system for  example,  of  report
             cards.


         29.  In relation to the question of when the appellant was last  in
             hospital,  the  representative  pointed  out  that  there  was
             nothing to say that the appellant had been in hospital  either
             recently or at all and I accept that submission.


         30.  I relation to the appellant's father's uncle having a wife who
             could  look after the appellant, I agree that the  appellant's
             father was not asked about this and we cannot speculate as  to
             what answer he might have given or what  age  the  great  aunt
             might be.


         31.  The representative referred to the case of TD.  In particular,
             he  referred  to  paragraphs  8  to  14.   The  representative
             explained in his skeleton  argument   that  the  phrase  'sole
             responsibility' was intended to reflect a situation  where the
             primary parental responsibility  for  the  child's  upbringing
             rested to all intents and purposes with one parent. The person
             claiming sole responsibility must  satisfactorily  demonstrate
             that he or she has been the person  exercising  responsibility
             for the child's upbringing in the sense  of  decision  making,
             control and obligation towards the child.  The  representative
             said that sole responsibility  was  a  factual  matter  to  be
             decided upon all of the available evidence.  He said that  the
             test  was  whether  the  parent  had  continuing  control  and
             direction over the child's upbringing including making all  of
             the important decisions in the life of the child.


         32.      In the whole circumstances, I accept  the  submissions  of
             the appellant's representative. It appears to me that  a  case
             of this kind must be fact  sensitive  but  I  am  prepared  to
             accept  that  the  appellant's  father  has  been  the  person
             exercising primary responsibility for the child in  the  sense
             of decision making, control and obligation towards the child."


6.   The appeal was accordingly allowed. The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  was
    granted permission to appeal on the basis that it was arguable that the
    judge had failed to elaborate on the contents of the  letter  from  the
    appellant's school and had failed to consider the  appellant's  uncle's
    role in the appellant's upbringing to the  extent  that  responsibility
    for the appellant may be shared with the sponsor.

7.   The appellant was unrepresented before me.   On  14  January  2015  the
    representatives had  applied  for  an  adjournment.   This  adjournment
    application had been refused on 16 January 2015.   It  did  not  appear
    that this adjournment application had been   renewed  and  in  all  the
    circumstances I determined it was appropriate to proceed.

8.   Mr Bramble relied on the grounds although he was without the  file  and
    was not in a position to identify the particular letter referred to  in
    the grant of permission. He submitted that  the  First-tier  Judge  had
    failed to fully reason the appeal on the sole responsibility issue.  If
    there was  a letter relating to the school the judge had not dealt with
    it.   There was a question whether the father  as  sole  carer  had  an
    input on the appellant's education.  There  was  the  question  of  the
    uncle and a wife who  might be able to look after the  appellant.   The
    judge should have had regard to the relationship between the  appellant
    and the uncle and the uncle and the sponsor and to have decided whether
    it was a case of shared or sole responsibility.

9.   At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.  I  remind
    myself I can only  interfere  with  the  judge's  decision  if  it  was
    materially flawed in law.

10.  The sole issue before the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  was  whether  the
    sponsor had sole responsibility  for  the  appellant.   The  judge  was
    referred to the authority of TD (Yemen) [2006] UKAIT  00049  where  the
    Tribunal summarises its findings in the head note as follows:

         "'Sole responsibility' is a factual matter to be decided  upon  all
         the evidence. Where one parent  is  not  involved  in  the  child's
         upbringing  because  he  (or  she)  had  abandoned   or   abdicated
         responsibility, the issue may arise between  the  remaining  parent
         and others who have day-to-day care of the child abroad.  The  test
         is whether the parent has continuing control and direction over the
         child's upbringing, including making all the important decisions in
         the child's life. However, where both parents  are  involved  in  a
         child's upbringing, it will be exceptional that one  of  them  will
         have 'sole responsibility'."

11.  It does appear that the First-tier Tribunal Judge was  fully  aware  of
    the legal test he had to apply by reference to the case of  TD  and  in
    the light of the submissions made to him.  In essence what the Tribunal
    in TD decided was that  the  question  of  sole  responsibility  was  a
    factual matter to be decided upon all the evidence.   In  addition  the
    judge had the benefit of hearing oral evidence.

12.  In relation to the letter Mr Bramble was in difficulty because  he  did
    not have his file. The judge refers to  correspondence  and  I  am  not
    satisfied that it is arguable that he overlooked any  relevant  matter.
    It was open to the judge to look at the appeal in the cultural  context
    as he did in paragraph 28.

13.  It is plain from looking at the  determination  as  a  whole  that  the
    judge satisfactorily probed the evidence, expressing reservations,  for
    example about the testimony of the appellant's wife.   However  he  did
    accept the essential elements  of  the  case,  as  is  clear  from  the
    determination.  As I have already said, he correctly addressed  himself
    on the law.  As he  states,  each  case  of  this  kind  must  be  fact
    sensitive.  This is not a case  where  responsibility  is  shared  with
    another parent.  The judge accepted the  sponsor's  case  that  he  was
    primarily responsible in the way established in the case of TD (Yemen).
     It does appear with due respect that the grounds of  appeal  submitted
    by the respondent are more in the nature of a  factual  rather  than  a
    legal challenge.  I do not find there is any material error of  law  in
    the judge's decision.


Notice of Decision
The appeal of the Entry Clearance Officer is dismissed  and  I  direct  that
the decision of the First-tier Judge allowing the appeal shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 11 February 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Warr


FEE AWARD

The First-tier Judge made a fee award in favour of the  appellant  and  that
stands
