
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/16818/2013
                                                               OA/16820/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Sheldon Court, Birmingham            |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23 September 2014                          |On 30 September 2014         |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ROBERTSON

                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                               CHINA (BEIJING)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                            MISS wenxin chen (a1)
                           MASTER wenjie chen (a2)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:         Mr M Mills, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:        Mr C Lane, Counsel, instructed by Lin & Co,
Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Claim History


1. The Appellant in this  appeal  was  the  Respondent  at  the  First-tier
   Tribunal hearing on 21 May 2014. However, for  ease  of  reference,  the
   Appellant and Respondents are  hereinafter  referred  to  as  they  were
   before the First-tier Tribunal. Therefore Miss Chen and Master Chen  are
   referred to as the Appellants and the Secretary of State is referred  to
   as the Respondent.

2. The Appellants, whose stated dates of birth are 20 September 1997 and 25
   June 1996 respectively, applied  under  paragraph  297  of  HC  395,  as
   amended (the Immigration Rules) for leave to enter the United Kingdom as
   the children of the Sponsor, Ms Xue Mei  Sum.  Their  applications  were
   refused and their appeals against refusal  were  allowed  by  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Graham in her  determination  dated  13  June  2014.  The
   issues before her were sole responsibility and maintenance.

3. The Respondent, in the grounds of  application,  takes  issue  with  the
   Judge's findings in relation  to  sole  responsibility  only.  Prior  to
   refusing the entry clearance applications, a field visit  was  made  and
   the results of the field visit were contained in a  Field  Visit  Report
   (FVR) referred to by the  Judge  as  the  document  verification  report
   (DVR). The Respondent submits that in  determining  the  issue  of  sole
   responsibility, the Judge found that the field officers were  unable  to
   locate the Appellants, their maternal grandparents or  the  property  in
   which they were said to reside with their grandparents because the field
   officers were asking about the "Chen" family  when  they  were  residing
   with their maternal grandparents who were Sun Zhong Ping  and  his  wife
   Xue Yun [18]. In so finding, the Respondent submits that the  Judge  did
   not have regard to the entire contents of the FVR,  which  included  the
   fact that precise details of the maternal  grandparents  were  confirmed
   with the Appellant (A2), enquiries were made of the  villagers  and  the
   village  community  officer  and   the   Appellants'   grandfather   was
   telephoned. It is submitted that because the totality  of  the  evidence
   provided by the FVR was not considered by the Judge, her findings on the
   issue of sole responsibility were materially flawed.

4. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was arguable  that
   "...In finding that the Field Officers  had  made  enquiries  about  the
   "wrong family", the Tribunal left out of account other  aspects  of  the
   evidence that suggested that the appellants were not living  where  they
   claimed and that it thus reached a perverse decision on the facts."

5. A Rule 24 reply was filed by on behalf of the Appellants, in which it is
   submitted that there was nothing to indicate  that  the  Judge  had  not
   considered the entire contents of the FVR; there was nothing within  the
   report which identified the villagers or the community officer  who  was
   said to have been consulted. Against this background,  it  is  submitted
   that (i) a visit in the middle of the afternoon which failed to find the
   Appellants (who were at school) or the  maternal  grandparents  was  not
   decisive of the application as a whole when  their  was  other  evidence
   which was not challenged (such as  a  land  deed  in  the  name  of  the
   maternal grandfather and school letters confirming the Appellants'  home
   address) (ii) even if the Judge should have given more complete  reasons
   for her conclusions, which is not accepted,  this  error  would  not  be
   material. In the alternative, it is submitted that if there is  a  fresh
   assessment of the DVR, the unchallenged  findings  in  relation  to  the
   other evidence, including the credibility of the Sponsor, establish that
   the appeal must be allowed.

 The Hearing

6. At the hearing, Mr Mills submitted that the mother of the Appellants was
   in the UK and the father was  in  China,  they  were  divorced  and  the
   question was whether responsibility was shared. There  was  evidence  of
   divorce, government registration documents  had  been  checked  and  the
   Appellants were registered as living with the paternal grandparents. The
   field  officers  had  gone  to  some  lengths  to  ascertain  where  the
   Appellants were living and their efforts were set out in  the  FVR.   In
   the original grounds of appeal before the First-tier Tribunal, there was
   some dispute as to the content of the telephone calls  made;  there  was
   reference to people being obstructive and an assertion that if the field
   officers came out in the middle of the day without warning it was likely
   that people would be out. The Judge placed considerable  weight  on  the
   field officers asking about the "Chen" family but did not  consider  the
   rest of the FVR.


7. Mr Mills submitted that in the FVR it  is  stated  that  villagers  were
   asked about the "Chen" family and no one had heard of them. However, the
   Appellants' surname was Chen, they were teenagers and  claimed  to  have
   lived with their maternal grandparents for some time yet neighbours  did
   not appear to know them. She also ignored the other matters set  out  in
   the FVR and her decision ought to be set aside.

8. When asked if the Notices of Refusal of the applications  were  sent  to
   the Appellants by post, Mr Mills stated that he did not know but at some
   overseas posts, decisions were collected by the applicants. Mr Lane also
   did not know but pointed out  that  p  289  of  RB  confirmed  that  the
   decision had been sent 'Via Visa Application  Centre'  but  it  was  not
   signed by the applicants to establish that it had been handed to them.

9. Mr Lane submitted that the only issue was whether the Judge did  or  did
   not consider material evidence. She was aware of the entire contents  of
   the report [3(ii)] and considered all of it [6  -  8].  She  found  that
   asking about the wrong family would cause confusion  amongst  the  local
   community and the community officer [18]. The community officer in  fact
   knew the family because he took them to  the  brother  of  the  maternal
   grandfather (RB, p 307). It was possible that someone who had turned  up
   at the village and made enquiries would be viewed with suspicion;  there
   was nothing to indicate that they would be  co-operative  or  that  they
   were not deliberately misleading. The Appellant was contacted and he was
   co-operative;  no  part  of  what  he  had  said  during  the  telephone
   conversation could be said to be misleading.

10. Mr Lane also  submitted  that  the  grounds  of  application  seemed  to
   recognise the difficulties; it was stated within the  grounds  that  the
   FVR identified that the "grandmother's sister in law purportedly  called
   the appellant's grandmother who said that she was  on  her  way  to  the
   apartment". If no family member of the maternal  grandparents  lived  in
   the village, the villagers and the community officer could  simply  have
   denied that they did.

11. Mr Lane further submitted that this was not the only evidence  that  the
   Judge relied on  in  reaching  her  decision;  she  had  the  land  deed
   confirming that the Appellants' maternal grandfather owned the property,
   the address therefore existed, the letters from  the  children's  school
   gave their home address and she found the Sponsor was entirely credible.
   The Judge did all that she needed to do  and  did  not  err  in  law  in
   reaching her decision.

12. Mr Mills, in reply, submitted that it  could  not  be  said  that  other
   findings within the determination were not challenged; the Judge did not
   deal with the FVR properly and this error infected her  other  findings.
   He stated that if I were to find that the Judge  materially  erred,  all
   findings would have to be remade.

Decision and reasons

13. It is trite law that the Judge must make her decision  on  the  evidence
   in the round. Within the Entry Clearance Manager's review, he notes that
   a copy property certificate was submitted with the appeal. This property
   certificate confirms that the maternal grandfather owns the property  in
   which the Appellants were said to reside. Nowhere within the review does
   the ECM state that the property certificate does not reliably  establish
   that the property did exist and  nowhere  in  the  determination  is  it
   recorded that the presenting officer submitted, at the hearing, that the
   address did not exist. The failure to locate a property, as asserted  in
   the Notices of Refusal, is not the same as saying the property  did  not
   exist.  The  'Translation  of  Household  Registration'  (RB,   p   126)
   establishes the address of Sun Zhong Ping so it cannot be said (i)  that
   it does not exist and (ii) that Sun Zhong Ping does not live there. This
   evidence was before the Judge when she made her findings of fact.

14. It is clear that she was aware of the contents of the  FVR  [3(ii)]  and
   [6 - 8] and the submissions within the grounds of appeal before her; she
   was aware of the concerns as to whether  the  villagers  may  have  been
   deliberatively  obstructive.  Bearing  in  mind  the   'Translation   of
   Household  Registration',  which  confirms  the  maternal  grandfather's
   address, it cannot be said that the property he owns does not exist. Due
   to initial enquiries regarding the "Chen" family, it  was  open  to  the
   Judge to find that there was some confusion in  the  way  in  which  the
   field officers had attempted to  locate  the  Appellants.  There  is  no
   indication within the report as to whether the villagers they  spoke  to
   would provide reliable information. On  the  evidence  before  her,  the
   Judge was entitled to conclude  that  the  field  officer's  report  was
   unreliable and  in  the  absence  of  the  FVR  providing  any  reliable
   information, the Judge referred to other parts of  the  evidence  before
   her to establish if the address existed  and  if  the  Appellants  lived
   there [18] and she found that she had  sufficient  evidence  to  confirm
   that it did and they did.

15. The Judge then considered whether the Sponsor  had  sole  responsibility
   and she found that she did on the  basis  of  remittances,  evidence  of
   visits and contact. This finding was open to her on the evidence  before
   her and no errors of law are disclosed.

Decision


16. The determination of Judge Graham contains no material  errors  of  law
    and her decision therefore must stand.


17. The Respondent's appeal is dismissed.


18. There was no application for an anonymity order before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal or before us. In the circumstances of this  case,  we  see  no
    reason to direct anonymity.

Signed
                                Date
M Robertson
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

TO THE RESPONDENT


     In light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a fee award
(Rule 23A (costs) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules
2005 and section 12(4) (a) of the Tribunals Courts and Enforcement Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance Note: Fee Awards in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011). As the appeal has been dismissed,
Judge Graham's fee award is confirmed.




Signed                          Dated

M Robertson
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal












