



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: OA/16601/13

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 15th September 2014                        |On 22nd September 2014       |
|                                              |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER- Nairobi
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And
                              Jamila Nabakooza
                        (No Anonymity direction made)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms D Ofei-Kwatia, instructed by Equity Law
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. For the  purposes  of  this  decision,  although  the  application  for
    permission to appeal was made by the respondent I shall  refer  to  the
    parties as they were referred to in the First-tier Tribunal that is  Ms
    Nabakooza as the appellant and  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  as  the
    respondent.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Uganda and is an 10 year old girl born on
    22nd  December  2003  and  she  appealed  against  a  decision  of  the
    respondent dated 16th July 2013 to refuse her entry  clearance  to  the
    United Kingdom further to paragraph 297 (i)(e), (iii) (iv) and (v)  and
    further to the Human Rights Act 1998 to join her father Mr K Suleman.

 3. On  7th  July  2014  First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge  McDade  allowed  the
    appellant's appeal to the First Tier Tribunal.

Application for Permission to appeal

 4. The respondent applied for permission to appeal on the basis the  judge
    allowed the appeal on the failure of the Secretary of State  to  verify
    the death certificate, an adjournment already having been  granted  for
    that purpose.  The judge failed to  allow  the  Presenting  Officer  to
    cross-examine the sponsor in relation  to  the  documentation  or  make
    submissions on the evidence. Given the history of the case (a  previous
    application had been declined  owing  to  the  submission  of  a  false
    document) the Presenting officer should have been allowed to  test  the
    evidence before the court.

 5. Further the judge allowed the appeal solely in relation to the  failure
    to discharge the burden of proof in relation to the death  certificate.
    The judge also failed to give consideration or reasons as  to  how  the
    appellant satisfied the maintenance and  accommodation  aspect  of  the
    rule which was cited as a ground of refusal.

Grant of Permission to appeal

 6. Permission to Appeal was granted by FTT Judge Andrew who stated that it
    was apparent that the judge had not given the  presenting  Officer  the
    opportunity to cross examine the sponsor regarding  the  document.   It
    was unclear whether or not the Presenting Officer conceded the question
    of maintenance and accommodation.

Findings

 7. At the hearing Mr Whitwell advised that the  original  certificate  had
    been handed to Counsel acting for the respondent at the  first  hearing
    on 24th March  2014  and  this  had  not  been  sent  to  the  ECO  for
    verification. He understood  this  document  had  been  requested  from
    Counsel but not returned.  He produced an email from Ms  S  Jones,  the
    Presenting Officer at the hearing before Judge McDade stating  'to  the
    best of my knowledge I did not concede maintenance and  accommodation'.



 8. Ms Ofe-Kwatia produced her colleague's back sheet which identified that
    Mr Balroop counsel on that occasion recorded that 'I explained that the
    only issue outstanding was the death certificate.  The DNA  establishes
    that they are related, his payslips prove  that  he  can  maintain  his
    daughter and if the appellant's mother  has  passed  away  there  is  a
    strong presumption that the Sponsor  has  sole  responsibility  of  the
    Appellant. '.

 9. At [4] of the determination the judge recorded that  a previous hearing
    was adjourned

    'in order to give the Home Office time to send  a  documents  that  was
    claimed to be the death certificate of the Appellant's mother  time  to
    send a document that was claimed to be the  death  certificate  of  the
    Appellant's mother to the ECO verification unit for examination'.

10. The judge recorded in his determination quite clearly with reference to
    the genuineness of the death certificate that 'Ms Jones  accepted  that
    this was the only issue in  the  case'  inferring  that  the  issue  of
    maintenance and accommodation had been accepted.

11. However, the reliability  of  the  documentation,  that  is  the  death
    certificate would affect the assessment of  the  case  under  paragraph
    297(i)(d) as to  whether  the  'other  parent  is  dead'  or  paragraph
    297(i)(e) which is whether 'one parent is present and  settled  in  the
    United  Kingdom  ...and  has  sole  responsibility  for   the   child's
    upbringing'.  Both of these were issues before the judge.

12. The ECO had stated that the previous death certificate  was  false  but
    the point made in the  ECO  refusal  regarding  the  death  certificate
    presented in the second application was not that it was false but  with
    regards the 'adequacy of the documentation'.  The Judge considered  the
    matter on the basis that the certificate was represented by the ECO  to
    be false and thus the burden of proving it was false  rested  with  the
    Secretary of State  which  was  not  undertaken.   The  judge  made  no
    findings in respect of the reliability of the evidence of the death  of
    the mother overall. The judge did not engage with  the  evidence  which
    was produced in respect of the death certificate and made  no  findings
    as to whether the documentation produced with regards the death of  the
    mother was reliable.

13. It was recorded in the determination without more that  the  Presenting
    Officer  had  conceded  the  accommodation  and   maintenance   issues.
    Ordinarily this may be sufficient.   However,  the  Judge's  record  of
    proceedings is entirely blank as to the proceedings.   In view  of  the
    sensitive nature of this case I find that a clear record of any  issues
    raised needed to be made and findings given. Further, an assessment  of
    the evidence regarding the death of the mother and sole  responsibility
    of the father was not addressed.

14. I take heed of the point made by Ms Ofei-Kwatia  that  there  has  been
    considerable delay in this matter and this is  the  second  application
    made by the appellant.  However, a false document was submitted by  the
    appellant in  the  first  application  which  has  cast  doubt  on  the
    reliability of the documentation produced in  the  second  application.
    This case involved an 11 year old female child who has lived  her  life
    in another country and apart from the sponsor and it is important  that
    the judge engaged with and assessed the evidence.




DECISION

15. I find that there is an error  of  law  and  the  determination  cannot
    stand. The determination is set aside in its entirety. The matter is to
    be set for a fresh substantive hearing before the First Tier Tribunal.



Directions

That the respondent use his/her best endeavours to obtain from  Counsel  the
original death certificate supplied by the appellant to the  respondent  and
to submit to the  appellant  and  the  Tribunal  any  document  verification
report at least 7 days prior to the substantive hearing.

The respondent is to provide expert evidence on the  legal  formalities  and
process required for the registration of deaths in Uganda at least  14  days
prior to the substantive hearing.


Signed                                             Date 15th September 2014



Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Rimington





