
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/16228/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 15 January 2015                           |On 5 May 2015                 |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE conway
                                   Between

                     Entry Clearance Officer, islamabad
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          MR khurram abbas khokhar
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Kandola
For the Respondent:    Ms Currie


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Mr Khokhar is a citizen of Pakistan born in 1979.  He appealed  against
    a decision of the ECO Islamabad made on 12 March 2013 to  refuse  entry
    clearance for the purpose of settlement  as  the  spouse  of  a  person
    present and settled in the UK.

 2. Although in the proceedings before me the ECO  is  the  appellant,  for
    convenience I keep the designations as they were before the  First-tier
    Tribunal thus Mr Khokhar is the appellant and the ECO, the respondent.

 3. The reasons for refusal were, in summary, that the appellant failed  to
    meet the requirements of suitability for entry clearance under Appendix
    FM of the Immigration Rules more particularly on  the  grounds  of  his
    previous conviction which made his  admission  to  the  UK  to  be  not
    conducive to the public good, and that he failed to  meet  the  English
    language requirement.

 4. He appealed.

 5. Following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 3 September 2014  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Gillespie allowed the appeal.

 6. The facts of the case do not appear to have been in dispute.  They  are
    summed up at paragraphs [3]ff  of  the  determination.   The  appellant
    entered the UK in about 2005 as a visitor and overstayed.  He  acquired
    an Irish passport and used it to found a deception upon which he  could
    remain in the UK.  He used a false driving licence in  order  to  drive
    here.  He worked as a test analyst in information technology supporting
    himself by his earnings.

 7. He first met the sponsor, Marium Khan, in the UK in early 2010.  She is
    a British national present and settled here.  She  is  in  work.   They
    formed an acquaintance which became more serious.  At first she assumed
    he was lawfully in  the  UK  but  later  that  year  learned  his  true
    circumstances.

 8. In October 2010 he was convicted on two counts relating to  documentary
    deception: the making of a false statement to procure  a  passport  and
    the possession of  improperly  obtained  identity  documents.   He  was
    sentenced  to  terms  of  imprisonment  of  one  year  to   be   served
    concurrently.  He did not seek to resist removal from the UK.

 9. In October 2012 the sponsor went to  Pakistan  where  she  married  the
    appellant.  It was intended that the appellant should return to the  UK
    as her spouse and that they live together with her parents  until  they
    are in a position to get their own home.   She  does  not  consider  it
    reasonable that she should have to leave her family,  job  and  settled
    life here in order to enjoy her married life  with  her  husband.   She
    cannot contemplate living in Pakistan  where  conditions  and  societal
    expectation would be intolerable to her.  If forced  to  leave  the  UK
    they would seek to settle together in a Middle Eastern country.

10. In his analysis of S-EC.1.4 and 1.5 of Appendix FM the judge considered
    that the full text 'shows that it applies when "the  exclusion  of  the
    applicant from the UK is conducive to the public good".   The  ordinary
    meaning of these words requires an enquiry into  whether  exclusion  is
    conducive to the public good.  There follow three  instances,  preceded
    by  the  causative  expression   "because"   which   are   phrased   as
    circumstances which might show that exclusion  should  be  regarded  as
    conducive to the public good.' [9]

11. The judge continued (at [10]):

         'The provision, read as a whole, is structured in such a  way  that
         the three instances following the "because" are all to be  regarded
         as the possible instances, not as final  and  immutable  instances,
         showing exclusion to be conducive for the purposes of this section.
           The  provision  cannot  be  understood  as  providing  that   the
         conviction  and  sentence  such  as  the  appellant   suffered   is
         necessarily  sufficient  of  itself   to   render   the   provision
         applicable, without further enquiry as to whether or not  exclusion
         would be conducive.  In other words,  a  person  might  still  have
         experienced the sentence that meets the definition in paragraph (b)
         but yet his exclusion might not be conducive to  the  public  good.
         Were it the intention of the regulations that proof of the sentence
         alone  brought  into  play  the  provision,  then  the  words  "the
         exclusion of the applicant from the UK is conducive to  the  public
         good because" would be otiose. An interpretation which treats words
         as superfluous or without  meaning  is  to  be  avoided.  A  proper
         interpretation of this provision therefore shows  that  an  enquiry
         into whether the exclusion of an applicant from the United  Kingdom
         is in the public good is necessary.   By  this  interpretation,  S-
         EC.1.4 would read consistently with
         S-EC.1.5, which requires investigation as to whether  exclusion  is
         conducive on other less precisely defined grounds than by reference
         to previous conviction and sentence.  It might  be  the  intendment
         (sic) (although this is not expressed) that the specific definition
         of the conviction and sentence of the nature specified in (a),  (b)
         and (c)  of  S-EC.1.4  has  the  effect  that  proof  of  any  such
         conviction and sentence gives rise to a presumption that  exclusion
         would be conducive, but even this would not eliminate the need  for
         enquiry into the  fact  should  an  applicant  seek  to  rebut  the
         presumption by evidence that his exclusion is not conducive to  the
         public good'.

12. The judge went on (at [12]) to  find  the  following  proven:  that  in
    submitting to removal despite the establishment of a relationship  with
    Ms Khan and her going to Pakistan  to  marry  him  and  assist  him  to
    regularise his status, such, 'demonstrated a genuine intention to purge
    his previous evasion of immigration control  and  to  adhere  to  law'.
    Also there was no indication that he will reoffend or pose future  risk
    to the public; he enjoys prospects of favourable settled  circumstances
    in the UK; he has an established marriage relationship with  a  British
    national  who  has  extensive  and  settled  family  connections  here.
    Further, he is capable of supporting himself without recourse to public
    funds; his wife is also  self-supporting  and  he  has  settled  family
    accommodation awaiting him.

13. He went on to state that there is no perceptible public interest in the
    exclusion of the appellant and none at all in the  consequent  enforced
    exclusion of Ms Khan, nor in the disturbance of family life between her
    and her family in the UK.  He held that the 'cumulative effect  of  the
    evidence  shows  that  notwithstanding  that  the  appellant  has  been
    sentenced to imprisonment as defined in S-EC.1.4(b), his exclusion from
    the UK is not conducive to the public good as required under S-EC.1.4.'

14. The judge continued (at [13-14]) by finding that while the appellant is
    a graduate and has held 'responsible employment in companies' in the UK
    and is 'undoubtedly competent in English' the certificate of competency
    he had produced was not from an  approved  provider.   Because  of  his
    failure 'to meet the precise technical demands of the English  language
    requirement' he  could  not  bring  himself  within  the  Rules  (ECP),
    although apart from that 'individual failure ...  he  meets  all  other
    requirements of the rule.'

15. The judge went on (at [15])ff to consider Article 8.  Having noted case
    law that the new Rules are 'intended as a compendious  codification  of
    the extent to which the protection of  Article  8  applies  within  the
    framework of the Immigration Rules and ought to be  respected  as  such
    ... They do not alter the  law  hitherto  applied  in  connection  with
    Article 8 protection, the residual applicability of which remain to  be
    examined where the Rules make inadequate  provision  for  circumstances
    recognised as relevant to protection under Article 8.'  He  noted  that
    'there should be no "freewheeling Article 8  analysis  unencumbered  by
    the Rules"'.  Regard had to be had to the extent to which an  appellant
    might or might not meet the requirements  of  the  Rules.   Only  where
    there were arguably good grounds for granting leave to  remain  outside
    the Rules was it necessary to go  on  to  consider  whether  there  are
    compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised under  them  which
    would justify the grant of protection under Article 8.

16. He found that exclusion of  the  appellant  would  interfere  with  the
    rights of family and private life enjoyed by  both  the  appellant  and
    sponsor and that was  at  a  level  sufficient  to  engage  Article  8.
    Advancing  to  proportionality  he  considered  section   117   'public
    interest' questions, finding that the appellant  is  capable  of  being
    self supporting and has in any event adequate support from his wife and
    her family; he is familiar with English and has a history of employment
    by important companies; he will not be a  burden  on  public  finances.
    Also his past evasion of immigration control is  'purged'  and  he  now
    submits to immigration  control.   He  added  'By  these  findings,  in
    accordance with my finding under S-EC.1.4 above, it is shown  that  the
    exclusion of the appellant is not conducive to the public good  and  is
    not necessary in the public interest' [17].

17. In further  analysis  the  judge  noted  Ms  Khan's  circumstances,  in
    particular, that she has been raised within a family home and continues
    to reside with other family members;  that  she  has  extensive  family
    connections here; that she is in responsible employment.  Such  factors
    weighed strongly on the exclusion being disproportionate.  Further, the
    likely lengthy exclusion of the appellant would force her to leave  the
    UK.  Such would be unjustifiably harsh.

18. The judge ended by stating (at [19]):

         '... The appellant, in respect of whom  there  was  no  deportation
         order or any finding that his presence  is  not  conducive  to  the
         public good, submitted to immigration enforcement ... with  a  view
         to regularising his position.  He and she have  endured  separation
         of almost three years; have married; have established family  life;
         all with the genuine desire to purge  the  previous  evasion.   The
         only  respect  in  which  the  appellant  now  fails  to  meet  the
         requirements of the Rules is the English language requirement, with
         which he is in any event in substantial,  albeit  not  full  formal
         compliance.   Continued  exclusion  would  in   my   judgement   be
         disproportionate.'

19. The ECO sought permission to appeal which was granted  on  27  November
    2014.

20. At the error of law hearing before me Mr Kandola sought to rely on  the
    grounds.   Parliament  had  decided  through  S-EC.1.4  (b)  that   the
    appellant's presence in the UK is not conducive to the public  good  he
    having been sentenced to  twelve  months'  imprisonment.   Refusal  was
    mandatory.  It was not open to the judge to find to the  contrary.   In
    doing so, such fatally tainted his approach to Article 8.   He  invited
    me to set aside the decision and remake it dismissing it.

21. Ms Currie's response was  that  there  was  no  error  in  the  judge's
    analysis of the rule for the reasons he gave.  It  was  a  natural  and
    proper reading of the section.   Even  if  he  was  wrong  it  was  not
    material and the decision should be upheld.  The judge had  found  that
    the appellant could not meet the Rules.  He had set  out  a  wealth  of
    reasons which were open to him on the evidence including his  intention
    to  purge  his  previous  offending,  that  he  was  not  at  risk   of
    reoffending, that he would have no recourse to public funds.  Also  the
    adverse impact on his spouse.  He had  properly  identified  sufficient
    compelling circumstances not recognised by the Rules.

22. In considering this matter I am satisfied that the judge erred  in  his
    interpretation of
    S-EC.

23. S-EC.1.1 reads:

         'The applicant will  be  refused  entry  clearance  on  grounds  of
         suitability if any of paragraphs S-EC.1.2 to 1.8 apply.'

    S-EC.1.4 reads:

         'The exclusion of the applicant from the UK  is  conducive  to  the
         public good because they have:

         ...

         (b)  been  convicted  of  an  offence  for  which  they  have  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at  least  12  months
             but less than 4 years, unless a period of 10 years has  passed
             since the end of the sentence.'

24. It is accepted that the  appellant  was  sentenced  to  twelve  months'
    imprisonment and that ten years has not passed since  the  end  of  the
    sentence.

25. As indicated above (at paragraph 10  and  11)  the  judge  noted:  'The
    language of the enactment suggest that mere conviction and sentence  is
    not by itself sufficient to make the provision  applicable.   The  full
    text of
    S-EC.1.4 shows that it applies when "The  exclusion  of  the  applicant
    from the UK is conducive to the public good".  The ordinary meaning  of
    these words requires an enquiry into whether exclusion is conducive  to
    the public good'.

26.  The provision, in his view, was structured in  such  a  way  that  the
    three instances following the 'because' are all to be regarded  as  the
    possible instances, not  as  final  and  immutable  instances,  showing
    exclusion to be conducive for the purposes of  the  section.  In  other
    words, a person might still have experienced the  sentence  that  meets
    the definition in paragraph (b) but yet  his  exclusion  might  not  be
    conducive to the public good.  A proper interpretation of the provision
    shows that an enquiry into whether the exclusion of an applicant is  in
    the public good is necessary. By that  interpretation,  S-EC.1.4  would
    read consistently with S-EC.1.5, which  requires  investigation  as  to
    whether exclusion is conducive on other less precisely defined  grounds
    than by reference to previous conviction and sentence.  Even  if  there
    was a presumption in S-EC.1.4 (a)(b) and (c) that  exclusion  would  be
    conducive enquiry would be needed should an applicant seek to rebut the
    presumption that his exclusion is not conducive to the public good.

27. I do not think that  analysis  is  correct.  I  consider  that  he  has
    misconstrued  the  provision.  S-EC.1.1  states  clearly   that   entry
    clearance on the grounds of suitability will be refused if  any  of  S-
    EC.1.2 to 1.8 apply.  It is mandatory.

28. A plain reading of S-EC.1.4 is that Parliament has decided that  for  a
    person such as the appellant who has been sentenced to at least  twelve
    months' imprisonment and ten years has not passed since the end of  the
    sentence, exclusion 'is conducive to the public  interest.'  The  judge
    was wrong to state that 'Were it the intention of the regulations  that
    proof of the sentence alone brought into play the provisions the  words
    "the exclusion of the applicant from the UK is conducive to the  public
    good "because" would be otiose'.  The clear reading of the  section  is
    that the 'because' refers to periods of imprisonment as defined in  (a)
    to (c) which make exclusion to be conducive to the public interest.  If
    an applicant's factual situation comes within the definitions  set  out
    in 1.4 (a) to (c) the result is an automatic exclusion under the rule.

29. It is unnecessary to construe S-EC. 1.5. as it is of  no  relevance  in
    this case where the appellant falls within the definition in  S-EC.1.4.
    (b).

30. The judge in misapplying the law  erred.   I  consider  that  to  be  a
    material error. The judge was clearly correct  to  dismiss  the  appeal
    under the rule although he did so on the sole basis  that  the  English
    language requirement was not met.  However,  in  his  assessment  under
    Article 8 he referred not only to that aspect of the  rules  not  being
    met, but was also,  at  [17]  and  [19],  strongly  influenced  in  the
    assessment of the balancing exercise by his conclusion  that  exclusion
    was not conducive to the public good  and  was  not  necessary  in  the
    public interest. His erroneous analysis of the rule fatally taints  his
    Article 8 assessment.

31. I set aside the decision and proceed to remake it.

32. The appeal cannot succeed under the Rules as the case fails under  S-EC
    1.4 (b) as well  as  on  the  failure  to  meet  the  English  language
    requirement.  Section S-EC.1.4 states that where that paragraph applies
    (as I have found that it does) 'unless refusal would be contrary to the
    Human  Rights  Convention  ...  it  will   only   be   in   exceptional
    circumstances that the public interest in maintaining refusal  will  be
    outweighed by compelling factors'.

33. In considering human rights I note the guidance given by the  Court  of
    Appeal in respect of applications for leave to enter on  the  basis  of
    family life with a person in the UK given in SSHD v SS  (Congo)  &  Ors
    [2015] EWCA Civ 387 (particularly at [39]ff). In this appeal  there  is
    no dispute that there is family life  between  the  appellant  and  his
    wife.  His exclusion interferes with their right to  respect  for  that
    family life and to a degree of severity sufficient to engage Article 8.
      The  decision  is  in  accordance  with  the  law.   The   issue   is
    proportionality.

34. In assessing proportionality such needs to include consideration of the
    section 117 'public interest' issues. I see no reason  to  divert  from
    the First-tier Judge's factual findings. As to Ms Khan's circumstances,
    she lives with family members  and  has  extensive  family  connections
    here.  She also has work. There are  no  children.  She  is  a  British
    citizen and I accept that she would find living in  Pakistan  difficult
    due to its conditions and societal expectations. It may  also  be  that
    the appellant in submitting to removal has made an effort to purge  his
    previous criminality and submit to immigration control.  Further,  that
    he, apparently, speaks English and would be financially independent.

35. On the other hand the appellant fails to satisfy the Rules not only  on
    the English language test issue but also on the major ground  that  his
    exclusion from the UK is conducive  to  the  public  good  due  to  his
    criminality. Such, in my judgement, is a significant factor against the
    appellant in the balancing exercise.

36. Further, while it seems she did not know of his  unlawful  status  when
    they started their relationship in early 2010 it is clear she was aware
    of it before he left the UK. They chose to build the  relationship  and
    marry in full knowledge of his situation.  That of course was a  matter
    for them but I do not see in considering the proportionality  exercise,
    that it assists the appellant's case.  Article  8  imposes  no  general
    obligation on a state to facilitate the choice made by a married couple
    to reside in it. I note  that  they  face  some  years  of  separation.
    However, I also note in that regard her  evidence  that  she  would  be
    prepared to live with her husband in the Middle East.

37. On the facts of this case I do not see  that  compelling  circumstances
    exist (which are  not  sufficiently  recognised  under  the  Rules)  to
    require the grant of leave outside the Rules. I conclude that it  would
    not be disproportionate to the public end to refuse entry clearance.

38. Further, I do not see there to be any  exceptional  circumstances  such
    that the public  interest  in  maintaining  refusal  is  outweighed  by
    compelling factors.  The appeal fails on human rights grounds.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  showed  an  error  of  law.   That
decision is set aside and remade as follows:

The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration  Rules  and  on  human  rights
grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed
Upper Tribunal Judge Conway                   Date

