

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA160272014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 March 2016                              |On 14 June 2016               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISLAMABAD
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     SB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Dywnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Hussain, instructed by Harris & Green Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and to the  respondent
    as the appellant (as they respectively appeared before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal). The appellant, SB, was born in 1942 and is a female  citizen
    of Pakistan.  She applied for entry to the United Kingdom as  an  adult
    dependant relative under Appendix FM  of  HC  395  (as  amended).   Her
    application was refused by a  decision  dated  9  December  2014.   She
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Ince) which, in  a  decision
    promulgated on 1 July 2015 allowed the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The Entry Clearance Officer now appeals,  with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal

 2. The appeal  turned  on  the  application  of  E-ECDR  of  Appendix  FM.
    Significantly, the  ECO  now  accepts  (see  grounds  of  appeal)  that
    subparagraph 2.4 is met as the appellant "as a result of  age,  illness
    or disability requires long term  personal  care  to  perform  everyday
    tasks."  Refusing the application initially, the  ECO  considered  that
    the appellant did not satisfy this part  of  the  Rule.   The  ECO  now
    accepts the finding was open to the judge on the evidence.

 3. The ECO, however, continues to dispute that subparagraph 2.5 is met  in
    the case of this appellant ("the appellant  is  unable  even  with  the
    practical and financial help of the sponsor, to obtain a required level
    of care in a country where they are living because it is not  available
    and there is no person in that  country  that  can  reasonably  provide
    it.").  The judge is criticised of having reversed the burden of  proof
    [42] when, in discussing the availability of care homes in Pakistan, he
    found that it  had  not  been  shown  that  suitable  care  homes  were
    available in Pakistan.  The grounds note that  the  Presenting  Officer
    before the First-tier  Tribunal  had  asserted  (and  the  sponsor  who
    attended the hearing and gave evidence also accepted) that  care  homes
    did exist in Pakistan.  The ECO submits that, in  the  absence  of  any
    evidence from the sponsor that such homes did not  offer  the  required
    level of care for this appellant, the judge should have  dismissed  the
    appeal.   Finally,  the  grounds  assert  that  the  judge  had   given
    inadequate reasons for,

         "... accepting the  sponsor's  evidence  that  there  was  no  one,
         amongst 180,000,000 people in Pakistan that could be employed as  a
         personal live-in carer to the appellant.  The sponsor's word  alone
         is accepted on this point despite the  damage  to  his  credibility
         that must follow from his past history of bringing  his  mother  to
         the UK on visit visas so she could receive NHS treatment  to  which
         she had no entitlement."

 4. Reading the decision as a whole, I am not satisfied that the judge has,
    as the grounds allege, reversed the burden of proof.  The  availability
    and suitability of care home had never been raised by the ECO  but  was
    raised for the first time in cross-examination  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by the Presenting Officer.  The judge noted that he could find
    no evidence at all about care homes in any of the material before  him,
    including the Home Office country report on  Pakistan.   Significantly,
    when refusing the application,  the  ECO  had  referred  only  to  care
    possibly being provided by  the  appellant's  daughters,  a  suggestion
    which the sponsor and appellant  provided  evidence  to  show  was  not
    practicable [40].

 5. The judge had to determine this appeal on the evidence that was  before
    him.  He has not allowed the appeal  because  the  ECO  has  failed  to
    provide evidence  of  the  availability  of  care  homes  in  Pakistan.
    Rather, he was unable to conclude on the  evidence  that  the  required
    level of care in Pakistan  is  available.   In  short,  the  judge  has
    accepted (as it was open to him to accept) the evidence of the  sponsor
    that the required level of care can only be provided to this particular
    appellant if she is granted entry  clearance  to  live  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The judge has examined the evidence carefully  and  supported
    his findings with cogent reasoning.  Although a  different  outcome  to
    this appeal may have been possible on the same evidence,  that  is  not
    the point; the judge has exercised his own judgment to the facts before
    him.  The Upper Tribunal should  hesitate  before  interfering  with  a
    properly reasoned decision of the First-tier Tribunal.   The  reasoning
    of the judge in this particular case is entirely clear  and  I  am  not
    satisfied  that  he  has  perversely  or  irrationally  misapplied  the
    Immigration Rules.  In the circumstances, the appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

 6. This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 9 June 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
