
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/16347/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 July 2016                               |On 02 August 2016             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Mrs Mursal Azizi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Mardner, Counsel, instructed by Kothala & Co
                    (Harrow Road)

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant in this case  is  an  Entry  Clearance  Officer  and  the
    respondent is Mrs Mursal Azizi.  However,  for  the  purposes  of  this
    decision and reasons I shall refer to the parties as they  were  before
    the First-tier Tribunal, where Mrs Azizi was the appellant.

 2. The appellant who was  born  on  11  February  1991  is  a  citizen  of
    Afghanistan who applied in May 2014 for entry clearance as  the  spouse
    of Zabihullah Azizi, the sponsor, a naturalised British citizen present
    and settled in the UK.  The respondent refused  the  application  in  a
    decision dated 8 November 2014.  In a decision dated  11  January  2016
    Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Rebecca  Harrington  allowed  the
    appellant's appeal.

 3. The respondent appealed to the Upper Tribunal on  the  basis  that  the
    judge was required to make a finding as to whether the requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules were met as at the date of decision  and  it  was
    argued that the judge's findings were  largely  based  on  postdecision
    evidence.  It was also argued that other findings  made  by  the  judge
    were simply irrational, although this ground of appeal was not  pursued
    before me.  I heard from both representatives and at  the  end  of  the
    hearing I reserved my decision.

Decision on Error of Law

 4. Mr Tarlow for the Entry Clearance Officer  relied  on  the  grounds  of
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  Mr Tarlow pointed out that at  paragraph
    [23] the judge  set  out  that  Skype  print-outs  were  post  decision
    evidence.  Mr Tarlow also pointed to the key finding  at  [29]  of  the
    judge's decision which he submitted was obviously based on postdecision
    evidence including that as at the date of the  hearing,  on  4  January
    2016, the appellant and the sponsor were in a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship.

 5. In summary, Ms Mardner submitted that the judge made  her  findings  on
    the basis that the marriage was subsisting.   She  submitted  that  the
    judge had found the sponsor to be a  credible  witness.   Although  she
    initially  submitted  that  the  respondent  had  accepted   that   the
    relationship was genuine and subsisting, when I took her to [17] of the
    judge's determination she  accepted  that  the  issue  of  whether  the
    relationship was genuine and subsisting was properly before the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  Ms Mardner pointed out that the judge  had  found  that
    there was a genuine relationship and that the judge had  accepted  that
    the couple had married and reiterated that the  sponsor  was  credible.
    She submitted that the judge had relied on pre-decision visits.

 6. It is common ground that evidence of the circumstances appertaining  to
    the date of decision was  admissible  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    judge if it shed light on the facts at the date of decision  (DR  (ECO:
    post-decision evidence) Morocco* [2005] UKIAT 0038) applied).  Evidence
    of post-decision visits and  of  'intervening  devotion'  generally  is
    admissible as evidence of a subsisting marriage and evidence  of  phone
    calls/contact   can  be  so  considered  (Goudey  (subsisting  marriage
    -evidence) Sudan [2012] UKUT 00041 (IAC); Naz  (subsisting  marriage  -
    standard of proof) Pakistan  [2012]  UKUT  00040  (IAC)).   Indeed  the
    judge, in a detailed and careful decision correctly directed herself as
    to this case law (at paragraph [28]) and that there  is  no  particular
    evidence  that  is  required  to  evidence  a   genuine   and   ongoing
    relationship.

 7. At paragraph [7] of the decision and reasons the judge  also  correctly
    directed herself that she must consider matters as they  stood  at  the
    date of the decision  and  significantly  she  also  properly  directed
    herself that she could consider  matters  arising  after  the  date  of
    decision only to the extent that they shed light on  the  situation  at
    the date of the  decision.   It  is  clear  therefore  that  the  judge
    recognised the relevance of post-decision events (which  in  this  case
    included visits by the sponsor to the appellant and  ongoing  contact).
    This must also be seen in the context of the respondent's decision of 8
    November  2014  which  specifically  cited  a  lack  of   evidence   or
    information to demonstrate contact or intervening devotion  (and  which
    the judge recorded at [13f]).

 8. Although the judge may not in her decision have expressly distinguished
    between evidence  pre  and  post  decision  (other  than  to  state  at
    paragraph 23 that the Skype print-outs were all post decision evidence)
    it is clear from a careful reading of the decision in its entirety that
    the judge was relying on post decision evidence only in so  far  as  it
    cast light on the circumstances of the relationship at the date of  the
    Entry Clearance Decision.  For example, the judge relied, at  paragraph
    [29a] on "two lengthy visits to Afghanistan to see the appellant  since
    the marriage together  with  the  lengthy  period  that  he  stayed  in
    Afghanistan immediately after their marriage."  This included a lengthy
    return visit after the marriage but before the  decision  for  52  days
    from 12 September 2014 until 4 November 2014.  In  addition  the  judge
    also accepted that the appellant and the sponsor lived together in  the
    sponsor's family home immediately after their marriage, on 4 June 2013,
    for 75 days until 17 August 2013.  Only one  of  these  three  periods,
    when the judge found that the appellant and the sponsor  were  together
    in Afghanistan, post-dated the decision and there is no error in taking
    this  into  account  as  additional  evidence  that  the  marriage  was
    subsisting on 8 November 2014.  Although again the  judge  specifically
    took into account the post decision evidence of contact  from  [23]  to
    [26] the judge had correctly reminded herself (at [23]) that  this  was
    post decision evidence.  It is clear therefore in light of this and her
    self-direction (at [7] and [28]) that she only  took  this  information
    into account in so far as it cast  light  on  the  situation  as  at  8
    November 2014.

 9. The key concern of the respondent  was  that  the  judge  concluded  at
    paragraph [29] that "the appellant and the sponsor are in a genuine and
    subsisting relationship and intend to live permanently  together."   It
    was the respondent's case that this statement indicated that the  judge
    had made a decision as to the circumstances at the date of the  hearing
    rather than the date of decision.  However I am not satisfied  that  it
    can be said that this statement at [29] related  to  the  date  of  the
    hearing rather than the date of  the  decision  and  in  light  of  the
    judge's findings generally and her careful directions, at [7] and  [28]
    as to the permissible evidence in such a case, it is clear to  me  that
    the judge was satisfied that the marriage was  genuine  and  subsisting
    and that the couple intended to live together as at  8  November  2014.
    The fact that the judge may also have been satisfied that the  marriage
    continued to subsist at the date of decision is not an  error  of  law,
    material or otherwise.

10. There was a considerable amount of  evidence  before  the  judge  which
    predated the decision of the respondent on 8 November 2014.  The  judge
    also significantly made strong findings of credibility in the sponsor's
    favour, finding him to be 'a compelling witness' who gave evidence  'in
    a perfectly straightforward manner, even in relation to issues that did
    not assist the appellant's case.  The  respondent  gave  no  reason  to
    doubt his truthfulness and I accept his evidence  as  credible'.    The
    judge recorded the sponsor's evidence as  to  the  development  of  the
    appellant and sponsor's relationship, including that it was an arranged
    marriage, they met a couple of  times  before  the  wedding,  that  the
    appellant moved into his home with his mother on 4 June  2013  and  has
    remained there and evidence as to contact since  then  via  Skype/Viber
    and visits to Afghanistan.  The judge also recorded  that  the  sponsor
    identified the individuals in photographs  in  the  appellant's  bundle
    which showed the appellant and the  sponsor  together  and  which  were
    taken in Afghanistan including at the appellant's brother's wedding.

11. The judge also took into consideration that  the  sponsor  alerted  the
    judge to the fact that there had been an error in the witness statement
    evidence as to their pre-marriage relationship.   It  was  the  judge's
    view that the sponsor need not have alerted the judge to this error and
    that this was  consistent  with  him  not  attempting  to  mislead  the
    Tribunal.  The judge gave clear reasons for accepting the  evidence  of
    the sponsor and preferring that to the reasons given by the  respondent
    in relation to claimed inconsistencies in the evidence.  The judge also
    found that the sponsor spoke  coherently  about  his  relationship  and
    about the appellant's family and that the  appellant  and  the  sponsor
    appeared comfortable with each other in  the  shown  photographs.   The
    judge also took into consideration that the appellant had  been  living
    (including  at  the  date  of  decision)  in  the  sponsor's  home   in
    Afghanistan with his mother, which the judge found consistent with  the
    intention to live with the sponsor in the UK.

12. All of these findings were open to  the  judge  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence available as to the circumstances  appertaining  the  date  of
    decision.  I am not satisfied that any error of law has been made  out.
    In the alternative that I am wrong and if the  judge  may  have  fallen
    into error in failing to specifically distinguish between the  pre  and
    post decision evidence, that error was not material given the  strength
    of her findings as to the relationship from the date of the marriage on
    4 June 2013 onwards and the wealth of  evidence  available  as  to  the
    existence of the relationship at the date of decision.

13. Although the respondent also took issue with the judge's findings  that
    there was a large cake at the  wedding  as  irrational,  this  must  be
    considered in the context of the judge's wider findings  that  all  the
    evidence pointed to  a  genuine  relationship  in  its  entirety  which
    included that the cake and  the  wedding  in  general  (and  the  judge
    accepted the sponsor's evidence which included that  the  wedding  took
    place before 700 guests) indicated that the marriage  was  genuine  and
    not one of convenience.  There is nothing irrational  in  that  finding
    when considered in the entirety of the decision.

14. It should be noted that if any error had been found to  be  material  I
    would in the alternative have remade the decision allowing  the  appeal
    on the basis of the  permissible  evidence  which  indicates  that  the
    marriage was genuine and subsisting as of 8 November 2014 and that  the
    couple, at that date, intended to live together permanently in the  UK.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal, allowing Mrs  Azizi's  appeal  does
not contain a material error of law and is maintained.

No anonymity direction was sought or made.






Signed                                  Date:  29 July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award was sought or is made.






Signed                                  Date:  29 July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
