
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
OA/16579/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                         |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 9 February 2016                        |  On 10 May 2016                  |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                        karthik rajaraman saraswathy
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                      entry clearance officer - chennai
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Anusha Rajaraman (sponsor)
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant,  Karthik  Rajaraman  Saraswathy,  who  was  born  on  11
    September 1988 is a male citizen of India.  He is the  brother  of  the
    sponsor, Mrs Anusha Rajaraman who is a British citizen.  By a  decision
    dated 26th August 2014, the appellant was refused  entry  clearance  to
    the United Kingdom as the adult dependant of the sponsor.  The  parties
    agree that the appellant was able to satisfy the Immigration Rules save
    for paragraph E-ECDR2.5:

         The applicant ... must be  unable,  even  with  the  practical  and
         financial help of the sponsor, to obtain the required level of care
         in the country where they are living because

         (a)  it is not available and there is no person in that country who
             can reasonably provide it; or

         (b)  it is not affordable.

 2. The appellant's appeal was dismissed in a determination promulgated  on
    2 July 2014 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Tunnock.  Judge   Tunnock  had
    found at [37]:

         The difficulty with the application is that it is not clear exactly
         what needs the appellant has  that  cannot  be  met  in  India.   I
         acknowledge that the level of sophisticated  support  that  can  be
         found in the UK may not be available but that support has not  been
         available to the appellant to date.  There is no evidence that  the
         appellant's father has any particular nursing or clinical skill  or
         whether he will have the affection of a parent for  his  son  which
         would enhance  the  quality  of  the  support  which  he  has  been
         providing.  I also accept  that  caring  for  the  appellant  would
         become more difficult as his  father  grows  older  but  I  am  not
         satisfied that the appropriate domestic  support  will  be  without
         specialist training in respect of autism, is not available.   I  am
         not satisfied that the evidence shows that the equivalent  of  care
         assistance cannot be sourced to assist the appellant with his daily
         needs set out in various reports.  Dr Varley provided some guidance
         for visual timetables  to  aid  the  appellant's  progress  and  it
         appears  that  they  can  all  be  implemented  without  specialist
         intervention.  I accept that it would almost  certainly  be  better
         for the appellant to come to the UK where he would live with family
         members who are extremely anxious to do the best for him.  However,
         it is not the test that is applied  under  the  Immigration  Rules.
         The burden is on the appellant to show that he is unable to  obtain
         the required level of care even the practical and financial help of
         the sponsor because it is either not  available  and  there  is  no
         person in India he knew who can provide it or it is not affordable.
          The issue of affordability  has  not  been  raised  understandably
         given the financial circumstances of the sponsor.  I set out  above
         I am not satisfied the  appellant  has  discharged  the  burden  to
         establish that the required level of care is not available.

 3. This appeal throws up a  number  of  difficult  issues.   Paragraph  E-
    ECDR2.5 begs the obvious question as to the meaning  of  "the  required
    level of care in the country where they are living".  The  use  of  the
    words "in the country in which  they  are  living"  suggests  a  proper
    construction of "required" care should be determined  by  reference  to
    the standards of the appellant's country of return.  There is also  the
    question of the ability of the appellant's father  to  continue  caring
    for him and whether he is, at the present time, providing the "required
    level  of  care".   At  [37]  Judge  Tunnock  acknowledged   that   the
    appellant's father has no "particular nursing or  clinical  skill"  but
    found that he was able  to  enhance  the  quality  of  the  support  he
    provided to the appellant because  of  the  natural  tie  of  affection
    between parent and son.  I am not sure that that is what is intended by
    the Immigration Rule when it speaks of a "required level of care".  The
    nature and extent of care required is, in my opinion,  properly  to  be
    established by evidence relating to the particular mental and  physical
    condition of the applicant; it does not necessarily follow that a close
    relative without any particular skills in providing care can  meet  the
    requirement.  I am also satisfied that this is a case in which not only
    current circumstances but those  reasonably  likely  to  occur  in  the
    future should be taken into account in assessing whether the  appellant
    meets the Immigration Rules.  The relevance of  prospective  or  future
    events should be considered in  this  instance  as  it  often  is,  for
    example, in determining the likely progress of contact between  a  non-
    resident parent and a child.  Having considered the  evidence  and  the
    submissions of the sponsor and the respondent's officer, I am satisfied
    that the appellant's  father  is  either  incapable  of  providing  the
    required level of care for the appellant at the present time.  Further,
    if the appellant and his father are getting by, so to speak, at present
    that is not a situation which I find will continue  in  the  medium  to
    longer term.

 4. I am satisfied also that there was before Judge Tunnock evidence  which
    plainly indicated that the care was simply not available for those with
    severe autism in India.  There is both general  and  specific  evidence
    (i.e. relating to this appellant) from  the  organisation,  Action  for
    Autism, which operates out of New Delhi, India.  The  general  evidence
    [149] indicates that "the needs of autistic children in India  are  not
    being met in either the regular or special educational systems and that
    there are "not enough services  to  meet  the  needs  of  mentally  and
    retarded  children  and  adults  in  India  let  alone  those  who  are
    autistic."  The evidence specific to the appellant (in the form  of  an
    email - see [151]) records that there are  "some  residential  settings
    for adults that are coming up across the country" although there are no
    "specialist... 24/7 care services in Chennai."  The letter of Dr  Avula
    [74] also  records  that  there  are  "not  government  institutes  for
    autistic children in India."

 5. I am fully aware that the Immigration Rules does not seek to  strike  a
    comparison between the quality and  availability  of  services  in  the
    United Kingdom  and  India;  the  United  Kingdom  can  no  more  offer
    assistance to all autistic people from India any more than it can offer
    a good education to those who may be denied it in their own  countries.
    However, the evidence in this  case  is  quite  striking,  namely  that
    autism does not only fail to attract specialist services in  India  but
    is largely ignored or left undiagnosed,  in  the  latter  case  because
    members of the medical profession see  little  point  in  diagnosing  a
    condition for  which  no  treatment  whatever  exists.   Having  found,
    therefore, that the "required level of care" cannot be provided by  the
    appellant's father the evidence points very strongly towards a  further
    finding  that  it  cannot  be  provided  by  anyone   else   in   India
    notwithstanding the ability of the United Kingdom sponsor  to  pay  for
    it.

 6. Judge Tunnock's solution to this difficulty was to conclude  that  "the
    appropriate domestic support, albeit  without  specialist  training  in
    respect of autism is ... available."  The  medical  evidence  indicates
    that the appellant obeys simple commands and that he is not  aggressive
    but it follows from Judge Tunnock's finding  that,  if  his  father  is
    unable to care for him, the appellant would spend his entire day alone,
    without any form of social interaction save for  the  short  visits  of
    domestic help who would provide his  food  and  clean  his  home.   The
    question arises as to whether  that  level  of  care  can  properly  be
    described as "the required level of care" whether by reference  to  the
    standards of the United Kingdom, India or elsewhere.   I  have  to  say
    that I find that it does not.  In the particular circumstances of  this
    appeal, I find that Judge Tunnock did err in law by concluding that the
    Appellant could not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.   I
    find that he does meet the requirements of paragraph E-ECDR2.5 for  the
    reasons which  I  have  given  above.   I  therefore  set  aside  Judge
    Tunnock's determination  (although  I  acknowledge  the  characteristic
    thoroughness with which he has conducted his analysis) and have  remade
    the decision by allowing under the Immigration Rules the appeal of  the
    appellant against the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer dated  26
    August 2014.

Notice of Decision

 7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 2 July  2014  is
    set aside.  I have remade the decision.  The appellant's appeal against
    the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer dated  26  August  2014  is
    allowed under the Immigration Rules.

No anonymity direction is made.







Signed                              Date 2 April 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


















