
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/16011/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th April 2016                           |On 27th April 2016            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              NURUDEEN BOATENG
                       (anonymity direction nOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Adeolu, Legal Representative, Lonsdale & Mayall
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal form the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Brown
    promulgated on 9 October 2015.  The respondent to the appeal (to whom I
    shall refer as 'the applicant' hereafter so as to avoid  confusion)  is
    Ghanaian, born in 1982, and married to a British  citizen,  Mrs  Zainab
    Boateng. They have one child, a son, who was 19 months old at the  time
    of the determination by the First-tier Tribunal.

2.   On 10 September 2014 the applicant applied for entry clearance  as  the
    partner of Mrs  Boateng.   The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  refused  his
    application on 26 November 2014  on  the  grounds  that  the  financial
    requirements in Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules had not been  met.
    The Entry Clearance  Officer  gave  consideration  as  to  whether  the
    application  raised  any  exceptional  circumstances  by  reference  to
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human  Rights  which  warranted
    consideration outside the requirements of the Rules but concluded  that
    it did not.

3.   That refusal was  reviewed  by  an  Entry  Clearance  Manager  and  was
    maintained in  a  decision  communicated  on  13  February  2015.   The
    decision was then appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. The  grounds  of
    the appeal  were  threefold:  first,  that  the  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the Immigration Rules; second, that  the  decision  was
    not in accordance with the law;  and,  third,  that  the  decision  was
    unlawful under section 6  of  the  Human  Rights  Act  1998,  as  being
    incompatible with Convention rights, specifically Article 8  concerning
    private and family life.

4.   In his closing submissions to the First-tier Tribunal on behalf of  the
    applicant, Mr Adeolu (who again represents  the  applicant  before  me)
    made the unambiguous concession that the applicant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of Appendix FM due as  Mrs  Boateng's  income  during  the
    relevant period was below the minimum required.  The  Judge  considered
    that concession to have been properly made and Mr Adeolu  has  repeated
    it before me.

5.   In submissions before me today, the question arose as to whether,  were
    a fresh application for entry clearance to be made, the minimum  income
    threshold could be demonstrated. Mr Adeolu submitted that the financial
    requirement would clearly be met but that it would be onerous upon  the
    applicant to make a fresh application, even if it were likely to  prove
    successful.

6.   In the First-tier Tribunal, the Judge, having  dealt  with  background,
    proceeded immediately to consider the matter under the Human Rights Act
    (see paragraphs 29 and following). The Secretary of State pursues  this
    as her principal ground of appeal, on the basis that it amounted to  an
    error of law, being contrary to the approach commended  in  SS  (Congo)
    [2015] EWCA Civ 387. The Judge, it is submitted, did not turn his  mind
    to identifying any  compelling  circumstances  pursuant  to  which  the
    matter could properly be considered outside the Immigration Rules.

7.   Mr Adeolu conceded that nowhere in his  determination  does  the  Judge
    make reference to a compelling or exceptional circumstance. He submits,
    however, that it is open to a reader of  the  determination  (importing
    the concept of the 'reasonable man on the Clapham omnibus') to look  at
    the decision holistically. He says that it can  be  inferred  that  the
    Judge turned his mind to the matter, and support for this  proposition,
    he says, may be found in paragraphs 46 and 47 of the determination.

8.   I find this submission uncompelling for two reasons. First,  these  two
    paragraphs are to be found in a passage of the determination  which  is
    preceded  by  the  sub-heading  'Proportionality  Consideration';  and,
    secondly, because nowhere in these two paragraphs (or elsewhere in  the
    determination) is it said by the Judge that a compelling or exceptional
    circumstance is made out for considering the matter  under  Article  8.
    Paragraphs 46 and 47 constitute a balancing exercise in which the Judge
    is looking at the best interests of the child concerned.

9.   In giving the  judgment  of  the  court  in  SS  (Congo),  Richards  LJ
    discussed the Court of Appeal's earlier decision of (MM) Lebanon [2014]
    EWCA Civ 985, concluding at paragraph 25,
         "The practical effect of the Court of  Appeal's  reasoning  ...  is
         that ... there will generally be no or only a relatively small  gap
         between the new [Leave  to  Enter]  Rules  as  promulgated  by  the
         Secretary of State and the requirements of Article 8 in  individual
         cases, including those involving sponsors who are British  citizens
         of refugees located in the United Kingdom. The Court of Appeal ....
         did not find it necessary to deal in detail with how wide that  gap
         might be, and accordingly did  not  have  to  decide  exactly  what
         significance the balance struck in the LTE Rules might have for the
         Article 8 balancing exercise to be conducted by an  official  or  a
         court or tribunal."

9.   Richards LJ, in SS (Congo), continued at paragraph 26  that  the  Court
    of Appeal in MM (Lebanon) had not said that there could never be  cases
    falling outside the LTE Rules where, on their particular facts, Article
    8 might require that LTE be granted outside the  Rules.  It  left  that
    possibility open. Following an exhaustive discussion of  both  domestic
    law and Strasbourg jurisprudence in a variety of factual circumstances,
    he stated at paragraph 51,
         "In our judgment, the approach to Article 8 in  the  light  of  the
         Rules in Appendix FM-SE should be the same as  in  respect  of  the
         substantive LTE and LTR Rules in Appendix FM. In other  words,  the
         same general proposition  applies,  that  compelling  circumstances
         would have to apply to justify a grant of  LTE  or  LTR  where  the
         evidence Rules are not complied with."

10.  The rationale for the requirement of compelling circumstances is  fully
    rehearsed by Richards LJ and merits recitation in full.
        [52] This is for two principal reasons. First, the  evidence  rules
        have the same general objective as the substantive rules, namely to
        limit the risk that someone is admitted into the United Kingdom and
        then becomes a burden on public resources,  and  the  Secretary  of
        State has the same primary function in relation to them, to  assess
        the risk and put in place measures which  are  judged  suitable  to
        contain it within acceptable bounds. Similar weight should be given
        to her assessment of what the  public  interest  requires  in  both
        contexts.
        [53] Secondly, enforcement  of  the  evidence  rules  ensures  that
        everyone applying for LTE or LTR is treated equally and  fairly  in
        relation to the evidential requirements they must satisfy. As  well
        as keeping the costs of administration  within  reasonable  bounds,
        application of standard rules is an important means  of  minimising
        the risk of arbitrary differences in  treatment  of  cases  arising
        across the wide range of  officials,  tribunals  and  courts  which
        administer the system of immigration controls. In this regard,  the
        evidence Rules (like the substantive Rules) serve as a safeguard in
        relation to rights of applicants and family members  under  Article
        14 to equal treatment within the scope of  Article  8.  [...]  Good
        reason would need to  be  shown  why  a  particular  applicant  was
        entitled to more preferential treatment with  respect  to  evidence
        than other applicants would expect  to  receive  under  the  Rules.
        Moreover, in relation to the proper administration  of  immigration
        controls, weight should also be given to the Secretary  of  State's
        assessment of the evidential requirements needed to  ensure  prompt
        and fair application of  the  substantive  Rules:  compare  Stec  v
        United Kingdom, cited at para. [15] above. Again, if  an  applicant
        says that they should be given  more  preferential  treatment  with
        respect  to  evidence  than  the  Rules   allow   for,   and   more
        individualised consideration of their case, good reason  should  be
        put forward to justify that."
11.  There is  nothing  in  the  Judge's  determination  (whether  expressly
    articulated of capable of being implied) to suggest  that  he  found  a
    good reason for considering this matter outside the Rules.  This  error
    of law is self evident on the face of the determination.

12.  The second, somewhat more general, ground  of  appeal  pursued  by  the
    Secretary of State is that there is no reference in  the  determination
    to the statutory matters to which regard must  be  had  under  Sections
    117A and 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  (as
    amended).  Mr Bramble, on the Secretary of State's behalf, very  fairly
    takes me to paragraph 50 of the determination and particularly  to  the
    reference to 'public interest'. This, he says (and it was not  disputed
    by Mr Adeolu)  is  the  only  place  in  the  determination  where  the
    expression 'public interest' used. But as Mr Bramble submits, and  with
    which I concur, Sections 117A and 117B import a far  greater  level  of
    detail  and  specificity  than  mere  'public  interest'  and   it   is
    unfortunate that the Judge made no reference to them. I noted, however,
    paragraph 44 of the decision in which the Judge states,  "In  assessing
    proportionality, I must afford great weight to the public  interest  in
    securing the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom  by  fair  and
    consistent immigration control, considered on the macro as well as  the
    micro level". Mr Adeolu was not able to direct me to any  part  of  the
    determination where the Judge expressly turned his mind to Section 117A
    and/or 117B. Since the error of law which I have found under the  first
    ground is sufficient  to  be  dispositive  of  this  appeal,  a  fuller
    discussion of the second ground is somewhat otiose, but for the reasons
    briefly stated, I am  drawn  inevitably  to  the  conclusion  that  the
    failure expressly to consider Sections  117A  and  117B  amounts  to  a
    further error of law.

13.  Accordingly,  there  are  two  errors  of  law  on  the  face  of  this
    determination.   The  first  is  that  the  Judge  did  not  find   any
    exceptional or compelling circumstance which warranted consideration of
    the case outside the Rules and the second is that the Judge  failed  to
    consider the statutory public  interest  considerations  prescribed  by
    Sections 117A and 117B.

14.  Mr Adeolu argues that in the event that I were to find there to be  one
    or more errors of law, I should not consider them  to  be  material.  I
    cannot  accept  that  proposition.  These  errors  -   separately   and
    cumulatively - go to the very heart of the judicial exercise  and  they
    clearly affected the way in which the matter was determined. I have  no
    option but to allow this appeal and to set aside the  determination  of
    the First-tier Tribunal.

15.  Having set aside the determination, how should I  proceed?   Mr  Adeolu
    submits I should remit the  matter  for  consideration  de  novo  by  a
    differently constituted First-tier Tribunal.  Mr Bramble, on the  other
    hand, says that I should remake the decision based upon the information
    available to me, preserving such findings as are proper from the First-
    tier Tribunal determination.

16.  Mr Adeolu stated that there  was  no  fresh  evidence  which  would  be
    adduced by the applicant, but he would prefer  a  different  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge to consider the matter. He advanced no reason as to  why
    a First-tier Tribunal Judge  might  be  better  placed  to  remake  the
    decision that would one of the Upper Tribunal.

17.  There was no rule 24 response filed and it is common ground that  there
    will be no fresh evidence called.  All  relevant  factors  militate  in
    favour of this matter remaining in the Upper Tribunal  for  expeditious
    redetermination. The interests of justice are best served by the  Upper
    Tribunal determining the matter.

18.  In remaking the decision, I give full regard to the Court  of  Appeal's
    decision  in  SS  (Congo)  and  address  first  whether  there  is  any
    exceptional or compelling circumstance to consider  this  case  outside
    the Rules. I have considered with care the findings and conclusions  to
    which the Judge came at paragraphs 29 to 53 of his decision. I  do  not
    seek to look behind any of those findings of  fact  which  I  treat  as
    being preserved. Viewed objectively, there is nothing  in  the  Judge's
    analysis -  whether  taken  separately  or  cumulatively  -  which  can
    properly amount to compelling circumstances legitimating  consideration
    of the case outside the Rules where (as has been found and  is  in  any
    event conceded) the requirements of Appendix FM have not been met.

19.  A weighty consideration in reaching this conclusion is  the  fact  that
    the Judge himself did not identify  any  such  compelling  circumstance
    either  expressly  or  by  inference.  See  my  analysis   above   when
    considering error of  law.  I  must  nonetheless  go  beyond  this  and
    consider whether there is anything in the applicant's case which  might
    be capable of amounting to a  compelling  circumstance  notwithstanding
    that it may not have been positively identified by the Judge. Mr Adeolu
    did not advance a positive case as  to  any  particular  feature  which
    might amount to a compelling circumstance and invited  me  to  consider
    the matter in the round.

20.  One feature of the case is the  fact  that  Mrs  Boateng  had  been  on
    maternity leave for some or all of the six months preceding the date of
    the applicant's application for entry clearance and, accordingly,  this
    may have served to reduce her level of income. It does not appear to be
    a feature upon which  Mr  Adeolu  had  relied,  but  even  if  it  were
    relevant, I do not consider that this fact, whether taken alone  or  in
    conjunction with other matters, is a compelling circumstance to justify
    entertaining a human rights challenge outside the Rules. I do  not  see
    any merit in the argument that  'but  for'  the  reduced  income  level
    during maternity leave makes this  a  'near  miss'  case  which  should
    therefore be favourably determined outside the Rules. It is, at best, a
    factor to be considered in the proportionality balance,  in  the  event
    that consideration outside the Rules is justified.

21.  I do not consider that the existence of a child of the relationship  to
    be a compelling circumstance. It is far from  exceptional.  The  child,
    whom the Judge identified as S is now some 2 years  of  age  and  is  a
    British citizen. Undoubtedly Mrs Boateng finds  it  more  difficult  to
    cope with raising a child on her own and that  burden  would  be  eased
    were the child's father, the applicant, to be in a position to join her
    and to help her. Nor is it disputed that it would not be in the child's
    best interests for him to go and live with the  applicant  with  Ghana:
    although I do not understand that this has ever been contemplated. But,
    however distressing the division of a family may be, it is a  far  from
    unusual situation and does not get us into the territory of an  Article
    8 consideration outside the Rules.

22.  To the extent that I am  wrong,  and  that  there  are  features  which
    whether individually or when taken together are capable of amounting to
    a compelling circumstance for considering this case under human  rights
    grounds outside the Rules, I must start with the  statutory  framework.
    Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, introduced
    by section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014 and in force  since  25  July
    2014, establishes a new statutory regime applicable  when  a  court  is
    determining immigration cases.  Sections  117A  and  117B  provides  as
    follows:

         117A Article 8 of the ECHR: Public Interest Considerations
         (1) This Part applies where a court  or  tribunal  is  required  to
         determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-
         (a) breaches a person's right to respect  for  private  and  family
         life under Article 8, and
         (b) as a result would be unlawful under  section  6  of  the  Human
         Rights Act 1998.
         (2) In considering the  public  interest  question,  the  court  or
         tribunal must (in particular) have regard-
         (a)  in all cases, to the considerations listed  in  section  117B,
    and
         (b)  in cases concerning the deportation of foreign  criminals,  to
             the considerations listed in section 117C.
         (3) In subsection (2), "the public  interest  question"  means  the
         question of whether  an  interference  with  a  person's  right  to
         respect for private and family  life  is  justified  under  Article
         8(2).


         117B Article 8: Public Interest Considerations  Applicable  in  All
    Cases
         (1) The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in  the
    public interest.
         (2) It is  in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-
             (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
             (b) are better able to integrate into society.
         (3) It is  in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
         financially independent, because such persons-
             (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
             (b) are better able to integrate into society.
         (4) Little weight should be given to-
             (a) a private life, or
             (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,
             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.
         (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established  by
         a person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
         precarious.
         (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-
             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a  qualifying child, and
             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom. "

23.  In assessing whether the refusal of entry clearance  to  the  applicant
    breaches his rights to a private or family life  under  Article  8,  or
    those of Mrs Boateng and/or their child, I have regard  to  the  public
    interest considerations articulated in Section 117B. I have  particular
    regard to the fact  that  the  family  and  private  life  between  the
    applicant and Mrs Boateng, and - latterly with the child as well -  was
    developed while the applicant had no immigration status at all  in  the
    United Kingdom. At best, there was an  uncertain  hope  or  expectation
    that an application for leave to enter might be granted at some  future
    date in the event that one were made.

24.  I take fully into account all the  features  identified  by  the  Judge
    (which I need not rehearse as there is no evidential challenge  to  any
    of the factual matters) but I can find no ground  for  concluding  that
    the  decision  of  the  entry   clearance   officer   amounted   to   a
    disproportionate  interference  with  the  Article  8  rights  of   the
    applicant, Mrs Boateng or their child. The public interest is clear, as
    are the evidential requirements under Appendix FM. The fact that during
    the six-month period leading up to the  application,  the  sponsor  may
    have been on maternity leave and  thus  not  in  a  position  to  prove
    attainment  of  the  financial   threshold,   is   not   a   sufficient
    consideration to displace the statutory public interest requirement. It
    may have been a near miss, but it was a miss nonetheless. In  paragraph
    57 of its judgment,  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  SS  (Congo)  expressly
    addressed cases where it was said by applicants that:
         "... improvements in the position of their  sponsors  were  on  the
         horizon, so that there appeared to be a  reasonable  prospect  that
         within a period of weeks or months they would in fact  be  able  to
         satisfy the requirements of the Rules.  They  maintained  that  the
         Secretary of  State  should  have  taken  this  into  account  when
         deciding whether to grant LTE outside the Rules. In  our  judgment,
         this affords very weak support for a  claim  for  a  grant  of  LTE
         outside the Rules. The  Secretary  of  State  remains  entitled  to
         enforce the Rules in the usual way, to say that the Rules have  not
         been satisfied and that the applicant should apply again  when  the
         circumstances have indeed changed."

25.  I need pass no comment on whether  a  fresh  application  with  current
    financial information would succeed or not. Mr Adeolu is confident that
    it will and he is at liberty to pursue it on  the  applicant's  behalf.
    However, that is irrelevant to the matters currently under appeal.  Put
    shortly, the applicant did not meet the requirements of Appendix FM  of
    the Immigration Rules. There is  no  compelling  circumstance  allowing
    this matter to be considered under human  rights  grounds  outside  the
    Rules. And even if there  were  such  circumstances,  any  claim  under
    Article 8 (private and family life) would fail for the reasons which  I
    have sought to outline above.

26.  In the circumstances, I remake the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    by dismissing the underlying appeal and restoring the decision  of  the
    Entry Clearance Officer.

Notice of Decision

i.   Appeal allowed and determination of First-tier Tribunal set aside.
ii.  Decision  re-made  dismissing  the  appeal  from  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer's  refusal  and  reinstating  the  Entry  Clearance   Officer's
    decision.


No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   Mark Hill                      Date     25 April 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC

