
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/16828/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Promulgated on                       |
|23 July 2015                         |2 September 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                   THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ISLAMABAD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 SAIRA ILYAS
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr Hafsah Masood, instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent (whom we shall call "the claimant")  is  a  national  of
    Pakistan.  She  applied  to  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  for  entry
    clearance as the partner of Irfan Abdul  Wahid  ("the  sponsor").   The
    Entry Clearance Officer refused her  application  because  he  was  not
    satisfied that the parties to the claimed marriage had met, that  their
    marriage  was  valid,  or  that  their  relationship  was  genuine  and
    subsisting and that they intended to live  together  permanently.   The
    claimant appealed, and her appeal came  before  Judge  O'Garro  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Judge O'Garro heard evidence  from  the  sponsor,
    and considered the documents on file.  She regarded the  sponsor  as  a
    credible witness.  She noted that  the  marriage  had  taken  place  in
    Pakistan and on the basis of the material before her concluded that the
    parties had met, that the marriage was valid, and that it  was  genuine
    and subsisting.  Although she had set out the relevant requirements  of
    the Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules, HC 395, no other feature
    of them appears to have been drawn to her attention; and she  therefore
    allowed the appeal.

 2. The Entry  Clearance  Officer  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  this
    Tribunal on three  grounds.   The  first  two  relate  to  the  judge's
    conclusions in relation to the marriage.  The Entry  Clearance  Officer
    submits that Judge O'Garro did not  give  sufficient  reasons  for  her
    conclusions in relation to the validity of the marriage; and  that  she
    failed to appreciate that the sponsor had  changed  his  domicile  from
    Pakistan to "UK domicile".  Permission  was  not  formally  granted  on
    either of those grounds, rightly so.  The judge took into  account  not
    merely an early meeting between the parties, but the sponsor's evidence
    as to their relationship, which she believed.  No  other  reasons  were
    necessary.  So far as domicile is concerned, there is as we  understand
    it no such thing as "UK domicile".  The sponsor's  domicile  of  origin
    was clearly Pakistan.  The burden of proof of a change of domicile lies
    on the party asserting it, and clear evidence is required.  Despite the
    submissions in the grounds of appeal, it appears to us that there is no
    evidence at all that the sponsor had changed his domicile.

 3.  The  Entry  Clearance  Officer's  third  ground  is,   however,   more
    substantial.  In order to obtain the entry clearance  she  sought,  the
    claimant  needed  to  meet  all  the  "relationship  requirements"   in
    paragraphs E-ECP.2.1 to 4.2 of Appendix FM to  the  Immigration  Rules.
    The requirements as to the nature of  the  relationship  are  those  of
    paragraph E-ECP.2.2, but they are preceded by this:

         "E-ECP.2.1.  The applicant's partner must be -

          a) a British citizen in the UK, ...or

          b) present and settled in the UK, ... or

          c) in the UK with refugee leave or with humanitarian protection."



 4. The Entry Clearance Officer's third ground is  that  the  claimant  was
    ineligible for the entry clearance she sought, because she did not meet
    the requirements of  that  paragraph.   It  was  on  this  ground  that
    permission was granted.

 5. At the hearing, Mr Masood told us that he did  not  have  the  relevant
    paperwork with him.  He was therefore not able to show that the sponsor
    fell within any of the three categories set out in paragraph E-ECP.2.1.
     He had claimed asylum on his arrival in the United  Kingdom  in  1996,
    and he had been granted leave to remain on 10 February 2012.  Mr Masood
    was not able to say that the leave was as a refugee or on the basis  of
    humanitarian protection.

 6. The sponsor is clearly not a British citizen.  At the date of the Entry
    Clearance Officer's decision he was clearly not settled in  the  United
    Kingdom: he had leave  valid  until  9  February  2015.   There  is  no
    suggestion in that grant that it  is  on  the  basis  of  his  being  a
    refugee; his leave at the date of the application on 23  July  2013  is
    not the  subject  of  any  evidence,  other  than  the  claimant's  own
    statement that he was "granted asylum".  Mr Richards told  us  that  no
    document known to him supports the claim that the sponsor  was  granted
    asylum.

 7. In the  circumstances  it  appears  to  us  that  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer's third ground is made out.  No doubt it is  a  pity  that  the
    matter was not brought to the attention of Judge O'Garro, but she could
    not properly allow an appeal  on  the  basis  of  compliance  with  the
    Immigration Rules when the evidence before her did not  establish  that
    the claimant met the requirements of those rules.  She erred in law  in
    her conclusion that the claimant met the requirements of the rules.  We
    shall set aside her decision and substitute a determination  dismissing
    the claimant's appeal.

 8. In doing so, however, we put on record that in our  view  there  is  no
    proper basis for doubting Judge O'Garro's conclusions on the nature  of
    the relationship between the claimant and the sponsor.  If there  is  a
    further application it  should  be  decided  on  the  basis  that  that
    relationship has been proved.

 9. For the reasons we  have  given,  however,  the  claimant's  appeal  is
    dismissed.


                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                        Date: 25 August 2015
