
[pic]
IAC

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/16749/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 December 2015                  |On 6 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                              Mrs shamaila safi
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E. Waheed, Counsel, instructed by Calices
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appeal

1.   This is an appeal by Mrs Shamaila Safi against the decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Chana, sitting on 2 January 2015, who dismissed the
    appellant's appeal against the decision of the Entry Clearance  Officer
    dated 25 July 2013 to refuse her entry clearance  as  a  partner  under
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.  The First-tier Tribunal did  not
    make an anonymity direction and there was nothing before me to  suggest
    that Ms Safi should be accorded anonymity for these proceedings.

2.   In summary, the appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on 5  August
    1990.  The respondent refused the  appellant's  application  for  entry
    clearance as a partner under  paragraph  EC-P.1.1  of  Appendix  FM  as
    although the appellant had submitted a marriage certificate and wedding
    photographs in relation to her marriage to the sponsor on 14 July 2011,
    the respondent was not satisfied that the relationship  was  subsisting
    due to the lack of evidence of  a  subsisting  relationship  since  the
    wedding.  The respondent was also  not  satisfied  that  the  sponsor's
    passport showed that the sponsor was in the country at the time of  the
    wedding. The review by the Entry Clearance Manager  (ECM)  on  10  June
    2014 accepted that the sponsor was in Afghanistan at the  date  of  the
    marriage.  However the ECM was also of the view that there was  a  lack
    of satisfactory evidence of contact and noted that the application  for
    entry clearance was not made until 16 April 2013, some 20 months  after
    the marriage.

3.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Chana, in a decision  promulgated  on  the  9
    February 2015, dismissed the appellant's appeal.  Permission to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal was granted on 1 October 2015.   The  grounds  of
    appeal argued: ground (1) that the judge had not   taken  into  account
    the evidence submitted in particular in relation to the claimed contact
    between the appellant and the sponsor; ground (2) that  the  judge  had
    stated that there was no evidence  such  as  stamps  on  the  sponsor's
    passport that indicated he was in Afghanistan when the conception  took
    place when in fact there was such evidence; and  ground  (3)  that  the
    judge, in finding  that  there  was  no  evidence  that  the  appellant
    consented to the marriage and that it was obvious that the  application
    was made on her behalf, failed to  take  into  consideration  that  the
    appellant  will  have  physically   submitted   her   entry   clearance
    application.

Error of Law

Ground 2

4.   Ms Fijiwala conceded that the judge had been wrong to say (as  she  did
    at paragraph [26] of the decision) that there was no evidence of visits
    to Afghanistan 'in and around June 2014  when  the  conception  of  the
    child took place' when in fact a copy of  the  sponsor's  passport  was
    before the judge which showed that he arrived in Afghanistan on 27  May
    2014, exiting on 19 August 2014.  Ms Fijiwala was of the view  that  if
    this part of the evidence was excluded which she argued it should  have
    been as this was post decision evidence (the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    (ECO) decision having been made on 25 July 2013), then  the  error  was
    not material.

5.   There is no merit in Ms Fijiwala's argument; she conceded  in  her  own
    submission that post-decision visits can be taken  into  consideration.
    Even if that were not the case the judge although she directed herself,
    at [25] that she was only allowed to consider 'facts as at the time  of
    the Entry Clearance Officer's decision' went  on  at  [26]  to  make  a
    finding that there was no evidence that the sponsor was in  Afghanistan
    'in and around' when the conception took place in 2014, when there  was
    such evidence.  The judge then went on at [28] to state  that  she  had
    considered all 'of the evidence in the case as a whole  in  the  round'
    and made a finding that it had not been demonstrated that the appellant
    and the sponsor were in a subsisting relationship.

6.   The judge's findings of fact were set out  at  [22]  through  to  [27].
    Her findings in relation to the pregnancy which she considered at  [25]
    and [26] were a factor in those findings, if not  one  of  the  central
    findings,  in  leading  the  judge  not  to  be  satisfied   that   the
    relationship was subsisting.  This was a mistake as to a material  fact
    which resulted in unfairness.  It is arguable that without that mistake
    of fact the judge may have reached a different conclusion.

7.   Accordingly the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal under  the  immigration  rules  was  vitiated  by  a
    material error of law such that it must be set aside and remade.

Grounds 1 and 3

8.   I am further satisfied that the  judge  failed  to  take  into  account
    evidence on material matters.  The judge had before her, in addition to
    the sponsor's oral and written evidence a bundle which included  almost
    200 pages of call history  documents  (including  Skype  records,  Talk
    Home, Tango and Lycamobile records).  Ms Fijiwala submitted that it was
    clear from  the  bundle  that  all  of  this  evidence  post-dated  the
    decision.  However, that  is  not  the  case.   Although  there  was  a
    significant amount of post decision evidence of calls the  bundle  also
    included a large number of records dated in 2012 and the first half  of
    2013, which therefore predated the decision.  The judge failed to  make
    any findings in relation to this evidence of contact and I am satisfied
    that she fell into error.   In  addition  although  the  judge  made  a
    finding, at [27] that there was no explanation as to why the  appellant
    would continue to live with her own family  and  the  sponsor's  family
    after they were married it was the evidence before the judge  including
    in the sponsor's witness statement  for  the  first  appeal  (dated  20
    October 2014) that his parents and  his  seven  siblings  all  live  in
    London (and are British Citizens).  The judge made no  findings  as  to
    this evidence which again was material to  the  overall  assessment  of
    whether or not the relationship was subsisting, given in particular the
    judge's finding at [27].

9.   In relation to ground 3, in finding in particular at  [23]  that  there
    was 'no evidence' that the appellant consented  to  the  marriage,  the
    judge failed  to  take  into  consideration  all  the  evidence.   This
    included that the appellant had provided her English language test  and
    the judge failed to make any findings as to this evidence.  Although Ms
    Fijiwala referred to the judge's findings that there was nothing in the
    appeal from the appellant, in  particular  no  witness  statement,  the
    judge went on to make detailed findings in relation to the  application
    including that it was on the  internet,  albeit  with  the  appellant's
    signature, and that there was no evidence of consent.   Those  findings
    were not, as Ms Fijiwala contended before me, restricted to findings as
    to the lack of evidence on appeal, but included the judge's findings as
    to the alleged lack of involvement of  the  appellant  in  the  process
    generally including the application.  In that context  I  am  satisfied
    that the judge fell into material error in  failing  to  make  adequate
    findings in relation to what weight if any was  to  be  placed  on  the
    appellant's sitting of the English test.

10.  I gave my decision at the hearing that there was an error  of  law  and
    that I would remake the decision afresh.

Remaking of the Decision

11.  For the purposes of remaking the decision, I heard oral  evidence  from
    the sponsor, Mr Israrullah Safi who gave evidence in English.   I  also
    heard submissions from both representatives.  All of the  evidence  and
    submissions are set out in the Record of  Proceedings.   The  documents
    before me included the bundle of documents originally before the First-
    tier Tribunal and a supplementary bundle of documents for the  purposes
    of  remaking  the  decision.   This  included   supplementary   witness
    statements from the sponsor, together with witness statements from  the
    appellant and the appellant's parents.  I reserved my decision. I  have
    carefully taken into account, in the round, all the evidence before  me
    prior to reaching that decision, even if not specifically  referred  to
    below.

The Law

12.  Appendix FM, Paragraph EC-P.1.1 of the Immigration Rules sets  out  the
      criteria for entry clearance as a partner.   These  include  that  the
      applicant  must  meet  all  of  the  requirements  of  Section  E-ECP:
      Eligibility for entry clearance as a partner.

13.  An applicant is required to meet all the requirements in paragraphs  E-
      ECP.2.1 to 4.2.  These include:
         'ECP.2.6. The relationship between the applicant and their  partner
         must be genuine and subsisting;
         ECP.2.10. The applicant and partner must intend  to  live  together
         permanently in the UK.'

The Burden and Standard of Proof

14.  The burden of proof is on the appellant to  establish  her  case  on  a
      balance of probabilities.  I  must  assess  the  appellant's  case  in
      relation to the above matters at the date of the ECO decision,  on  25
      July 2013.

My Findings

15.  It was not disputed that the only  issue  before  me  was  whether  the
    appellant and the sponsor were, at the date of decision, in  a  genuine
    and subsisting relationship and whether they intend  to  live  together
    permanently.

16.  I found the sponsor, Mr Israrullah Safi to be a credible  witness.   He
    gave  consistent  oral  evidence  and  did  not  waiver  under   cross-
    examination.  In finding the sponsor credible I have considered all the
    evidence including that he works on occasion as an interpreter for  the
    Ministry of Defence.  This was not disputed (and  was  evidenced  on  a
    number of the financial documents).  I am of the view that  this  would
    be a position of some trust and that the  sponsor  would  not  wish  to
    jeopardise this role or his integrity generally by  being  party  to  a
    fraudulent application.  His evidence was of assistance to me.

17.  Although I accept that the telephone numbers given by the appellant  in
    the application form were Pakistan telephone numbers,  the  sponsor  in
    oral evidence and the appellant  in  her  witness  statement  dated  20
    October 2015, confirmed that as she had  to  attend  the  British  High
    Commission in Islamabad in Pakistan in order to submit her application,
    she provided the contact numbers  of  her  uncle  in  Pakistan  as  she
    understood from the ECO at the High Commission that they might need  to
    contact her.  On balance I  am  satisfied  that  this  is  a  plausible
    explanation.  The appellant was not asked on her application to provide
    any  other  telephone  numbers.   I  do  not  therefore,  in  all   the
    circumstances, draw any  adverse  inference  from  the  fact  that  the
    numbers shown on itemised telephone records submitted by the  appellant
    both with her application and on appeal are different.

18.  The appellant  has  provided  two  witness  statements,  one  dated  20
    October 2015 and one dated 20 February 2015.  Although  these  postdate
    the respondent's decision I have taken them into consideration  insofar
    as they relate to the circumstances appertaining at the decision.

19.  The appellant and the sponsor have provided  a  substantial  amount  of
    documentary evidence including telephone and other  records,  including
    of Skye and Tango internet calls.  Although I accept that some of  this
    evidence is of limited value, being for example  undated  screen  grabs
    showing the appellant and the  sponsor  on  the  same  screen,  I  have
    considered this evidence cumulatively, in the round.   The  appellant's
    sponsor has always consistently maintained (and this  is  supported  by
    the appellant's subsequent witness statements (with translations)  that
    he and his wife have maintained contact by a variety of  methods.   The
    couple met in August 2009  and  the  sponsor  indicated  in  his  first
    witness statement that between August  2009  and  September  2012  they
    talked to each other using international  calling  cards,  'Maxitalk  &
    Talk Home'.  Although these were not produced,  I  accept  that  it  is
    plausible that these may not have been kept at the  time,  particularly
    as the couple moved on to other methods of keeping in contact.

20.  The couple married  on  14  July  2011  and  the  sponsor  remained  in
    Afghanistan for a further month and a half after  the  wedding  (and  I
    accept that this is shown  on  the  sponsor's  passport  stamps).   The
    sponsor's  passports  also  show  a  number  of   further   visits   to
    Afghanistan. Although the ECM in reviewing the appellant's  grounds  of
    appeal, by review dated 10 June  2014,  indicates  that  there  'is  no
    evidence' that the sponsor saw the appellant, for example in the  visit
    to Afghanistan from 14 June 2012 to 11 September 2012, I  accepted  the
    sponsor's consistent evidence that all of his own family including  his
    mother and father and siblings reside in  the  UK.   Although  that  in
    itself does not mean that he was necessarily visiting the appellant, on
    the basis of all the evidence considered in the  round,  including  the
    consistent oral evidence of the sponsor  and  the  appellant's  witness
    statements, I accept on balance that he was.

21.  The ECM asserted that there was no evidence of Skype  contact  'in  the
    file'.  However this evidence was before me and consists of almost  100
    pages  of   screenshots.    The   usernames   'Safi   Israrullah'   and
    'Masrorisrar' can be seen on these screenshots as can pictures  of  the
    appellant and the sponsor on the screen in  some  of  the  screenshots.
    The dates of the skype calls are also visible  and  show  contact  from
    March 2013 onwards.  As there was clearly contact  therefore  by  Skype
    from at least March 2013 and the respondent's decision was not  reached
    until 25 July 2013 I have considered this  evidence  in  the  round  as
    supportive of the appellant and the sponsor's continuing relationship.

22.  In relation to the considerable bundle of phone contact print outs  the
    ECM asserted that the Lycamobile records named the sponsor and gave his
    telephone number, however the ECM  asserted  that  the  number  called,
    93777520377 was an Afghan number whereas the number  provided  for  the
    appellant (with the application) was a Pakistan  number.   It  was  the
    appellant's and the sponsor's  consistent  evidence  that  the  sponsor
    provided the appellant  with  a  phone,  number  93777520377  and  that
    initially they spoke to each other every two or  three  days  and  that
    this then increased to every day and sometimes more than  once  a  day.
    This is consistent in my findings with the frequency of calls shown  in
    the phone records before me.

23.  The Lycamobile records before me cover September 2012 to  August  2013.
    The sponsor's passport records show that he  was  in  Afghanistan  from
    June 2012 until September 2012.  It is plausible in this  context  that
    the sponsor may have given the appellant a phone by which  to  continue
    to maintain contact.  I note that  the  Lycamobile  records  do  indeed
    record calls to the Afghanistan number (which on balance on  the  basis
    of the consistent evidence before me from both the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor I accept was the appellant's number) initially every  few  days
    in 2012 (and occasionally every day) although I note that the frequency
    of these calls increased in 2013 with sometimes more than  one  call  a
    day, but again sometimes calls every two to three days.  In the context
    of a long distance relationship and in light of what I  accept  on  the
    basis of the evidence before  me  that  sometimes  connections  can  be
    unreliable in Afghanistan, I do not draw any adverse inference from the
    fact that the appellant stated in her  application  that  she  and  her
    husband spoke every few days whereas the sponsor indicated it was every
    day.  I accept on balance that both were the case at differing times in
    the relationship.  The records before me support the evidence  of  both
    the appellant and the sponsor that contact increased as time  has  gone
    on.

24.   The  ECM  also  noted  that  the  appellant's  application  for  entry
    clearance was not made until 16 April 2013, some 20  months  after  the
    marriage and was of the view  that  this  cast  further  doubt  on  the
    relationship.  As I have indicated I am satisfied that  there  is  more
    than  ample  evidence  of  telephone  and  other  contact  between  the
    appellant and the sponsor prior to the date of the ECO decision (and  I
    am satisfied that the evidence of contact after this date is admissible
    in so far as it indicates that there was a subsisting  relationship  at
    the date of decision, which has continued).

25.  In addition, the sponsor gave consistent oral evidence  at  his  wife's
    appeal before me in relation to the delay in the application.  In order
    to meet the financial requirements the sponsor indicated that he needed
    to complete his studies (for a diploma)  after  he  returned  from  the
    wedding in order that he would be in a position to gain  employment  at
    the required financial level. After he completed his diploma he went to
    Afghanistan to visit his wife for a further 3 months  in  2012  (and  I
    accept on balance the oral and documentary evidence including  passport
    stamps that indicates these visits took place) and returned to take  up
    a full time job.  The financial requirements were not  in  dispute  and
    the sponsor has a number of positions, including (as noted above) as  a
    translator for  the  Ministry  of  Defence.   I  accept  the  sponsor's
    evidence that once he was earning the required income level he  had  to
    ensure that he had at least six  months  of  financial  documents.   In
    addition it was his consistent evidence that his wife had to  pass  the
    requisite English language test, which took more than one  attempt.   I
    accept the sponsor's evidence therefore that the earliest  he  and  his
    wife were in a position to be ready to  submit  their  application  was
    March/April 2013, and the application was submitted in April  2013.   I
    do not therefore attach any adverse inference from  the  fact  that  20
    months had elapsed from  the  marriage  as  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    appellant and the sponsor have adequately explained that this time  was
    required in order that they would be in a  position  to  meet  all  the
    relevant requirements when the application was made.

26.  In finding that the marriage is subsisting and  genuine  and  that  the
    couple intend to live together permanently, I have considered  all  the
    admissible evidence which relates to the circumstances appertaining  at
    the date of decision in July  2013.   I  am  satisfied  that  there  is
    adequate evidence including in the form of  records  of  telephone  and
    other  contacts  together  with  evidence  of  subsequent   visits   to
    Afghanistan by the sponsor.  I  accept  on  balance  including  in  the
    context of the appellant's witness statements relating to this  contact
    and these visits together with the sponsor's credible oral evidence  in
    this regard,  that  the  contact  and  visits  were  with  and  to  the
    appellant.

27.  Although I accept therefore that there was evidence before me that  the
    appellant and the sponsor have had  a  child  in  2015  (including  DNA
    evidence that they both are the parents and of  an  application  for  a
    British Passport for that  child)  which  is  arguably  evidence  of  a
    subsisting  relationship  in  July  2013  which  has  continued,  I  am
    satisfied, for the reasons set  out  above,  that  the  appeal  clearly
    succeeds without recourse to this evidence.

Notice of Decision

28.  The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made a material error of  law  and
    her decision to dismiss the appeal is set aside.  I substitute a  fresh
    decision to allow the appeal.


Signed   Date: 31 December 2015

M. M. Hutchinson
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
