

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/16038/2012
     OA/16039/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 30 August 2013                             |On 04 September 2013         |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before


                            UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                                 D E TAYLOR


                                   Between


                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And



                                HALEEMA BIBI
                                  IQRA BIBI

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:  Mrs Pettersen, HOPO
For the Respondent: no appearance


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


   1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Kelly made following a hearing at Bradford on  the
      17 June 2013, allowing the claimants appeal against  the  decision  of
      the entry clearance officer made on 26 July 2012 to  refuse  to  grant
      them entry clearance to come, with their mother, to the UK.


   2. The original refusal was on  the  grounds  that  the  entry  clearance
      officer was not satisfied that the claimant's mother had entered  into
      a marriage which was genuine and subsisting, nor that the family could
      be adequately maintained and accommodated in the UK. The  judge  found
      in favour of the claimants in respect of these issues and there is  no
      challenge to this aspect of the decision.

   3. However, the entry clearance officer also raised paragraph 297(i) with
      respect to the minor appellants. Their mother is divorced  from  their
      father, and there was no information before him about where he was and
      what responsibility he had, if any for their upbringing.

   4. The judge did not deal with this issue at all in the determination.

   5. The sponsor did  not  appear  at  the  hearing  although  he  and  his
      representatives were  properly  served  with  notice.  However  he  is
      severely disabled and Mrs Pettersen  told me that the sole person from
      Girlington Advice centre who deals with immigration matters no  longer
      works there.

   6. Accordingly she agreed that the  fairest  course  would  be  for  this
      appeal to be for Judge Kelly to complete  his  decision  and  consider
      whether the claimants are in a position to meet  the  requirements  of
      paragraph 297(i).

   7. The judge erred in law in failing to determine one of the issues which
      was before him. To the extent that that issue remains outstanding, the
      decision is set aside.

   8. This appeal will be heard at Bradford when the decision will be remade
      by Judge Kelly. It is important that the sponsor, with  his  advisers,
      if any, attends the hearing.


Signed                                  Date




                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
