
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/16542/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On Tuesday 2nd April 2019            |On Friday 26th April 2019            |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                             MRS JUSTICE JEFFORD
                    (SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE)
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                     OR
                         [Anonymity direction made]
              (A protected party: by his litigation friend KWS)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Harrison QC and Mr A Vaughan, Counsel
                    instructed by Bindmans LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr J Anderson, Counsel instructed by Government
                    Legal Department


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
This appeal involves a protected person and also concerns the welfare  of  a
child.   An  anonymity  direction  has  been  made  by  the  Upper  Tribunal
previously and it is appropriate to continue that  anonymity  direction.  We
make clear that our reasons for that direction do not include the impact  on
the Appellant's own reputation of the crimes which he has  committed.  Until
a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the Appellant is  granted  anonymity.
No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him  or
any member of his family. This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent. Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    INTRODUCTION

      1. This appeal comes before  us  for  re-making  of  the  decision  in
         relation to Article 8 ECHR, an error of law having  been  found  by
         this Tribunal (Mrs Justice Elisabeth Laing DBE and  Upper  Tribunal
         Judge Jordan) by a decision dated as long ago as  5  December  2014
         ("the Decision").  It comes before us by a slightly unusual  route.
         By the Decision, the Tribunal accepted that there was an  error  of
         law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge,  promulgated
         on 9 July 2014, allowing the Appellant's  appeal.   The  First-tier
         Tribunal's decision was therefore set aside  although  the  factual
         findings therein were not disturbed by the  grounds  of  challenge.
         The Tribunal went on to re-make the decision in relation to Article
         3 ECHR, dismissing  the  Appellant's  appeal  in  that  regard  but
         reserving to a resumed hearing the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

      2. The Appellant has since appealed the  Decision  on  the  Article  3
         grounds to the Court of Appeal.  Permission to appeal  was  granted
         on that application by Lord Justice  Hickinbottom  on  26  November
         2018.  He gave directions on that occasion to permit the  Appellant
         to amend his  grounds  to  deal  with  an  issue  relating  to  the
         applicability of the case of Paposhvili v Belgium [2017] Imm AR 867
         to the facts of this case.  Following that amendment and a  hearing
         on  28  February  2019,  Lord  Justice  Hickinbottom   stayed   the
         Respondent's application to set aside the grant of  permission  and
         indicated  that  this  Tribunal  would  hear  and   determine   the
         outstanding Article 8 grounds by a resumed hearing,  prior  to  the
         substantive hearing in the Court of Appeal on 24-25 June 2019.  The
         Court of Appeal has also indicated that, in the event  that  either
         party  is  dissatisfied  with  our  decision  which   follows,   an
         application for permission to appeal  will  be  considered  by  the
         Court on a rolled-up basis during that hearing.

      3. As we understand the position, therefore, we are to determine  only
         the Article 8 ground of appeal.  We do so on  the  basis  that  the
         Decision which is under appeal remains  intact  and  we  gratefully
         adopt such  parts  of  the  Decision  which  are  relevant  to  our
         consideration below.

    PROCEDURAL MATTERS

    LITIGATION FRIEND

      4. An application has been made on behalf of  the  Appellant  for  the
         appointment of a litigation friend in this  appeal.   The  proposed
         litigation friend is his sister who is a British citizen living  in
         the UK.  We have anonymised her identity here, and in the  heading,
         in order to preserve the Appellant's anonymity.

      5. A  Presidential  panel  of  this  Tribunal  has  recently  provided
         guidance in relation to the appointment of  litigation  friends  (R
         oao JS and Others) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
         (litigation friend - child) 2019 UKUT 00064 (IAC).   Although  that
         guidance is in the context of the capacity  of  minor  children  in
         judicial review proceedings,  the  decision  makes  clear  that  it
         applies equally to the statutory appeal context ([72]) although the
         costs  and  procedural  regimes  are  different.   It  is  also  of
         assistance for what it has  to  say  about  the  assistance  to  be
         derived from the  Civil  Procedure  Rules  although  those  do  not
         strictly apply to the Tribunal ([77]).  For that reason, we adopted
         a similar approach when determining the application in  this  case.
         In particular, CPR 21.4(3)(a) and (b) provides that the  litigation
         friend must be able to fairly and competently  conduct  proceedings
         and have no interest adverse to the Appellant.

      6. We heard oral evidence from the Appellant's sister, KWS.   She  has
         been appointed by the Court of Protection since June 2015 to handle
         the Appellant's financial affairs in the UK.   She  confirmed  that
         she remains willing to act on  his  behalf  in  relation  to  these
         proceedings.  She confirmed that she understands her responsibility
         in relation to the making of decisions in relation  to  conduct  of
         the proceedings and that she is content to  assume  responsibility.
         We also confirmed that she has no interest adverse to that  of  the
         Appellant.  We were also satisfied on the medical evidence provided
         by Dr Sewell (to which we refer below) that the Appellant lacks the
         capacity  to  conduct  these  proceedings  himself  and  that   the
         appointment of a litigation friend is necessary.

      7. The Respondent did not object to  the  appointment.   We  therefore
         appointed KWS as the Appellant's litigation friend in this  appeal.
         We note that as this is a statutory appeal and the Appellant is  in
         any event a publicly funded party (in which regard KWS is also  his
         litigation friend), no costs consequences arise.

    APPLICATION TO ADDUCE FURTHER EVIDENCE

      8. The  Appellant  applied  to  adduce  updated  witness  and  medical
         evidence to which we will refer  below.   The  Respondent  did  not
         object  to  that  application.   The  Respondent   also   made   an
         application  to  adduce  further  evidence.    The  basis  of   the
         application is set out at [3] to [5] of the  Respondent's  skeleton
         argument.  Those paragraphs read as follows:

             "3. The Defendant applies to rely on further  evidence.  First
             the Defendant applies to rely on evidence from  Tascor  as  to
             the circumstances of  the  Claimant's  removal.  As  explained
             below, it is denied that the Claimant  was  mistreated  during
             the process of his removal. The evidence is  plainly  material
             in  demonstrating  that.  For  the  avoidance  of  doubt,  the
             Defendant does not consider that the alleged  mistreatment  is
             relevant to the determination of this appeal in any event.

             4.  Second, the Defendant applies to rely on excerpts from the
             GCID  records  which  also  relate  to  the  circumstances  of
             removal, and for the same reasons as above.

             5   Third, the Defendant applies to rely on a  response  to  a
             country information request dated 21 March 2009 in respect  of
             the Open Arms Centre."

      9. Ms Harrison objected to the adducing of the evidence, save for  the
         third item referred to.  She submitted that the other material  was
         not relevant as indeed appeared to be  the  Respondent's  position.
         As Mr Anderson pointed  out,  however,  the  material  went  to  an
         argument  made  at  [11]  of  the  Appellant's  skeleton   argument
         concerning procedural fairness obligations under Article 8.  It was
         to that argument that the material was  directed  even  though  the
         Respondent's primary position was that it was not relevant.

     10. Ms Harrison also pointed out that the  material  went  further.  In
         particular, the GCID notes appeared to be  the  entirety  of  those
         notes relating to the Appellant.   That  objection  appears  to  be
         founded on the inclusion of details of other offences in which  the
         Appellant has been suspected of involvement  but  have  led  to  no
         convictions.  We observe that the Respondent's decision letters  do
         include reference to the generality of those matters, but  we  were
         not provided with any evidence about  them  and  Mr  Anderson  made
         clear that this was not  the  reason  for  seeking  to  adduce  the
         further evidence.  Accordingly, we disregard that evidence entirely
         when considering the appeal.  We indicated that we  would  consider
         the other material  going  to  the  apparent  issue  of  procedural
         fairness should a need arise to do so.   As  it  was,  for  reasons
         which follow, we did not need to do so.

    THE LEGAL FRAMEWORK

    ARTICLE 8 ECHR: PROCEDURAL OBLIGATIONS

     11. In light of our above observations on the Respondent's  application
         to adduce evidence, it is convenient at this point to deal with the
         nature and  impact  of  the  Article  8  procedural  obligation  as
         referred to at [11] of the Appellant's skeleton argument.  This  is
         an out of country  right  of  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the
         Respondent  which  was  certified  under  section  94  Nationality,
         Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002   ("the   2002   Act").    That
         certification is on the basis that  the  appeal  is  one  which  is
         clearly  unfounded,  in  other  words  could  not  succeed  on  any
         legitimate view and taking the evidence at its highest.  There  has
         been no successful challenge to that certification.   As  such,  we
         agree with Mr Anderson that the Supreme Court's judgment of  Kiarie
         and Byndloss v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2017]
         UKSC 42 is not directly on point (see in  particular  at  [35]  the
         distinction drawn between section 94 certification and certificates
         issued pursuant to section 94B of the 2002 Act).  Equally, however,
         that judgment does not limit the extent  to  which  the  procedural
         obligations in Article 8 apply in  a  particular  case.   Moreover,
         even if Article 8 did not itself apply, there is a domestic  common
         law duty of fairness which applies.  Whether a hearing is or can be
         fair is a matter which is highly fact sensitive.

     12. We do not need to say anything more about  this  for  two  reasons.
         First, Mr Anderson submitted, and  we  understood  Ms  Harrison  to
         accept, that if an appellant considers  that  his  out  of  country
         appeal cannot be fairly conducted, then the appropriate  course  is
         to seek a stay of the appeal and directions for steps to render the
         appeal fair.  That is consistent with the guidance provided by  the
         Presidential panel's decision in AJ (s  94B:  Kiarie  and  Byndloss
         questions) Nigeria [2018] UKUT 115 (IAC). An appeal ought not to be
         allowed substantively on Article 8 grounds due to  some  procedural
         unfairness which is capable of being remedied.

     13. Second, and in any event, the approach adopted by the Respondent in
         this case has been not to challenge the substance  of  the  witness
         and medical evidence.  Accordingly, there is no dispute as  to  the
         facts which requires resolution by the presence of the Appellant in
         the UK.  We have of course already determined that the Appellant is
         not capable of providing  instructions  and  we  doubt  could  give
         evidence orally.  No  application  was  made  for  him  to  do  so.
         Medical and other reports have been provided as  to  his  condition
         since his return  to  Jamaica  in  2013.  There  was  therefore  no
         submission made on his behalf that the appeal has been  unfair  and
         cannot fairly be determined.

    TEMPORAL APPROACH

     14. Both parties are agreed that, in  determining  whether  deportation
         breaches the Appellant's Article 8 rights, we must proceed  on  the
         hypothesis that the Appellant has not been deported already.   Both
         parties are also agreed that we must determine the position  as  at
         the date of the hearing before us.   However,  Ms  Harrison  argued
         that section 94(9) of the 2002 Act means that we have to proceed on
         the basis of a hypothetical removal as at the date  of  the  actual
         removal.  In this case, that was in July 2013.  She says that  this
         must be the  position  because,  otherwise,  if  the  position  had
         improved for an appellant he would not be  able  to  vindicate  his
         rights.  She used as an example a Libyan deported to Libya who  was
         tortured or ill-treated on return contrary to Article  3  ECHR  but
         who had been released by the time  that  the  appeal  came  on  for
         hearing. Ms Harrison argued that her submission  was  supported  by
         the Decision.

     15. The Respondent's position is that whether the deportation  breaches
         the Appellant's rights is to be determined based on a  hypothetical
         removal as at the date of the hearing.  Mr Anderson submitted  that
         this is consistent with both the wording of section 94(9) and  what
         the Tribunal said in the Decision in the passages relied upon by Ms
         Harrison.

     16. Section 94(9) provides as follows:

             "Where a person in relation to whom a  certificate  is  issued
             under this section subsequently brings an appeal under section
             82(1) while outside the United Kingdom, the  appeal  shall  be
             considered as if he had  not  been  removed  from  the  United
             Kingdom."

     17. The purpose of that sub-section is in our view clear,  particularly
         as it forms part of section 94 which gives rise to out  of  country
         appeals.  It permits  an  appellant  to  pursue  an  argument  that
         removal in consequence of the decision to remove  him  will  breach
         his human rights (or in an appropriate case his  rights  under  the
         Refugee Convention) even though the decision to remove has  already
         taken effect.  It is not to permit an appellant to put  forward  an
         argument based on historic breaches of Convention rights.  That  is
         consistent with the position under the Refugee Convention where the
         issue whether a risk arises is to  be  determined  as  at  date  of
         hearing and, if the risk no longer exists by that  date,  a  person
         would no longer be  entitled  to  succeed  in  his  appeal  against
         removal.

     18. We are also concerned that,  if  Ms  Harrison  were  right  in  her
         submission we would, in effect, be conducting a review  of  whether
         the Respondent's decision to deport  in  2013  was  a  lawful  one;
         indeed, Ms Harrison came close to suggesting as much.  That is  not
         our function. Our function  is  to  decide  for  ourselves  whether
         deportation is in breach of the Appellant's human rights as at  the
         date of the hearing and unconstrained  by  the  Respondent's  views
         (save as to the significance and  weight  of  the  public  interest
         which applies).

     19. The position as we set it out is moreover consistent with what  was
         said by the Tribunal in the Decision at  [23]  that  "the  FTT  was
         required to consider whether a hypothetical removal (which  had  in
         fact happened) would breach the Appellant's rights under  the  HRA.
         The questions for the FTT accordingly were whether as at  the  date
         of the hearing, that hypothetical removal  either  created  a  real
         risk of ill treatment crossing the article 3 threshold or  breached
         the Appellant's article 8 rights."  That  point  is  reiterated  at
         [49] where the Tribunal dealt with this issue as follows:

             "We  do  not  criticise  its  reliance  on  evidence  of   the
             Appellant's  experiences  in  Jamaica  after  his  removal  as
             evidence that there was a real risk of a breach of  article  3
             when he was removed.  Ms Harrison  effectively  accepted  that
             this is what the FTT  did  in  paragraph  7  of  her  skeleton
             argument for this hearing.  It is true that at the stage  when
             the Appellant was removed, the FTT, which had considered  this
             issue in the determination dated 21 December  2011,  had  held
             that the Appellant would have access  to  appropriate  medical
             facilities in Jamaica (determination paragraph 8).   That  was
             highly relevant to the question whether there was a real risk,
             at the point of removal, that the Appellant's article 3 rights
             would be breached.  But the question for the FTT  was  whether
             there was such a risk from a hypothetical removal at the  date
             of the hearing.  We consider that it would be counterintuitive
             and artificial if the FTT's assessment of that risk could  not
             be informed by evidence of  the  actual  consequences  of  the
             removal which  had  in  fact  occurred  by  the  time  of  the
             hearing."

             [our emphasis]

         Far from supporting the Appellant's position, we consider that this
         paragraph  reinforces  the  view  we  express  above.   We  accept,
         however, that evidence  post-dating  the  actual  removal  must  be
         relevant to our assessment of the consequences of deportation.   In
         fact, such evidence makes our task somewhat easier since we are not
         required to speculate.

     20. Ultimately, as Ms Harrison accepted, little  turns  on  this  legal
         argument  because,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  in  this  case,   the
         Appellant's position has,  if  anything,  worsened  in  the  period
         following the actual removal.

    ARTICLE 8 ECHR: SUBSTANTIVE CONSIDERATIONS

     21. We can deal very shortly with this aspect of the law.  The  parties
         argued the case by reference  to  section  117C  of  the  2002  Act
         ("Section 117C") which reads as follows:

             "117C Article 8: additional considerations in cases  involving
             foreign criminals


             (1) The deportation of foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.

             (2) The more  serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
             criminal, the greater is the public interest in deportation of
             the criminal.

             (3) In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.

             (4) Exception 1 applies where-

                  (a)  C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom
                  for most of C's life,

                  (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                  Kingdom, and

                  (c)  there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to  be
                  deported.

             (5) Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.

             (6) In the case of a foreign criminal who has  been  sentenced
             to a period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2.

             (7) The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to  be
             taken into account where a court or tribunal is considering  a
             decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent  that
             the reason for the decision was the offence  or  offences  for
             which the criminal has been convicted."

     22. It is accepted  that,  although  the  Respondent's  decision  under
         appeal in this case pre-dates the changes to the 2002  Act  brought
         about by the Immigration Act 2014 (which include  the  introduction
         of Section 117C), we are nonetheless required  to  have  regard  to
         that section in appeals heard after the date when it was introduced
         (YM (Uganda v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2014]
         EWCA Civ 1292).   Both parties also accept that  the  Appellant  is
         not subject to automatic deportation under section  32  UK  Borders
         Act 2007 (because the Appellant was under eighteen at the  date  of
         conviction for the index offence and therefore an  exception  under
         section 33 applies).  However, as Mr  Anderson  submitted,  and  we
         accept, Section 117C continues to apply (as do the  other  sections
         of Section 117A-D).  We do not set out the relevant sections of the
         Immigration Rules.  There  is  no  suggestion  that  those  operate
         differently on the facts of this case.

     23. The Appellant was sentenced to a period of thirty months in a Young
         Offenders Institution for his crime.  Accordingly, the  issues  for
         us are whether either of the two exceptions in  Sections  117C  (4)
         and (5) apply and, if they do not, whether  there  are  other  very
         compelling circumstances over  and  above  those  exceptions  which
         outweigh the public interest in deportation.  Although Section 117C
         (6) applies that test only to cases where the criminal sentence  is
         four years and over,  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  NA  (Pakistan)  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 662 held
         that it applies also by analogy to cases where the sentence is over
         twelve months but under  four  years  (see  [23]  to  [26]  of  the
         judgment).  The Supreme Court's judgment in Hesham Ali v  Secretary
         of State for the Home  Department  [2016]  UKSC  60  to  which  our
         attention is also drawn did not involve the application of  Section
         117 and therefore the focus of what is there said depends  in  part
         on the Immigration  Rules  being  intended  to  be  compliant  with
         Article 8 more generally.  We did not though discern any dissent on
         the part of the Respondent to the test being one of proportionality
         nor that a "balance sheet approach" should be applied when  looking
         at the case overall.

     24. Our attention was drawn to a number of other legal  authorities  to
         which we refer as necessary when we come to the discussion  section
         below.

    THE EVIDENCE

    OUR STARTING POINT

     25. There are two other decisions which form part of the  framework  in
         which we determine this appeal.  First, the Appellant has exercised
         a previous  right  of  appeal  which  culminated  in  a  First-tier
         Tribunal decision promulgated on 21 December 2011  (appeal  number:
         IA/26228/2011) ("the  FtT  Decision").   As  such,  the  principles
         enunciated in Devaseelan (Second Appeals - ECHR - Extra-territorial
         effect) Sri Lanka [2002] UKIAT 00702 apply. In short  summary,  the
         findings made in that  decision  are  the  starting  point  to  our
         determination.  Facts happening since that decision  can  be  taken
         into account as can facts happening before that  decision  but  not
         relevant to it.

     26. Second, as we observe at [3]  above,  although  the  Appellant  has
         permission to appeal the Decision, that has  not  been  overturned.
         As such, what that has to say about the approach we are to take  to
         this appeal is relevant.  The Decision is of  course  relevant  for
         what it has to say about the error of law made  by  the  First-tier
         Tribunal  decision  allowing  the  appeal  on  Article  8   grounds
         (decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Abebrese dated 9 July  2014:
         "the Second  FtT  Decision").   Nonetheless,  we  accept  that  the
         factual findings made in the  Second  FtT  Decision  are  still  of
         relevance.  As we have already indicated, the  Respondent  has  not
         challenged the facts of the case or the evidence put forward by the
         Appellant.

     27. Before we move on to look at what those decisions  show  about  the
         facts of the case and evidence, it is helpful to summarise the main
         facts of the case.  Those are set out in detail at [6] to  [22]  of
         the Decision.  In broad summary, the Appellant  is  a  national  of
         Jamaica born in May 1989.  He came to the UK on  14  December  1998
         aged nine years with his sister KR.  Their mother, DH, was  already
         in the UK. She did not have leave to remain here.  OR  and  KR  had
         leave to remain as visitors but then overstayed.   DH  and  KR  now
         have limited leave to remain.  That  is  a  development  since  the
         Decision in 2014.  KWS is married to  a  British  citizen  and  had
         indefinite leave to remain on that basis.  She  is  now  a  British
         citizen herself.

     28. In April 2005, the Appellant was convicted, on a guilty plea, of an
         offence of oral rape of a twelve-year old girl.   He was just under
         sixteen years old at the date of conviction.  He was  sentenced  to
         thirty months' custody and placed on the  Sex  Offenders'  Register
         for life.  His appeal against  that  conviction  was  dismissed  in
         2011.  The Appellant has other convictions dating back  to  October
         2008 of resisting or obstructing a constable in  the  execution  of
         his duty, of taking a vehicle without consent, of driving without a
         licence and without insurance.   He  was  given  a  twelve  months'
         community order.

     29. The first decision to deport the Appellant was in  2009.   However,
         in January 2008, the Appellant's partner, MB, gave birth to a  son,
         D.  When the Respondent was provided with evidence in that  regard,
         the decision to deport was withdrawn and replaced  with  a  further
         decision which was the subject of the appeal  leading  to  the  FtT
         Decision.  The Appellant's appeal was dismissed on that occasion.

     30.  The  Appellant  thereafter  applied  for  leave  to  remain.   The
         Respondent at that point accepted that the  deportation  order  had
         been incorrectly made and a fresh  decision  was  made  maintaining
         deportation.  An asylum claim made following the threat of  removal
         in March 2013 was refused and certified under  section  96  of  the
         2002 Act.  The Appellant was deported on 12 July 2013  and  remains
         in  Jamaica.   We  will  need  to  say  a  little  more  about  the
         circumstances of  the  deportation  below.   However,  we  are  not
         concerned with what occurred during the deportation.  The Appellant
         claims to have been ill-treated.  There is a civil  claim  in  that
         regard.  We were told  that  those  proceedings  have  been  stayed
         pending this appeal, but we need say no more about that issue.   It
         is not relevant.

     31. The central issue for our purposes is the effect of deportation  on
         the Appellant's mental health.  We will need to deal with  that  in
         more detail below both as to the circumstances which existed at the
         time of the earlier decisions and as they have now developed.

    THE FtT DECISION

     32. The salient findings as they appear in the  FtT  Decision  and  the
         Tribunal's observations on relevant evidence are as follows:

         (a)      The Appellant had established a private life in the UK and
         had undergone schooling since his arrival.  He was severely bullied
         at primary school and had been expelled in  year  10  following  an
         incident involving another pupil.  He had however succeeded  "in  a
         number of educational endeavours" and had  certificates  to  record
         his achievements.

         (b)      The private life established was,  however,  "shallow  and
         was certainly limited".  He is said  to  have  been  involved  with
         church activities.

         (c)      The Tribunal heard evidence from MB and expressed  concern
         about her ability to give evidence and recorded that  it  was  "not
         particularly detailed and satisfactory".  It was said that she  and
         the Appellant had been in a relationship  prior  to  2008  but  had
         split up during that year for about twelve months.  MB had  another
         relationship during that time and gave birth to  a  daughter.   The
         Tribunal made the following findings about that relationship:

             "[58]     We concluded that it was not to be expected and that
             the bond between the appellant and [MB] was so strong that she
             would go to Jamaica with the appellant.  We  accept  that  she
             would be left in the UK as would the appellant's son.  However
             we considered that there would remain  the  opportunities  for
             contact to be maintained through modern means of communication
             and it was not wholly outside the range of  possibilities  for
             visits to take place by members of his family to the appellant
             in Jamaica."

         (d)      The Appellant is the father of D who was born  in  January
         2008.

         (e)      At the time of the appeal (in 2011), the Appellant and  MB
         were not living together.  She  had  recently  moved  in  with  her
         parents and the two children.  The Appellant visited D and  MB  and
         would help with D by taking him to the  park  and  to  school.   He
         provided some money to MB for D when he  was  able.   The  Tribunal
         found:

             "[45]      The  evidence  of  the  witnesses  was  not  wholly
             reliable so far as we were concerned but we were  prepared  to
             find that there  is  a  reasonably  strong  bond  between  the
             appellant and [D].  We find that the  appellant  is  a  father
             figure  in  his  life  and   the   appellant   himself   takes
             responsibility and there is a bond between him  and  his  son.
             We  however  considered  that  the  relationship  between  the
             appellant and his son existed as a result  of  mostly  weekend
             visiting which from time to time  would  extend  to  an  extra
             couple of days both before and after  the  weekend.   We  were
             prepared to find applying the civil standard that these visits
             took place probably as frequently as every fortnight."

         The Tribunal concluded though that "there was no question" that  MB
         or D would consider or be expected to return to  Jamaica  with  the
         Appellant.  In so doing, they took into account "the  rather  loose
         relationship" between the Appellant and  MB.   The  Tribunal  found
         that D's future was with his mother in the UK.

         (f)      The Appellant's mother had no right to remain in  the  UK.
         He had various other members of family in the UK including an aunt,
         uncle and sister. The Tribunal viewed the evidence of the Appellant
         and his witnesses about the lack of any family members  in  Jamaica
         "with a degree of caution".  It also concluded that the Appellant's
         mother could return to Jamaica with the Appellant if she  chose  to
         do so.

         (g)      By the time of this appeal, the Appellant's mental  health
         problems were already manifesting themselves.  We set out what  was
         said about the evidence from the Appellant's  doctor,  Dr  Garwood,
         and the Appellant's sister in full:

             "[51]     We noted particularly the  letter  from  Dr  Garwood
             dated 31 May 2011.  He said that the appellant had  a  history
             of mental illness which he had been treating for over a  year.
             The report was unsatisfactory in the sense that it  was  brief
             and did not explain in detail what specific investigations  he
             had undertaken to enable him to reach a firm  conclusion.   He
             said that he had treated him with anti psychotic  drugs  which
             improved his condition.  He said that he had suffered  with  a
             tendency  to  psychotic  symptoms  since  he  had  first  been
             referred to Dr Garwood.   He  was  profoundly  depressed.   We
             noted that he suffers stress  which  seemed  to  increase  and
             exacerbate his mental illness rapidly such that  he  descended
             into severe symptoms relatively quickly.  We  noted  that  the
             appellant's condition was progressive with periods of illness,
             with periods of remission.  The exacerbations were  likely  to
             be related to life stresses.  Without prompt  and  appropriate
             treatment he was likely to  become  chronically  mentally  ill
             with high dependency needs.

             [52]      We heard evidence from the appellant's sister  [KWS]
             who said that she had assisted the appellant on  a  number  of
             occasions when he had had serious conditions  and  breakdowns.
             There was no reference to  breakdowns  in  any  of  the  other
             documents which we had had particularly  from  Dr  Garwood  we
             noted  that  Dr  Garwood  prescribed  strong  anti   psychotic
             medication which had the effect of causing potent sedation and
             suppression of psychotic symptoms.  We noted that this  letter
             was dated July 2008 and gave the opinion that he was "unfit to
             plead".  The letter concluded by saying  that  he  required  a
             further and full mental health assessment and a review of  his
             medication.  The letter produced for the proceedings before us
             and dated 31 May 2011 made no similar comment."

         (h)      As to what might occur if the Appellant  were  removed  to
         Jamaica,  having  noted  the  Respondent's   evidence   about   the
         availability of medication in Jamaica,  the  Tribunal  went  on  to
         record the evidence of Dr Garwood as follows:

             "[54]     ... We balanced those  comments  with  the  comments
             contained within Dr  Garwood's  letter  that  the  psychiatric
             services in Jamaica are rudimentary.  There is one psychiatric
             hospital and community mental health  service.   They  do  not
             offer the standard of care which was fit for purpose and  does
             not reach the standard.  He commented  that  it  was  unlikely
             that [OR] would obtain appropriate psychiatric care  and  thus
             his psychiatric condition would deteriorate rapidly  and  this
             would cause permanent  deterioration  of  his  mental  health.
             [OR] had a close relationship and is  well  supported  by  his
             family.  We noted that he was prescribed with  medication  and
             Risperdal tablets had been prescribed.  We had no evidence  to
             say that these drugs would not be available for the  appellant
             in Jamaica."

         (i)      The Tribunal accepted that the Appellant's  last  offences
         were in 2008.  The Tribunal noted, however, that the opinion of the
         probation service in relation to the second offence  was  that  the
         Appellant was at medium risk of committing further offences.

     33. The Tribunal therefore concluded that "the appellant's  claims  and
         those of his son under article 8 are not sufficient to outweigh the
         need for the maintenance of immigration control"

    THE SECOND FtT DECISION

     34. By the time of the hearing in May 2014 leading to  the  Second  FtT
         Decision, the Appellant had already been removed.  He did not  give
         evidence.  However, the Appellant's sisters KER[1] (now KWS) and KR
         gave evidence.  KR also has mental health problems of her own and a
         very close relationship with the Appellant.  She gave evidence that
         the Appellant had suffered a decline in his  mental  condition  and
         had suffered a "shut down" in that he would  not  communicate.   KR
         was concerned that the Appellant "may not survive in Jamaica in his
         present condition".  KWS also said that the  Appellant's  condition
         had deteriorated and that he was not communicating with the family.
          KWS told the Tribunal that, when the Appellant was in the UK,  she
         was  responsible  for  ensuring  that  the  Appellant  "washed  and
         functioned" and she also  sent  money  to  the  Appellant  but  was
         concerned  that  this  was  being  taken  away  by  others  in  the
         community.

     35. So far as we can see, MB did not give evidence to  Judge  Abebrese.
         There is no record of any oral evidence she gave at that  time  nor
         any finding made save that the Appellant "has a partner  and  child
         in this country and the Tribunal accept as credible the evidence in
         respect of the impact on the appellant in being removed from  them.
         The evidence before the Tribunal is that the  appellant  [and  that
         he] provided support for his child and partner,  [MB]".   The  only
         evidence recorded about the impact of  separation  from  MB  and  D
         appears to be that  from  one  of  the  doctors  who  records  that
         separation  from  his  son  and  girlfriend  was  exacerbating  the
         Appellant's mental health condition.  Judge Abebrese made  findings
         about the medical evidence at that time.  As  we  set  out  further
         below, the evidence was that of Dr  Labinjo  who  had  examined  OR
         while he was awaiting deportation and that  of  Dr  Bailey-Davidson
         who  had  seen  him  following  his  arrival  in  Jamaica.    Judge
         Abebrese's findings at [20] to [22] of the Second FtT Decision were
         as follows:

             "[20]     The tribunal after careful consideration of all  the
             evidence makes the following  findings.   The  Tribunal  finds
             that the evidence of Dr Labinjo is credible for the  following
             reasons.  Dr Labinjo in his letter dated 9  July  2013  to  Dr
             Thomas at the Sussex Partnership:

                  'I reviewed this gentleman following my initial report  of
                  11 June 2013 at which I made  a  diagnosis  of  depression
                  with   psychotic   features   which   were    particularly
                  exacerbated by  his  incarceration  and  particularly  the
                  separation from his young  son  and  girlfriend.   I  also
                  mentioned that [OR] had a depressive illness  before  [to]
                  detention, I was also able to corroborate this from his GP
                  records'

                  'I shall state that at this time I do  not  consider  this
                  man fit for detention, neither is he fit for travel.   His
                  depressive  illness  has  been  relatively  refractory  to
                  treatment and he is at risk of fatality.'

             [21]      The appellant was assessed further when  he  arrived
             in  Jamaica  by  Dr  Bailey-Davidson  who  is   a   Consultant
             Psychiatrist and she made the following conclusions which  the
             Tribunal finds credible in respect of the appellant's physical
             and mental condition

                  'He was admitted  to  Bellevue  Hospital  because  he  had
                  become withdrawn and was isolating himself.  At this  time
                  his  diagnosis  remains  as  depression   with   psychotic
                  features...[OR] has no known relatives in Jamaica  and  so
                  is limited in his adjustment to life in Jamaica.'

             [22]      It was submitted by the  respondents  representative
             Mr Briant that no medical reports had been prepared since  the
             appellant was removed from the United Kingdom.   The  Tribunal
             finds  that  the  reports  which  had  been  prepared  on  the
             appellant since his arrival in Jamaica were supportive of  the
             report which had been prepared by Dr Labinjo and  formed  part
             of a consistent  history  of  [the]  a  person  who  had  been
             diagnosed  as  defective  in  several  respects  mentally  and
             physically.   ...  The  Tribunal  accepts  as   credible   the
             submissions of Ms Harrison that the  appellant  was  suffering
             from a pre-existing condition before he was removed from  this
             country.  The condition as described by Dr Labinjo was  severe
             and that  the  psychotic  features  remained  in  place.   The
             evidence of Ms Sobers  suggest  that  the  evidence  not  only
             deterioration but also neglect and degrading.  The photographs
             provided by the appellant indicate that the  conditions  which
             the appellant resides in  is  degrading.   The  Tribunal  also
             finds it credible that the appellant  sleeps  outside  of  the
             residence.  Dr Labinjo in his report at  Paragraph  32  states
             that the appellant whilst he was in this country  was  already
             signs of not being able to respond to questions about his  son
             or his mum.  Dr Labinjo at Paragraph 34 of the report states:

                  'I have read the report of Ms Eva Forde  and  my  clinical
                  opinion is that [OR] has definitely not  improved  and  is
                  now psychotic as well, and this maybe the reason why he is
                  now on the anti-psychotic drug haloperidol'

             Furthermore, Dr Labinjo states at Paragraph 36 of  his  report
             and he states:

                  'I have seen the report by the Independent  Social  Worker
                  Ms Eva Forde who visited [OR] and have  gained  collateral
                  information from it.  She had spoken to [OR] Staff at  the
                  Shelter.  He was self neglecting  including  his  personal
                  hygiene.  This is a feature of clinical depression ... the
                  report also indicates that [OR] had attempted suicide  and
                  that due to this, and their inability to locate any shards
                  of glass from a broken mirror that  is  believed  to  have
                  been broken by [OR], he was removed from this area of  the
                  centre for his own safety and protection and to enable him
                  to receive more supervision and support.'

             The Tribunal noted that Dr  Labinjo  at  the  hearing  of  the
             appeal was still of the view that  based  on  the  information
             from other sources in Jamaica he was  of  the  view  that  the
             appellant was at present a significant high risk in respect of
             suicide.  The Tribunal  finds  on  the  evidence  provided  on
             balance a  credible  conclusion  of  the  appellant's  current
             mental state."

     36. We note Mr Anderson's objection to the use of the word  "degrading"
         in submissions  which,  quite  obviously  in  the  technical  sense
         relates to the application of Article 3 ECHR (which the  First-tier
         Tribunal found to be breached).  In having regard  to  the  passage
         cited above, we take the description into account only in the wider
         sense of conditions which are undignified and of very low standard.
         We do not intend by reference  to  that  passage  to  indicate  any
         agreement with the First-tier Tribunal's view that Article  3  ECHR
         is breached by reason of the  conditions  in  which  the  Appellant
         finds himself.

    THE DECISION

     37. We turn then to the evidence recorded in the Decision and what  the
         Tribunal had to say about it.

     38. We begin with the evidence  about  the  Appellant's  mental  health
         condition.   This  begins  with  the  Appellant's  referral  to   a
         psychiatrist, Dr Labinjo, whilst the Appellant was detained pending
         deportation.  The Appellant had tried to commit suicide on  3  July
         2013 by hanging himself from railings.  Dr Labinjo's conclusion was
         that the Appellant was not fit to fly or  be  detained.  He  should
         either be assessed under section 2 Mental Health Act or transferred
         to hospital under section 48 of that Act.  However, the  Respondent
         was then given advice by two  other  doctors  (Dr  Geraint  Thomas,
         doctor at Brook House Healthcare, and Dr Raj)  that  the  Appellant
         could be detained and was fit to fly.

     39. An application for judicial review challenging removal was  refused
         permission on the papers with  a  direction  that  renewal  of  the
         application should not act as a barrier to removal.  The  Appellant
         was refused an injunction by Mitting J  preventing  removal  on  11
         July 2013 and was removed on 12 July 2013. Permission  was  refused
         at an oral hearing on 14  August  2013.   Although  the  Respondent
         accepted that the  original  decision  to  deport  leading  to  the
         application for judicial review failed to provide  the  appropriate
         information about appeal rights and did not therefore conform  with
         the Immigration (Notices) Regulations  2003,  a  new  decision  was
         served on 28 August  2013  which  is  the  decision  under  appeal.
         Accordingly, we agree with Mr Anderson's submission that this is of
         no relevance to the issues we have to consider.

     40. We set out in full the Tribunal's summary of the evidence before it
         in the Decision as to the Appellant's mental state  and  conditions
         in Jamaica as at November 2014:

             "[18]     The Appellant has been living in Jamaica ever since,
             in undoubtedly poor conditions.  He lodged an  appeal  out  of
             country on 19 September 2013.  He has been staying  in  hostel
             for  homeless  men  called  the  Open  Arms  Centre.   He  was
             accommodated at first in a relatively clean and modern part of
             the hostel,but moved to a dormitory after a suicide attempt so
             that he could be better monitored.  The manager of the hostel,
             Mrs Grant, was given no information about his illness when  he
             arrived.  He was admitted to Bellevue Hospital for psychiatric
             treatment as an in-patient, but only after the intervention of
             Dr Labinjo.  We have seen photographs of the interior  of  the
             hostel.  Its condition is poor.  The Appellant sleeps  outside
             on the ground because his bed  is  infested  and  because  the
             other residents  have  threatened  him.   The  evidence  about
             whether,  and  if  so  how  effectively,  he  has  been  given
             medication for his illness is unclear, but it  seems  that  he
             has at times been prescribed medication for his  illness,  and
             has refused to take it,  and  at  times  not  been  given  any
             medication.

             [19]      A social worker who prepared a report after visiting
             the Appellant in January 2014 explained that he had been moved
             from much better  physical  accommodation  with  single  rooms
             because of fears that he was a suicide risk and a feeling that
             this could be better monitored if he stayed in the  dormitory.
             That  accommodation  is  cleaner  and  more  modern  than  the
             dormitory.  His assigned sleeping quarters are next  to  those
             of the resident supervisor.  Various activities are  available
             for the residents, but the  Appellant  takes  no  interest  in
             them.  Cooked food is provided  for  the  residents,  but  the
             Appellant does not  eat  it.   Dennis  Beckford,  one  of  the
             workers in the hostel, buys him dried food.  No-one is abusing
             him, but no-one is looking after him.  The social worker noted
             that Mrs Grant is "very helpful, open and accommodating".

             [20]      A family friend who visited him on 1 and 7 May  2014
             found him unkempt and unwashed, with  filthy  hair  and  feet,
             long dirty fingernails, and wearing filthy  clothes.   He  did
             not seem to be showering or bathing.   He  was  not  bothering
             about his hygiene or his appearance.  He was  very  withdrawn.
             The dormitory was  disgusting  and  insanitary.   Mr  Beckford
             tries to help him.

             [21]      There was recently a robbery  at  the  hostel.   The
             Appellant was held at gunpoint, according to  an  undated  and
             unsigned statement by his sister.  He has also been stabbed in
             an altercation.

             [22]      We were shown a very recent psychiatric report by Dr
             Sewell.  He interviewed and assessed the Appellant in Jamaica.
              His diagnosis is severe mental illness (major depression with
             psychotic features).  He lacks capacity.  He is at moderate to
             high risk of self harm.  His prognosis is poor."

    THE EVIDENCE BEFORE US

     41. As the Tribunal said, it had before it the then recent report of Dr
         Sewell dated 11 November 2014, prepared following an examination on
         3 October 2014.  We will say a little more  about  that  below  not
         least to put in context Dr Sewell's subsequent opinion.  We need to
         deal with all the evidence produced after the  hearing  leading  to
         the Decision and all evidence which goes  to  the  Article  8  ECHR
         issues which was not therefore considered in depth in the Decision.
          The  Tribunal  helpfully  summarised  at  [57]  and  [58]  of  the
         Decision, the factors to which we need to  have  regard  on  either
         side of the balance when  it  comes  to  reaching  our  assessment.
         Before we do that, though, we need to set out the evidence which is
         before us relating to those factors.

    The Medical Evidence

     42. It is convenient to begin with the medical evidence as the starting
         point is the position which  we  have  already  set  out  from  the
         previous decisions.

     43. In addition to the evidence of Dr Garwood, Dr Labinjo and Dr Bailey-
         Davidson to which we have already referred, we now have two reports
         from Dr Clayton Sewell  BSc  (Hons),  MBBS,  DM  (Psychiatry).   Dr
         Sewell is a Consultant General and Forensic Psychiatrist who  is  a
         Lecturer/Consultant in Forensic Psychiatry at the University of the
         West Indies, Mona and a  Sessional  Psychiatrist  employed  by  the
         Department of Correctional Services, Minister of National Security,
         Jamaica.  He  is  the  immediate  past  President  of  the  Jamaica
         Psychiatric Association.

     44. Dr Sewell has prepared two reports regarding OR, the first referred
         to above and dated 11 November 2014 and a further report  dated  21
         March 2019 following an examination on 7 March 2019.  Dr Sewell has
         diagnosed OR with "a severe  mental  illness  consisting  of  Major
         Depressive  Disorder,  recurrent  episode,  severe  with  Psychotic
         Features, based on the DSM 5".  His  second  report  notes  a  more
         impaired mental state than  existed  in  2014  with  more  negative
         symptoms  of  mental  illness.   He  opines  that  the  significant
         stressors for OR's illness are his detention in the UK, deportation
         and separation from his family.   Dr  Sewell  stays  in  the  first
         report that OR is at a moderate to high risk of  self-  harm.   His
         second report states that  this  is  now  a  moderate  risk.   Both
         reports place OR at a high risk  of  being  a  victim  of  harm  or
         violence from others.  That is in part based on the  fact  that  OR
         has been attacked in the past (see extract  from  the  Decision  at
         [40] above).

     45. As we have already observed, we have to consider the position as at
         the date of the hearing before us.  We have read Dr Sewell's  first
         report and take it into account.  However, it is more convenient to
         cite the content of his second report.

     46. We have regard to  what  Dr  Sewell  says  about  OR's  history  of
         treatment since being back in Jamaica.  OR was residing at the Open
         Arms Centre.  This is  a  Non-Governmental  Organisation  which  is
         partnered with various governmental organisations  in  Jamaica  and
         receives some funding from the  British  Government.   The  British
         High Commission in Jamaica is satisfied that it is regulated by the
         appropriate authorities in Jamaica (see Response to an  Information
         Request - Jamaica: Homeless shelters dated 21 March 2019 adduced by
         the Respondent). OR was described as keeping to himself and talking
         to himself, not  engaging  with  others  or  participating  in  any
         activities, hardly saying anything and talking nonsense, frequently
         asking about his  son,  refusing  to  sleep  inside  and  therefore
         sleeping outside in the bushes, having to be  forced  to  wash  and
         change his clothes and having  a  decreased  appetite.   Dr  Sewell
         mentions that OR received treatment on one occasion for a few weeks
         at Bellevue Mental Hospital.  Dr Sewell  notes  that  OR  has  been
         prescribed various  medications  at  various  times  but  does  not
         specifically say whether any such medication  has  been  prescribed
         since OR has been back in Jamaica.  As we note below, in any event,
         even if he is prescribed medication, OR appears to lack ability  to
         realise that he ought to take that medication.

     47. Dr Sewell was only able to examine OR in  March  2019  through  the
         intervention of Mr Beckford, who had tried to help OR when  he  was
         at the Open  Arms  Centre.   Under  the  heading  "Relevant  Recent
         History", Dr Sewell says:

             "According to Mr Dennis Beckford, [OR]  was  attacked  with  a
             knife  by  another  man,  while  at  the  Open  Arms   Centre,
             sustaining a laceration to  his  forearm.   [OR]  subsequently
             left Open Arms around 2015 and since then has seen a worsening
             of his symptoms. [OR] has received no further psychiatric care
             and  it  is  unknown  if  he  has  had  any  recent   physical
             altercations.

             [OR] reportedly stayed at a home in Vineyard  Town,  Kingston,
             where Mr Beckford would bring things for him but on  the  last
             occasion that Mr Beckford visited he was  told  that  [OR]  no
             longer resided there. Dennis Beckford subsequently  would  see
             [OR] wandering on the streets of Downtown, Kingston.  Whenever
             Mr Beckford tried to interact with [OR],  he  would  push  him
             away and ignore him.  Mr Beckford would observe rashes to  the
             feet of [OR] but no obvious injuries.  [OR], according  to  Mr
             Beckford has been observed to be inappropriately  dressed  and
             dishevelled in appearance, as well as smelling of urine in the
             past.

             Mr Beckford was unaware of [OR's]  current  address  but  says
             that he went looking for [OR] at St.  William  Grant  Part  in
             Downtown, Kingston as he has  passed  him  there  on  multiple
             occasions in the past.  Fortunately, he saw him there and  had
             to hold on to him and bring him to be seen for the purposes of
             this report."

     48. Dr Sewell describes OR's presentation in March 2019 thus:

             "Appearance and Behaviour

             At the time of the interview, [OR] appeared his  chronological
             age and was dressed in a long black hooded winter  coat,  jean
             shorts, dirty socks and slippers.  His hair  was  braided  but
             had become dishevelled with bits of grass  in  it.   Prior  to
             being seen he was observed standing in a corner of the waiting
             area.  He was malodourous and appeared  to  have  lost  weight
             when compared to his previous visit  in  2014.   He  initially
             stood outside the office and was reluctant to enter.   He  had
             to be guided into the office though he did not actively resist
             entering.  He was eventually encouraged to take  a  seat.   He
             sat hesitantly and appeared to have no interest in interacting
             with me.  He made no eye-contact throughout the interview  and
             preferred to stare at the adjacent wall.  He did  not  respond
             to his name being called or to physical contact.

             Speech, Thought and Perception

             He had no verbalisation and when asked  a  question  he  would
             provide  no  verbal  or  physical  response.    His   observed
             emotional expressions  were  flat  with  no  changes  observed
             during  the  entire  interview.    He   appeared   unable   to
             concentrate or focus on the  questions  being  asked  and  was
             clearly preoccupied  in  thought.   He  displayed  significant
             negative symptoms of his mental illness which appeared  to  be
             impacting significantly  on  his  ability  to  appreciate  the
             situation and respond appropriately.  There was  no  behaviour
             during the interview to suggest possible current homicidal  or
             suicidal ideas.  He  appeared  distracted  and  likely  to  be
             experiencing hallucinations.

             Cognition

             He did not appear to be oriented in time or place and did  not
             respond to his name being called.   [OR]'s  insight,  judgment
             and abstract thinking appeared to be  severely  impaired.   He
             displayed obvious impairment in  his  ability  to  comprehend,
             follow instructions and  to  complete  any  tasks  during  the
             interview.  His interpersonal skills were also very poor.   At
             the end of the interview he went back to the waiting area  and
             to lie down on the floor."

     49. Having set out the diagnosis and stressors to which we have already
         referred, Dr  Sewell  provides  the  following  detail  about  OR's
         current level of function:

             "...  He   is   currently   having   considerable   difficulty
             controlling his emotions following  stressful  events  in  his
             life and  appears  to  display  regression  (reversion  to  an
             earlier stage of  development  in  the  face  of  unacceptable
             emotions) and repression (unconscious blocking of unacceptable
             thoughts,  feelings  and  impulses).   He  is   also   clearly
             psychotic with disorganised behaviour and hallucinations.

             OR has been observed to be displaying behaviour  suggesting  a
             depressed  mood,  including  withdrawn   behaviour   (sleeping
             outside, not communicating) and tearfulness.  He has  markedly
             diminished interest or  pleasure  in  almost  all  activities,
             including those of  daily  living  (being  forced  to  bathe).
             There is also significant psychomotor retardation (slowing  of
             thought and physical movement), signs of a loss of energy with
             diminished ability to think or concentrate.  These  signs  are
             as a direct result of his mental Major Depressive Disorder.

             During the process of his deportation and following  that,  he
             has difficulty functioning physically and  emotionally  as  he
             did prior to  these  experiences.   The  experience  has  also
             impacted negatively on his supportive relationships  with  his
             young son  and  other  members  of  his  family.   He  appears
             troubled from  time  to  time  by  discomforting  memories  or
             emotions, especially in response to reminders of the  life  he
             has left behind  him  in  the  United  Kingdom.   This  severe
             distress and lack of social support  has  resulted  in  severe
             impairment in his social and occupational  functioning.   This
             stressor is  continuous,  and  he  continues  to  be  severely
             impacted by his illness.

             He displayed  significant  fear,  anxiety  and  based  on  the
             history  provided  had  displayed  great  distress  at   being
             separated from his son.  He still appears to be suffering as a
             result of the loss of family  support,  the  symptoms  of  his
             mental illness and the inadequate biological and  psychosocial
             remedies being provided to him at present..."

     50. Dr Sewell goes on to deal with the treatment which OR is  receiving
         in Jamaica as follows:

             "In my  opinion,  [OR]  currently  does  not  appear  to  have
             adequate resources or  expertise  being  provided  to  him  to
             effectively manage  his  mental  health  condition  given  his
             current severe level of impairment.

             The Community Mental  Health  Services  remain  challenged  in
             terms of their staff and medications.  This has  led  to  [OR]
             falling through the gaps in service  delivery,  especially  as
             there is no one to provide the  social  support  necessary  to
             facilitate his recovery.  Such necessary social support  would
             including  finding  [OR]  and  physically  bringing   him   to
             appointments (as Dennis Beckford had to do on  March  7  2019)
             and  to  administer  medications.   This  is  not  within  the
             capacity of the CMHS in St Catherine, which results in greater
             reliance on family  members  to  facilitate  the  housing  and
             continued care of [OR]  even  if  compulsory  acute  care  was
             provided.  In the  absence  of  any  such  family  support  in
             Jamaica, [OR] appears to have gone a number of  years  without
             any treatment and there is clear evidence of deterioration  in
             his mental and physical health."

     51. As to prognosis, Dr Sewell has this to say:

             "The  prognosis  for  [OR]   is   poor   given   the   present
             circumstances.  Without medication, psychotherapy  and  social
             support his symptoms will  continue  to  worsen  resulting  in
             further disorganised behaviour and poor self-care.  Access  to
             the state social  support  service  is  extremely  limited  in
             Jamaica, requiring families to play a  greater  role.   [OR]'s
             presence in Jamaica without his family puts him at risk,  even
             after acute involuntary treatment.  With the limited care  and
             as a result of his ill-health the following sequence of events
             are likely to occur:

                o He is likely to be targeted by others in the community.

                o He will spend more time on the streets of Kingston.

                o There he is likely to experience further victimization and
                  decline in his physical health.

                o He is at risk of running afoul of the law or being accused
                  of committing a crime (usually a minor offence) and ending
                  up in a correctional facility that is  currently  not  fit
                  for the purpose for which it was designed.  This is likely
                  to be associated with re-traumatisation and poor  outcomes
                  as far as [OR]'s mental and physical health are concerned.

                o The impact of these possible  experiences  may  extend  to
                  worsening  feelings  of  hopelessness  and   helplessness,
                  increasing his risk of self-harm.

                o The delays in the criminal justice system in Jamaica  will
                  likely result in him spending an inordinately long  period
                  of time before he is suitable for trial.

                o During  that  time,  he  would  be  subjected  to  further
                  inadequate care as there is no full-time  psychiatrist  in
                  the prisons and limited medication availability."

         We should note that we were not informed that OR has committed  any
         crimes since returning to Jamaica and what Dr Sewell says  in  this
         regard appears to be linked to the possibility that  OR  will  have
         resort to crime because of the situation in which he finds  himself
         rather than any observation based on continuing risk  of  offending
         on OR's part.  To that extent, Dr Sewell's opinion appears  to  run
         contrary to the recounted history of his  time  at  the  Open  Arms
         Centre where it is said that "[t]here were no reports of him  being
         aggressive towards others and was said to be more inclined to  walk
         away from them".  It is also there observed that OR  had  "made  no
         clear attempts to harm himself."

     52.  Based  on  Dr  Sewell's  assessment,  he  provides  the  following
         recommendations:

             "... 1.   [OR] should immediately resume psychiatric treatment
             to include the provision of the appropriate antidepressant and
             antipsychotic medications (he was  referred  to  the  Bellevue
             Hospital after being evaluated).

             2.  He should also  receive  Supportive  Psychotherapy,  which
             could then be  expanded  as  his  symptoms  remit  to  include
             Cognitive-Behaviour Therapy.

             3.  He would also benefit  from  improved  social  support  to
             include:

                  a.   Adequate financial assistance

                  b.   An individual to appropriately manage his finances.

                  c.   Appointment of an  individual  to  manage  his  legal
                      affairs.

                  d.   Appropriate supportive living arrangements.

             4.  Greater family support to include regular physical contact
             with his family, particularly being able to interact with  his
             son.

             5.  Given the lack of any family support in  Jamaica  and  his
             inability to have direct contact with his family in the UK who
             would otherwise be  providing  that  support,  [OR]  will  not
             recover from his mental illness  while  in  Jamaica,  and  his
             symptoms will not improve and may  well  continue  to  further
             deteriorate.   Even  if  adequate  psychiatric  services  were
             available which I  am  afraid  they  are  not,  in  this  case
             effective access and use of them requires the  assistance  and
             support of his family and a safe and secure  environment.   It
             is therefore vital, in my  view  that  [OR]  is  permitted  to
             return to the UK where he can resume physical contact with his
             son and receive the support of his family, in order to stand a
             chance of any sustainable recovery."

    The Appellant's Relationship with Family Members in the UK

     53. As will be evident from the medical evidence, the support on  which
         OR's treatment and improvement is said to depend  is  that  of  his
         family and not of his partner.  As such, we begin with the evidence
         from his family members.  We heard oral evidence from  KWS  who  is
         also acting as OR's litigation friend and from KR, OR's sister with
         whom he has a close bond.

    KWS

     54. KWS has provided three statements in these proceedings.   In  those
         statements, she describes the family circumstances as follows.  She
         is the eldest of the three children.  OR and KR  have  a  different
         father but the same mother, DH.  DH had come to the UK  before  the
         children leaving them in Jamaica.  KWS was separated from OR and KR
         and went to live with a family friend.  She came to the  UK  before
         OR and KR.  She notes that OR and KR are particularly close because
         KR had responsibility for looking after OR when  DH  left  Jamaica.
         We will come on to deal  with  what  happened  at  that  time  when
         setting out KR's evidence.

     55. KWS says  that  OR's  mental  health  problems  started  after  his
         imprisonment for the rape.  She acted as his carer.   She  is  also
         the registered carer for KR who has mental health problems  of  her
         own.   KWS  ensured  that  OR  took  his  medication  and  attended
         appointments.  She had been doing this since 2008.  Regarding  OR's
         situation in Jamaica, in her  first  statement,  undated  but  made
         before May 2014, KWS says this:

             "[13]     [OR]'s removal  has  affected  us  all  very  badly.
             Jamaica is not his home.  He is a foreigner there.  He came to
             the UK when he was very young and has been  here  ever  since.
             We have no contacts and no family left in Jamaica and we  have
             no one to assist him.  [OR] needs help with his daily life and
             he cannot manage on his  own.   We,  as  a  family,  are  very
             grateful to the help from Dennis from the Open Arms Centre who
             has been willing to keep us informed and to try and assist  us
             but there is a limit to what he can do.  He has made it  clear
             to us that he cannot meet [OR]'s needs, and that where  he  is
             at the moment is totally unsuitable.   [OR]  needs  much  more
             help than he is getting.  Dennis is very  worried  about  him,
             his mental state, he thinks he will harm  himself  and  he  is
             very upset that [OR] is now sleeping outside  of  the  hostel.
             There is a limit on what Dennis can do: he has been in serious
             trouble with the manager of the hostel, Mrs Gant, who has told
             him that he should not be getting involved  in  responding  to
             [OR]'s solicitors and that his  job  is  on  the  line  if  he
             carries on giving help or information...."

     56. KWS goes on to describe how, when OR is unwell  he  withdraws  into
         himself and refuses to interact with people because  he  is  scared
         that they wish him harm.  At those times, he will  not  look  after
         himself and stops eating properly.  By contrast, when  he  is  well
         she describes how he interacts and fully engages  with  the  family
         and others, plays with his son and  takes  good  care  of  himself.
         Although KWS accepts that OR had mental health problems  whilst  in
         the UK, she says that with family support, he was able to recover.

     57. She describes her communications with OR since he has been back  in
         Jamaica as "too upsetting" so has left it to DH  and  KR  to  speak
         with  him.   She  says  it  has  become  "impossible"  to  have   a
         conversation.   In her second and third statements, she  says  that
         she has little direct contact.   OR  answers  the  phone  but  says
         nothing so they cannot have a conversation with him.

     58. KWS says in her first statement that OR was taken for treatment  at
         Bellevue Hospital in November 2013, following the  intervention  of
         Dr Labinjo.  She describes OR's reliance on Mr  Beckford  for  help
         with getting food etc but reiterates that he is not  able  to  help
         much because of his manager's  objection  to  him  doing  so.   She
         provides some money each month when she is able.  She is a teacher.
          She said that she sends about 50 per month and sometimes more.

     59. KWS provides evidence in her third statement about an armed robbery
         at the Open Arms Centre in September 2014 when OR was attacked. She
         also describes how she was informed by Mrs Grant of the  Open  Arms
         Centre on 26 October 2014 that OR had been evicted  because  of  an
         incident when OR was stabbed.  As such, he  lost  access  to  those
         facilities.

     60. As a person with indefinite leave to  remain  (and  now  a  British
         Citizen), KWS accepts that in theory she could go to Jamaica to see
         OR.  However, she says that she cannot afford to do  so,  and  also
         finds flying extremely difficult as she has claustrophobia.

    KR

     61. KR has provided three witness statements in these  proceedings  for
         previous hearings and provided an updating statement dated 20 March
         2019.

     62. In her first statement, KR describes how DH  left  her  and  OR  in
         Jamaica when KR was aged twelve and OR seven.  They were left  with
         their father.  They forged a very close bond as a result  of  their
         experiences.   Their  father  neglected  them,  and   they   became
         homeless.  They were sent to live with one of  DH's  friends  whose
         sons abused OR and KR.  KR was sexually,  physically  and  mentally
         abused.  OR was beaten and bullied.  The children at school laughed
         at OR and KR and bullied them.

     63. Since coming to the UK, KR and OR had lived  with  DH.   KWS  lives
         nearby.

     64. KR says that she was not aware of her and OR's  immigration  status
         until 2008 when OR was arrested.  At that time,  she  and  DH  were
         also told to report.

     65. Following deportation, KR says that it has been difficult to  speak
         to OR because either he does not answer the phone or  won't  speak.
         At first, he used to  just  repeat  things  and  did  not  seem  to
         understand.  Now he rarely talks at all. She speaks of him being in
         a "locked away state". In her second statement, she  said  that  OR
         had been slightly more  communicative  following  a  visit  from  a
         relative to which we refer below but that was the first time for  a
         long while (the second statement was made in May 2014).

     66. KR also says that OR was frightened of being put  in  hospital  as,
         when he is ill, he becomes distrustful of people.

     67. KR confirms that there are no family members in Jamaica.  OR has no
         friends or relatives there.  She confirms that Dennis Beckford  has
         helped OR but has got into trouble with the manager of  the  hostel
         for helping.

     68. KR provides more information about the Open Arms Centre.  She  says
         that the first part is where people are placed when deported.   She
         describes that part as being looked after and well resourced.   She
         says that the part to which OR was moved following  deportation  is
         for homeless men and is in a "very shocking state".  She says  that
         OR told her that he could not stay in the dormitory  where  he  was
         put because other men threatened him as they considered him  to  be
         British.

     69. KR does however say in her first statement that  OR  was  receiving
         medication.  She also confirms that OR was in Bellevue Hospital for
         most of December 2013.  KR was concerned about the treatment  which
         OR was receiving, particularly since a nurse who visited him  there
         left KR a message expressing concerns about him and  the  treatment
         he was receiving.  There is no further information in this  regard.
         In  her  second  statement,  however,  she  says  that  it  is  her
         understanding that OR is not taking medication regularly.

     70. KR had a breakdown in 2011 and was treated  as  an  in-patient  for
         seven weeks.  She has been  diagnosed  with  post-traumatic  stress
         disorder, bulimia, bi-polar disorder and agoraphobia.  KWS confirms
         that KR has ongoing mental health issues.  KR  has  been  seeing  a
         psychologist every week since June 2013 and  continues  to  receive
         medication.  She has been particularly affected by OR's deportation
         and her concerns for  his  well-being  now  that  he  is  alone  in
         Jamaica.  According to her second statement, she suffered a relapse
         when she had to be taken to Whipps Cross Hospital on  an  emergency
         basis.  She describes further problems in her third statement  made
         in November 2014. That was following the armed robbery at the  Open
         Arms Centre.

     71. In her most recent statement for the hearing before us, KR confirms
         that she and DH now have limited leave to remain granted  following
         appeals in October 2015.  They now have limited leave to remain  to
         2021. In relation to her own  situation,  she  is  unable  to  work
         because of her mental health problems.  She has access to benefits.
          Between them, the family send OR about 50 per month.

     72. KR no longer tries to have conversations  with  OR  because  he  is
         "barely communicative" and because she also finds it too  upsetting
         to speak  to  him.   They  communicate  by  the  "occasional  emoji
         message" via WhatsApp.  She says that KWS and DH still have contact
         but OR just repeats things and does not engage in  a  conversation.
         She says that the family can do little if anything to help  without
         direct face to face contact.  She told us that, when OR was  living
         in the UK and was suffering from illness, she would get him up  and
         ensure he ate, washed and brushed his teeth and cleaned  his  room.
         KWS would take both of them to appointments.  KR would then  ensure
         that OR took his medication and KWS would remind her to do this  if
         she were not there.

     73. We also had limited evidence that OR  has  recently  moved  into  a
         private house in Jamaica.  KR described the  circumstances  leading
         up to the provision of this accommodation as follows:

             "13.      [OR] is currently living in a private  house.   This
             was arranged through our paternal aunt [N] who  lives  in  the
             UK.  [OR]'s and my father lives in the United States.  I  have
             had no contact with him until very recently when he  contacted
             me as I am having problems obtaining a birth certificate  from
             the Jamaican  authorities.   Our  father  has  never  been  to
             Jamaica to see [OR]  but  on  [N]'s  request  he  did  provide
             details of an old friend of his who may  be  able  to  provide
             [OR] with a room.  This lady did give him a room and [OR]  has
             been living there since around October last year  although  we
             do not really know how much time  he  actually  spends  there.
             The house is in the Independence City area of St Catherine  as
             I understand.  I understand from conversations with my  mother
             and [KWS] that sometimes it is difficult for him there as  the
             woman often calls him stupid and other  insulting  terms,  and
             she certainly does not support him in any  sense,  apart  from
             allowing him to stay in the room in her house."

         We observe that it is suggested in Dr Sewell's most recent  report,
         based on what he was told by Mr Beckford, that OR may no longer  be
         living in this accommodation and may, once again, be living on  the
         streets.

    DH

     74. DH, OR's mother, came to the UK in 1996.  Her own  mother  came  to
         the UK when DH was aged one year but DH remained  living  with  her
         grandmother in Jamaica.  OR and KR lived with her in  the  UK  from
         1998 until OR was deported.  She confirms that OR's  mental  health
         problems  became  evident  after  his  release  from   imprisonment
         following the rape.  She says  that,  when  ill,  OR  would  become
         withdrawn but his condition was stabilised by medication.

     75. DH says that OR must  have  been  very  ill  following  deportation
         because he would not otherwise  have  been  admitted  to  a  mental
         hospital.  She says however that mental hospitals  in  Jamaica  are
         not good places. She confirms KR's evidence about the conditions at
         the Open Arms Centre and the treatment of OR by  others  who  don't
         like him because he is English.

     76. In her  second  statement,  DH  describes  her  own  mental  health
         problems with depression for which she  receives  medication.   She
         also confirms that KR's mental health has deteriorated  since  OR's
         deportation.

    [SAG]

     77. The best direct evidence we have about OR's  situation  in  Jamaica
         (beyond the medical reports) comes from Ms [G].  She is  originally
         Jamaican but now a British citizen and a  friend  of  OR's  mother.
         She visited OR during a visit to Jamaica to see her family  in  May
         2014.   She visited him twice at the Open Arms  Centre.   She  says
         this about him:

             "5. As I have said, I have known [OR] for many years and I was
             very upset at the difference in him.  It was  like  he  was  a
             different person from the one I had known in the UK.   He  was
             unkempt, his hair was  filthy  and  uncombed,  his  feet  were
             filthy and he was generally in a very poor state.  His clothes
             were filthy.  His fingernails were very long and  very  dirty.
             I do not think he has cut them since he had been there.  I cut
             them for him.  I do not think that he is showering or bathing.
              He has to pay to have his clothes washed and I do  not  think
             he has done this very often.  He did have some cleaner clothes
             which I made him put on - he appears just not to be  bothering
             at all about his personal hygiene and appearance.  He was just
             like a tramp or homeless person you can see on the streets.

             6.  He was also extremely withdrawn.  He was very reluctant to
             talk to me at all at first.  At first I was not even  sure  he
             recognised me as when Mrs Grant from the hostel asked  him  if
             he knew me he did not answer.  She had already told me that he
             hardly spoke but even  so  I  was  shocked  that  he  did  not
             immediately answer me as I am hardly a  stranger  to  him.   I
             thought he would be glad to see me but he did not  react.   It
             was very upsetting.

             ...

             9.  ... I saw the dormitory section for myself.  This is where
             [OR] is living.   The  conditions  there  are  disgusting  and
             unsanitary.  The dormitory is over run by cockroaches and bugs
             and I can see that it would be a disgusting place to stay.

             10. [OR] told me that he does not stay  in  the  dormitory  at
             nights but sleeps outside the dormitory  in  the  garden.   He
             also told me that the dormitory is locked in the day  time  so
             he has not option but to stay outside.  [OR] told me  that  he
             used to sleep on  the  verandah  which  is  just  outside  the
             dormitory but Mrs Grant has now put a lot of  flower  pots  on
             the verandah so he can not sleep there.  He also told me  that
             he used to sit on a bench most of the day and then he  started
             sleeping on the bench as well.  But  recently  Mrs  Grant  has
             stopped this as well: she has had the bench sawn in half so he
             can not sleep there.  He must now sleep on the  bare  concrete
             and he has no bedding.

             11. I was very upset when I first saw  [OR].   Mrs  Grant  and
             other staff there commented that I was the  first  person  who
             had visited him from the UK and they asked where his  Mum  was
             and why no-one else had visited him.  I said it was because he
             had no-one in Jamaica to turn to.  I was so upset  by  all  of
             this that I started to cry.

             ...

             12. One of the other men there, another man from Britain, told
             me that [OR] was also picked on and laughed at by  the  others
             as he did not stand up for himself and never said anything  to
             anyone.  I got the sense that he was  bullied  there.   Others
             would not want to be near him when he is in such a state.

             ...

             18. I feel desperate for [DH] and her family.  They  are  good
             people and I have known them for a very long time.  It  deeply
             upset and shocked me seeing [OR] in that situation and  I  can
             only imagine how awful it is for them to know  about  what  is
             happening to him.  He is in a terrible state and I do not  see
             how he can get out of it.  He urgently needs to be back  being
             looked after by his family and with proper medical care in the
             UK."

    [EB]

     78. We were also particularly struck by the witness statement from OR's
         solicitor, [EB] dated 20 March 2019.  We  infer  from  the  content
         that it was intended to  demonstrate  that  OR  lacks  capacity  in
         relation to the conduct of these  proceedings.   However,  it  also
         goes to confirm the evidence about OR's lack of  communication  and
         mental health condition currently.

     79. Ms [B] is a solicitor with Bindmans LLP.   She  has  acted  for  OR
         since 2014.  She spoke to him on two occasions, on 7 and 8 February
         2019.  What she says about the first of those conversations gives a
         flavour of the difficulties encountered:

             "4. I rang him but he did not answer so I sent him a  WhatsApp
             message to ask when was a good time to ring him.  I said in my
             WhatsApp message "This is Liz in London.  When is a good  time
             to ring?".  I did not receive a reply.  A few moments later  I
             rang again and this time the phone was answered.  I asked if I
             was speaking to [OR] and the person I was speaking to did  not
             respond.  I introduced myself by saying I was [EB] and I  said
             I am working on your case in London about whether you can come
             back.  There was then a silence until the speaker, a man, said
             "Are you outside mam?".  He repeated this twice.  I said  that
             I was in London and I was ringing him from  London.   I  asked
             him if he knew who I was.  There  was  no  response.   He  was
             making a strange noise and I could not  tell  whether  he  was
             laughing or crying.  He then suddenly said,  "Hello  mam".   I
             said hello and asked if he was [OR].  He did  not  answer  and
             did not speak.  There was then silence.

             5.  The silence was suddenly broken by him saying, "Hello mam"
             which he repeated three times but said nothing more.  I  asked
             if that was [OR].  The answer was, "Hello mam".  I said that I
             am his solicitor in the UK working on his case.   He  made  no
             immediate response but then said, "Are you  outside  mam?"   I
             said no, I was in London.  He made the  same  noise,  a  small
             laugh/cry and then he went quiet again.

             6.  I then said I want to talk to him about his case in the UK
             and about his appeal.  His response was, "Hello mam".  I asked
             him if he understood that he still had a case in London  about
             his removal and possibility of returning  here.   He  did  not
             respond other than to make the same sound.  I asked him if  he
             was upset or he was laughing.  He did not  reply.   I  said  I
             would try and ring him the following day.  There was no  reply
             to begin with and then  I  heard  a  very  small  voice,  very
             quietly say, "Yes."  I said I was going now and I would  speak
             to him the next day.

             7.  As I rang off I thought I heard him  say  something  so  I
             immediately rang back.  The phone was answered  but  again  he
             said nothing at first.  He was continuing to make the  noises,
             either the small laugh or the small  crying  noise.   He  then
             said, "Are you outside mam?"  I said, "No I'm not outside".  I
             said "I will ring you tomorrow."  He then said "Hello mam".  I
             said, "Do you know why I'm ringing you?"  Again the same noise
             but no words.  I said I would ring him the  next  day.   Again
             there was no reply just the same sounds and words."

     80. The report of that conversation is consistent  with  evidence  from
         OR's family members about the inability to hold a conversation with
         him because he simply repeats something which bears no relation  to
         the content of the question asked.

    The Appellant's Relationship with MB and D

     81. We turn then to the relationship between OR and MB, the  mother  of
         D, and between OR and D.

    MB

     82. We begin with MB's own evidence.  MB has provided three  statements
         in these proceedings, two for the previous hearing and an  updating
         statement for the hearing before us.

     83. At the time of her first statement signed on 27 November  2013,  MB
         says that she and OR had known each other for some years and had  a
         relationship for about a year.  They broke up before D was born but
         had reconciled by the time OR was deported.  MB confirms  that  she
         and OR did not  live  together.   He  lived  with  his  mother  and
         sisters; she lived with her mother. At the time he was deported she
         says that she "hoped that we had a future together.  I am  now  not
         sure what the future holds for us."

     84. MB confirms in her statement that she  has  learning  difficulties.
         She can read and write but she cannot count money and so her mother
         controlled her money.  She moved out in 2009  when  she  was  in  a
         relationship with another man who is the father of her daughter but
         moved back to her mother's house in 2011.   MB  also  has  bi-polar
         disorder for which she is prescribed medication.  By  the  time  of
         her second statement, she had moved from her mother's house and was
         living on her own with D and her daughter.

     85. Most of MB's evidence concerns OR's relationship with D.  She  says
         that OR was a very good father and wanted to be part of  D's  life.
         He had always been an active parent even when she and OR  were  not
         together.  She says that D "loves him very much".  She says that  D
         calls OR "his super Dad".

     86. In terms of the impact on D of OR's deportation, MB  says  this  in
         her first statement:

             "19.      Since [OR] was deported [D] has  not  been  himself.
             He has shown aggressive behaviour  which  had  never  happened
             before.  He is not as happy as he was: he misses his Dad a lot
             and he wants his Dad back.  [D] had been referred to the child
             psychiatrist because of his reaction to his Dad's deportation.
              I know he misses his Dad a lot and he needs him, just like he
             needs me, but I don't want him to have to see people unless it
             is  necessary.   I  don't  like  the  idea  of  him  seeing  a
             psychiatrist when he is only 5.

             20. I am sure [OR] misses [D].  He loves  him  very  much  and
             although they speak regularly on the phone it is not the same.
              [OR] was used to looking after him every week, for four  days
             each week and every other weekend so they spent a lot of  time
             together.  This is a huge change for both of  them.   I  think
             the person who has lost most through [OR]  being  deported  is
             [D].

             21. [D] knows that his Dad was deported and  can't  understand
             why someone would have decided to do that.  It  has  made  him
             very angry with the police who he blames for his Dad being  in
             Jamaica.   I  find  it  very  hard  to  try  to  give  him  an
             explanation of what has happened.  I don't want  to  tell  him
             too much as he is too young.

             22. I also need [OR] back.   I  don't  want  to  be  a  single
             parent, I never did.  I want [OR] to be help me bring  [D]  up
             and to share the responsibility for [D].  That can't happen if
             [OR] is in Jamaica."

     87. That latter point  is  followed  up  in  her  second  statement  as
         follows:

             "7. I said in my earlier statement that I need [OR] back as  I
             do not want to be  a  single  parent  and  I  want  help  with
             bringing [D] up.  That is right.  I very much want to be  able
             to have [OR] here for [D]'s sake.  I  do  not  know  what  the
             future holds for me and [OR] but I do know  for  certain  that
             [D] needs his dad and [OR] should be here to take that  active
             role."

         She reiterates that point in her most recent  statement  by  saying
         that she does not know what the future would be for her and  OR  if
         he returned but she does know that he  was  committed  to  being  a
         father to D and if he was helped with his mental health,  he  would
         once again be the "super dad" for D that he once was.

     88. In her second statement, MB describes how D  has  been  writing  to
         everyone, including the Prime Minister to ask for his father to  be
         allowed to come home.  She describes the  communication  which  she
         and D have with OR in her statement.  She  says  that  OR  is  very
         quiet and very rarely speaks.  He does say a few words to D to  say
         that he is alright, but MB does not believe that he is.

     89. MB's most recent statement for the purposes of the  hearing  before
         us provides more detail about the impact of OR's deportation  on  D
         as follows:

             "2. On a day-to-day basis [D] seems to be managing okay, but I
             know he sorely misses his dad.  [D] is increasingly closed  in
             about his feelings and it is difficult  to  know  what  he  is
             thinking or feeling.  He will simply say  things  like  he  is
             'okay', but I do not think that he is.

             3.  [D] has had problems at school and the  school  have  been
             worried  about  his  behaviour  and  attitudes   towards   his
             schooling.  He has shown periods of anger, losing his  temper,
             throwing things, eg on one occasion he threw the PE  equipment
             about and then stormed off.  There have been  calls  from  the
             school and a number of meetings about him and my Mum has taken
             over dealing with the school for me as  I  have  struggled  to
             understand what the school are saying to me so it is best that
             my Mum does this for me and [D].  The  school  have  put  some
             extra rules around for [D] to help him with his behaviour such
             as limiting his play time.

             4.  He used to go to see [OR]'s family a lot but I  know  when
             he's there he really feels the  absence  of  his  dad  and  he
             misses him.  He has stopped going as it was  making  him  very
             unhappy.  [D] is an emotional child  although  he  won't  talk
             about his feelings and says he is fine when  he  is  not.   He
             often cries when his feelings get on top  of  him  because  he
             does not know how to deal with them.  I struggle to  know  how
             best to help [D] but I do know that if his Dad  was  here  [D]
             would be much happier.

             5.  I don't think [D] ever talks about his Dad to his  friends
             or at school.  He has become closed about his feelings for his
             Dad.  He spends a lot of time at home with me.  He  gets  very
             upset when his sister [S] goes off to see her dad  because  he
             does not have his own dad here.

             6.  [D] and his father definitely continue to have a bond.   I
             know [D] desperately wants his Dad back in the UK.  They  have
             contact by WhatsApp messages and occasional  calls,  but  very
             little is said during these calls since  [OR]  barely  speaks,
             and says only one or two words, and often repeats them.  Every
             child needs their Dad, but these conversations usually do  not
             make much sense so I feel it is confusing for [D] to  actually
             speak  to  [OR],  which  is  why  telephone  contact   is   so
             occasional.  This lack of any contact with [D] is really  very
             distressing for him, and for me."

     90. MB also says that she does not think that D has any  mental  health
         problems.  She considers that the problems  he  has  would  not  be
         helped by counselling.  She says that the only thing which can make
         D better is his father being returned to the UK.

    Other Family Members

     91. OR's mother and sisters  have  also  provided  evidence  about  the
         relationship between OR and his son.   KWS in her  first  statement
         describes the bond between OR and D as  "very  close  and  loving".
         She says that she saw "a real change" in OR when D was  born.   She
         says that "[D] gives [OR] purpose.  From [D]'s point  of  view  his
         dad is everything.  Now that [OR]  is  in  Jamaica  [D]  is  really
         suffering."

     92. KR confirms in her statements that OR is a good father to  D.   Due
         to OR's own experiences, he was determined that D should  not  grow
         up without a father.  She says that D has been "really affected" by
         OR's deportation.  D talks about OR all the time and does  drawings
         for him and writes him letters.  However, even at the time  of  the
         first statement, KR noted that OR was so ill he no longer spoke  to
         D.

     93. In terms of the impact on D of OR's deportation, KR  says  that  he
         has become very angry about his father's deportation.  He has  said
         that he hates the police because they took  his  father  away.   KR
         also reports that D has said his friends laugh at  him  because  he
         does not have his father.  She  says  that  the  family  were  very
         worried about D's behaviour and took him to the GP who referred him
         to CAMHS.  As we have already noted, however, that referral was not
         followed through as MB objected to it.

     94. In her most recent statement, KR says that OR's  family  no  longer
         see D because he finds it difficult to see them because his  father
         is not there.  He no longer visits them.  They still  have  contact
         by phone or text and give him presents as if from his  father.   KR
         says that MB and D still have contact with OR via WhatsApp, but she
         thinks this is likely to be very limited because  of  OR's  current
         state.

     95. DH also describes OR as a "very, very good Dad"  to  D.   She  says
         that D "was  the  best  thing  that  ever  happened  to  [OR]"  and
         describes things they used to do together.  She says that D  was  a
         very positive factor in  OR's  life.   She  describes  D  as  "very
         miserable" without OR and that D's behaviour has been impacted.

    The Appellant's Private Life

     96. We have no witness statement from OR himself.  He gave evidence  to
         the Tribunal in his earlier appeal, but we have not  been  provided
         with any witness statements from that appeal.  We note what is said
         about the evidence at that time.  The Tribunal had  no  details  of
         any  legitimate  employment.   There  was  an  indication  that  OR
         proposed to enrol in further education.  We have already  mentioned
         the findings of that Tribunal in relation to private life.

     97. In terms of the evidence about OR's upbringing in the UK, the  only
         relevant evidence appears to be that of DH who says this:

             "10.      [OR] came to the UK in 1998 with  [KR].   He  was  9
             years old when he came  and  was  living  here  until  he  was
             deported in the summer of 2013.  He has grown up here and is a
             Londoner.  He has a London accent and is like any other  young
             man from  London.   He  has  friends  from  a  wide  range  of
             backgrounds.  He never says anything about Jamaica and has  no
             attachment to it.  He has never wanted to go to  Jamaica,  not
             even on a holiday.

             11. He went to school Sybourn Junior  School,  Waltham  Forest
             and then to Mcenteee Secondary School.  He did  not  take  his
             GCSEs because he was arrested and imprisoned  before  he  took
             them.  After he was  released  he  went  back  to  Walthamstow
             College and then Enfield College  but  he  struggled  at  both
             because he said he could not concentrate."

         There is in the bundle for the 2014  hearing,  a  report  of  Renee
         Cohen BA, CQSW, Psychotherapist/ Independent Social Worker dated 12
         April 2008 which says that KR and OR "have adjusted to life in  the
         UK and feel part of British society with which they identify."  She
         also says that both "are very  identified  with  British  culture."
         However, there is no detail  provided  nor  any  reference  to  the
         evidence on which those conclusions are based.   We  note  that  Ms
         Cohen's report was considered by a previous Tribunal  when  DH,  KR
         and OR appealed against a  decision  to  remove  them  to  Jamaica,
         culminating in a decision promulgated on 8 August 2008  ("the  2008
         FtT Decision").

     98. As to OR's private life since returning to  Jamaica,  there  is  no
         evidence before us suggesting that he has any relatives in Jamaica.
          The medical evidence suggests that, if there are  any,  there  are
         none with whom he has a practical or meaningful relationship.   The
         only evidence we have  of  any  personal  relationship  OR  has  in
         Jamaica is that with Mr Beckford who works or worked  at  the  Open
         Arms Centre.  Mr Beckford sought to assist OR when he was there and
         continued to do so up until the time when he left  the  address  in
         Vineyard Town in  2015.   According  to  Dr  Sewell's  most  recent
         report, there is no longer any  functioning  relationship,  to  the
         extent that Mr Beckford no longer knows where OR lives, and  OR  no
         longer engages with Mr Beckford.  It  is  apparent,  based  on  his
         endeavours to get OR to the medical examination, that  Mr  Beckford
         remains willing to  assist  if  he  can.   However,  as  Dr  Sewell
         reports, Mr Beckford had to hold on to OR  and  bring  him  to  the
         appointment.   That  is  consistent  with  the   absence   of   any
         continuing, co-operative relationship between them.

    DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

    EXCEPTION 1

     99. Ms Harrison accepted that OR cannot meet exception one in  relation
         to his private life.  That is because he had not lived  in  the  UK
         lawfully save as regards the first six months of his time here.  We
         also observe that we would not have found that  he  had  lived  for
         most of his life in the UK in any event.  He was in the UK  between
         14 December 1998 and 12 July 2013.  That is a period of about 14  
         years.  He lived in Jamaica until aged 9 .  He has  been  back  in
         Jamaica now for over 5  years.

    100. We  also  do  not  accept  that  OR  was  socially  and  culturally
         integrated in the UK.  It is said by his mother  that  he  grew  up
         here and was like any other young man from London.  However,  there
         is a dearth of  evidence  about  his  time  growing  up  here.   He
         received some education but that was of course interrupted  by  his
         offending.  The Tribunal in the earlier appeal noted  that  OR  had
         said that he intended to enrol in further education  following  his
         release, but DH says he struggled to do so  because  he  could  not
         concentrate.  There is no evidence of any  "legitimate  employment"
         according to the Tribunal in the earlier appeal.

    101. There is also very limited evidence about any of OR's relationships
         in the UK, with the exception of those with his family who are also
         all Jamaican in origin and the relationship with MB about which  we
         say more below.  Suffice it to say for present purposes that we are
         unconvinced that this was ever a committed relationship.

    102. The  Tribunal  in  the  earlier  appeal  noted  that  OR  had  some
         involvement in church activities.  However, no evidence about  that
         was produced to us.  Even the evidence put forward to  the  earlier
         Tribunal appears to have been merely a letter  from  a  Pastor  who
         said that OR (or possibly D) attended Sunday School.   The  earlier
         Tribunal, in 2011, found that private life was "reasonably  shallow
         and was certainly limited".

    103. We accept there is evidence that other men at the hostel in Jamaica
         have treated OR differently because they consider him to be British
         (although we note from Ms Sobers' report  that  one  of  the  other
         residents of Open Arms Centre told her that they  only  called  him
         that because most  residents  did  not  see  OR  as  a  person  and
         generally did not know his name).   In  any  event,  that  name  is
         probably given only  because  they  are  aware  that  OR  has  been
         deported from the UK.  That is relevant to the obstacles  which  OR
         has faced in integrating in Jamaica but not to the question whether
         OR was socially and culturally integrated in the UK.

    104. We are not satisfied that the material before us allows us to reach
         a conclusion that OR was socially and culturally integrated here.

    105. We do however accept that the situation for OR since  returning  to
         Jamaica has been very  difficult  indeed.   He  has  become  almost
         entirely socially withdrawn and does not interact with others.   He
         is said to have been sleeping rough.  He has no family  members  or
         friends in Jamaica with the exception of Mr Beckford who  has  been
         trying to help him to deal with life there.  However, the  evidence
         is that OR has not adjusted at all to life in Jamaica.

    106. The question of what  amounts  to  very  significant  obstacles  to
         integration was dealt with by the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Kamara  v
         Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  813
         where Sales LJ (as he then was) analysed it in the following way:

             "14.      In my view, the  concept  of  a  foreign  criminal's
             "integration" into the country to which it is proposed that he
             be deported, as set out in section  117C(4)(c)  and  paragraph
             399A, is a broad one. It is not confined to the  mere  ability
             to find a job or to sustain life while  living  in  the  other
             country. It is not appropriate to treat the statutory language
             as subject to some gloss and it will usually be sufficient for
             a court or tribunal simply to direct itself in the terms  that
             Parliament has chosen to use. The idea of "integration"  calls
             for a broad evaluative judgment to be made as to  whether  the
             individual  will  be  enough  of  an  insider  in   terms   of
             understanding how life in the society in that other country is
             carried on and a capacity to participate in it, so as to  have
             a reasonable opportunity to be accepted there, to be  able  to
             operate on a day-to-day basis in that society and to build  up
             within a reasonable time a variety of human  relationships  to
             give substance to the individual's private or family life.

    107. Having regard to the evidence which we have  already  set  out,  we
         consider that it shows that the level of obstacles which  OR  faces
         have reached that very high threshold.  That is the  more  so  when
         one considers that OR has been back in Jamaica now for  nearly  six
         years and yet the evidence is that he is still not  functioning  in
         his everyday existence.   As  we  have  already  observed,  he  has
         apparently formed no relationships with others; as KR put it in her
         evidence OR has effectively "shut down".  He  appears  to  have  no
         interaction with others at all and has from time to time and  quite
         probably presently, been living on the streets with no job  and  no
         integration in Jamaican society.  As we have found, OR is unable to
         meet the first exception  in  Section  117C  because  he  does  not
         satisfy all the criteria there set out. The impact on  his  private
         life and family life is though something to which we will  need  to
         return  when  considering  whether  there   are   very   compelling
         circumstances which outweigh the public interest in this case.

    EXCEPTION 2

    108. We begin with  OR's  relationship  with  MB.   Based  on  MB's  own
         evidence, we doubt that it can be said that she and OR have or ever
         have had a genuine and  subsisting  relationship.   Insofar  as  Ms
         Harrison seeks to argue that this is because  deportation  and  the
         separation that entails has affected that relationship so much that
         it has broken down, we do not accept that submission.  The Tribunal
         in the earlier appeal did not make a finding that, at that time, in
         2011, there was not any relationship between OR and MB but  equally
         they did not make any finding that there was.  We accept that Judge
         Abebrese found that MB was OR's partner and that the evidence about
         the impact of OR's deportation on  her  was  "credible".   However,
         that evidence is not set out in Judge Abebrese's decision.  We have
         set out MB's evidence about her and OR's  relationship  above.   We
         are not satisfied  that  this  shows  any  continuing  relationship
         between her and OR.  She herself says that she does not  know  what
         future they have.  Her concern appears to  be  principally  if  not
         entirely a desire to have OR share the parental responsibility  for
         D.

    109. Even if  we  are  wrong  about  whether  the  relationship  can  be
         categorised as genuine and subsisting, it follows from what we  say
         that we do not accept that it is unduly harsh for MB to  remain  in
         the UK without OR as she has done since 2013.  She  has  family  in
         the UK who have been supporting and continue to support  her.   She
         has some mental health and other problems but there is no  evidence
         that any of those are caused by or have even  been  exacerbated  by
         OR's deportation.

    110. Turning then to the impact of OR's  deportation  on  D,  we  accept
         that, notwithstanding the  limited  ongoing  communication  between
         father and son, there is still a genuine  and  subsisting  parental
         relationship.  OR is accepted to be D's biological  father.   There
         is some evidence of OR's continuing concern for his child and D  is
         said to continue to be important  to  him.   Similarly,  D  remains
         committed to his father  and  very  concerned  that  OR  should  be
         returned to the UK.

    111. Applying paragraph Section 117C (5), we are  required  to  consider
         whether the effect of  OR's  deportation  is  unduly  harsh.   This
         entails consideration whether it is unduly harsh for  D  to  go  to
         Jamaica to be with his father or to remain in the UK  without  him.
         The meaning of "unduly harsh" in section 117C (5) was considered by
         the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home
         Department [2018] UKSC 53.  The particular  issue  that  arose  was
         whether the relative seriousness of the offence was a matter to  be
         taken into account.  In his speech, Lord Carnwath  (with  whom  the
         others agreed) dealt with the meaning  of  the  expression  "unduly
         harsh" as follows (at [23]):

             "... the word "unduly" implies an element of  comparison.   It
             assumes that there is a "due" level of "harshness", that is  a
             level which may be acceptable or justifiable in  the  relevant
             context.  "Unduly" implies something going beyond that  level.
             The relevant context is that set by section 117C (1), that  is
             the public interest in deportation of foreign criminals.   One
             is looking for a degree of harshness going beyond  what  would
             necessarily  be  involved  for  any  child  faced   with   the
             deportation of a parent.  What it does not require in my  view
             (and subject to the  discussion  of  the  cases  in  the  next
             section) is a balancing of the relative levels of severity  of
             the parent's offence other than is inherent in the distinction
             drawn by the section itself by  reference  to  the  length  of
             sentence. ..."

    112. In the section that follows, at  [27],  Lord  Carnwath  cited  with
         approval the Tribunal's decision in MK (Sierra Leone)  v  Secretary
         of State for the Home  Department  [2015]  UKUT  223  as  providing
         authoritative guidance as to the meaning of "unduly harsh":

             "By way of self-direction, we are mindful that "unduly  harsh"
             does not equate with uncomfortable, inconvenient,  undesirable
             or merely difficult.  Rather, it  poses  a  considerably  more
             elevated threshold.  "Harsh" in this context, means  something
             severe, or  bleak.   It  is  the  antithesis  of  pleasant  or
             comfortable.  Furthermore, the addition of the adverb "unduly"
             raises an already elevated standard still higher."

    113. With that test in mind, we accept that D cannot be expected  to  go
         to Jamaica to be with his father.  We have already found that there
         is no continuing relationship between MB and OR.  MB is  a  British
         citizen who has problems of her own and could not  be  expected  to
         leave the support she has in the UK to go to join a man who she  is
         no longer in a relationship with.  Moreover, in light of  OR's  own
         severe difficulties in managing to look after himself  in  Jamaica,
         he could not look after MB or D.

    114. However, we do not accept that the evidence shows that it is unduly
         harsh for D to remain in the UK without OR.  There is evidence that
         D is very distressed by his separation from  his  father  (although
         MB's evidence is that he does not show that  distress  as  much  in
         recent times).  We accept that there  have  been  some  behavioural
         difficulties.  We also accept that  there  was  concern  about  D's
         mental state at one point although MB says she does not think  that
         D is mentally  ill.  The  evidence  though  goes  nowhere  near  to
         establishing the magnitude of difficulties which would be  required
         to meet the threshold of undue harshness.  That a  child  would  be
         extremely  upset  by  separation  from  a  parent  is  an  expected
         consequence of deportation.  It might also be expected that a child
         may behave badly because of that upset or the lack  of  control  of
         the absent parent.

    115. For those reasons, we do  not  accept  that  OR  meets  the  second
         exception in Section 117C.

    VERY COMPELLING CIRCUMSTANCES

    116. That OR cannot meet either of the two exceptions set out in Section
         117C is not however the end of the matter.   We  have  to  consider
         whether there are very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above
         those two exceptions.

    117. We have referred above  to  the  Supreme  Court's  judgment  in  KO
         (Nigeria) and to the Court's interpretation  of  Section  117C  (5)
         which excludes  from  our  consideration  the  seriousness  of  the
         offending save insofar as that is inherent in  the  differentiation
         between sentences of four years or more and those under that  term.
         However, that judgment has nothing to say about the  way  in  which
         Section 117C (6) is to be interpreted.

    118. We have referred at [23] above, to the case of NA (Pakistan).   The
         guidance given in that case concerning the application of the  test
         of very compelling circumstances remains fully authoritative.   The
         Court of Appeal's explanation of the operation of that test is  set
         out by Jackson LJ as follows:

             "28.      The next question which arises concerns the  meaning
             of  "very  compelling  circumstances,  over  and  above  those
             described in Exceptions 1 and 2".  The new para. 398 uses  the
             same  language  as  section  117C(6).   It  refers  to   "very
             compelling circumstances, over and above  those  described  in
             paragraphs 399 and 399A." Paragraphs 399 and 399A of the  2014
             rules refer to the same subject matter as Exceptions 1  and  2
             in section 117C, but they do so in greater detail.

             29. In our view, the reasoning of the Court of  Appeal  in  JZ
             (Zambia) applies to those  provisions.   The  phrase  used  in
             section 117C(6), in para. 398 of the 2014 rules and  which  we
             have held is to be read into section  117C(3)  does  not  mean
             that a  foreign  criminal  facing  deportation  is  altogether
             disentitled from seeking to rely on matters falling within the
             scope of the circumstances described in  Exceptions  1  and  2
             when seeking  to  contend  that  "there  are  very  compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2".  As we have indicated above,  a  foreign  criminal  is
             entitled to rely upon such matters, but he would  need  to  be
             able to point to features of his case of a kind  mentioned  in
             Exceptions 1 and 2 (and in paras. 399  or  399A  of  the  2014
             rules),  or  features  falling   outside   the   circumstances
             described in those Exceptions and those paragraphs, which made
             his claim based on Article 8 especially strong.

             30. In the case of a  serious  offender  who  could  point  to
             circumstances  in  his  own  case  which  could  be  said   to
             correspond to the circumstances described in Exceptions 1  and
             2, but where he could only just succeed in such  an  argument,
             it  would  not  be  possible  to  describe  his  situation  as
             involving very compelling circumstances, over and above  those
             described in Exceptions 1 and 2.  One might describe that as a
             bare case of the kind described in Exceptions 1 or 2.  On  the
             other hand, if he could point to  factors  identified  in  the
             descriptions of Exceptions 1 and 2 of an especially compelling
             kind in support of an Article 8 claim, going well beyond  what
             would be necessary to  make  out  a  bare  case  of  the  kind
             described in Exceptions 1  and  2,  they  could  in  principle
             constitute" very  compelling  circumstances,  over  and  above
             those described in Exceptions  1  and  2",  whether  taken  by
             themselves or in conjunction with other  factors  relevant  to
             application of Article 8.

             31. An interpretation of the relevant phrase to  exclude  this
             possibility would lead to  violation  of  Article  8  in  some
             cases, which plainly was not Parliament's intention. In  terms
             of relevance and weight for a proportionality  analysis  under
             Article  8,  the  factors  singled  out  for  description   in
             Exceptions 1 and 2 will apply with  greater  or  lesser  force
             depending on the specific facts of a particular case.  To take
             a simple example in relation to  the  requirement  in  section
             117C(4)(a) for Exception 1, the offender in  question  may  be
             someone aged 37 who came to the UK aged 18 and hence satisfies
             that requirement; but his claim under Article 8 is  likely  to
             be very much weaker than the claim of an offender now aged  80
             who came to the UK aged 6 months, who by dint of  those  facts
             satisfies that requirement.  The circumstances in  the  latter
             case might well be highly relevant  to  whether  it  would  be
             disproportionate and a breach  of  Article  8  to  deport  the
             offender, having regard to the guidance given by the ECtHR  in
             Maslov v Austria [2009] INLR 47, and hence highly relevant  to
             whether there are "very  compelling  circumstances,  over  and
             above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2."

             32. Similarly, in the case of a medium  offender,  if  all  he
             could advance in support of his Article 8 claim  was  a  "near
             miss" case in which he fell short of bringing  himself  within
             either Exception 1 or Exception 2, it would not be possible to
             say that  he  had  shown  that  there  were  "very  compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2".  He would need to have a far stronger case  than  that
             by reference to the interests protected by Article 8 to  bring
             himself within that  fall  back  protection.   But  again,  in
             principle there may be cases in which such an offender can say
             that features of his case of a kind described in Exceptions  1
             and 2 have such great force for Article 8 purposes  that  they
             do constitute  such  very  compelling  circumstances,  whether
             taken by themselves  or  in  conjunction  with  other  factors
             relevant to Article 8  but  not  falling  within  the  factors
             described in Exceptions 1 and 2.  The decision  maker,  be  it
             the Secretary of State or a tribunal, must  look  at  all  the
             matters  relied  upon  collectively,  in  order  to  determine
             whether they are sufficiently compelling to outweigh the  high
             public interest in deportation."

    119. Having regard to what is there said, we note the need to take  into
         account our conclusions about the exceptions as those apply in OR's
         case.  Although we have found that OR cannot meet either  of  those
         two exceptions, it remains appropriate for us to take into  account
         those conclusions when looking at the wider impacts on OR's private
         and family life.

    120.  Before  we  carry  out  the  balancing  exercise  which  a   wider
         consideration of Article  8  requires,  however,  we  need  to  say
         something about the public interest in this case to  which  we  are
         required to have  regard,  and  which  is  obviously  to  be  given
         significant weight in a criminal deportation context.

    The Public Interest

    121. Section 117C (1) provides that the deportation of foreign criminals
         is in the public interest.  Section 117C (2) provides that the more
         serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal, the greater is
         the public interest in deportation of the criminal.  In this  case,
         the Appellant was sentenced in  2005  to  thirty  months  in  youth
         custody by reason of his age at the  time  of  offending.   He  was
         convicted of further offences  in  2008  which  were  of  a  lesser
         magnitude and did not lead to any term of  imprisonment.   We  have
         referred to the  Respondent's  decision  letters  which  allude  to
         possible further offending which has not led  to  any  convictions.
         However, as we have already observed, the Respondent did not pursue
         a case based on those matters, we received no evidence about  those
         possible offences and we leave them out of our  consideration  when
         it comes to considering the public interest.

    122. We have regard to what is said in the FtT Decision  concerning  the
         Appellant's offending as follows:

             "34.      ... In the respondent's bundle we  had  the  judge's
             sentencing remarks dated 15 April 2005.  They were referred to
             in the reasons for refusal letter.  We noted  that  the  judge
             commented in relation to the offence he said "first of all [C]
             did not consent to giving you oral sex and secondly  that  you
             were in possession of a knife, that  she  knew  it,  and  this
             constituted an implicit threat ...This behaviour will  not  be
             tolerated and youths and young men who behave in this way must
             know that it will not be tolerated".  He  went  on  "I  accept
             however that you believed that [C] was older than she in  fact
             was and indeed you believed that her age was similar  to  your
             own".  He added that he took into account that  the  appellant
             was only 15 and would not be 16 until  "May".   He  took  into
             account  the  appellant  had  no  previous  convictions.    He
             concluded "the least sentence  that  I  can  pass  is  one  of
             thirteen months detention[2] under Section 91."

             35. We had no reports presented to us from  the  agencies  for
             example there was  no  probation  report  in  respect  of  the
             proceedings.   We  had  no  report  from  the  Young  Offender
             Institution concerning his conduct there.

             36. We considered it relevant that the appellant was convicted
             of other offences on 20  October  2008.  These  were  offences
             involving resisting or obstructing a police constable,  taking
             a vehicle without consent and other motoring offences.  He was
             sentenced to a twelve month community order  and  disqualified
             from driving.  We had the pre-sentence report  in  respect  of
             these proceedings of which we took careful note.  We noted  in
             particular that the appellant had been assessed  as  being  of
             medium risk of re-offending."

    123.  We have no further reports  as  to  the  current  risk  which  the
         Appellant poses or might pose if returned to the UK.   However,  as
         Mr Anderson points out, the public interest in deportation  is  not
         confined  to  protecting  the  public  from  the  risk  of  further
         offending.  In OH (Serbia)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2009] INLR 109, Wilson LJ (as he then  was)  identified
         the following interests:

             "15.      From the above passages in N (Kenya) I  collect  the
             following propositions:

                  (a)  The risk of reoffending is one facet  of  the  public
                  interest but, in the case of very serious crimes, not  the
                  most important facet.

                  (b)  Another important facet is the need to deter  foreign
                  nationals from committing serious crimes by  leading  them
                  to understand that, whatever the other circumstances,  one
                  consequence of them may well be deportation.

                  (c)   A  further  important  facet  is  the  role   of   a
                  deportation order as an expression of society's  revulsion
                  at serious crimes and in building public confidence in the
                  treatment of foreign citizens who have  committed  serious
                  crimes.

                  (d)  Primary responsibility for the public interest, whose
                  view of it is likely to be wider and better informed  than
                  that  of  a  tribunal,  resides  in  the  respondent   and
                  accordingly  a  tribunal  hearing  an  appeal  against   a
                  decision to deport should not only consider for itself all
                  the facets of the public interest but should weigh,  as  a
                  linked but  independent  feature,  the  approach  to  them
                  adopted by the respondent in the context of the  facts  of
                  the  case.  Speaking  for  myself,  I  would  not  however
                  describe the tribunal's  duty  in  this  regard  as  being
                  higher than "to weigh" this feature."

    124. At [70] of his judgment in Hesham Ali (Iraq) v Secretary  of  State
         for the Home Department [2016] UKSC 6, Lord Wilson  considered  his
         reference to "society's revulsion" as "too emotive a  concept"  but
         went on to say:

             "... But I maintain that  I  was  entitled  to  refer  to  the
             importance of public confidence in our determination of  these
             issues. I believe that we should be sensitive  to  the  public
             concern in the UK about the facility for a foreign  criminal's
             rights under article  8  to  preclude  his  deportation.  Even
             though, for the purposes of the present appeal, we must ignore
             section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014, the  depth  of  public
             concern had earlier been made manifest  not  only  in  section
             32(4) of the 2007 Act  but  also  in  the  amendments  to  the
             immigration rules introduced on 9 July 2012 to  which  I  will
             turn  in  the  next  paragraph.  Laws   serve   society   more
             effectively if they carry  public  support.  Unless  it  lacks
             rational foundation (in  which  case  the  courts  should  not
             pander to it), the very fact of public concern about  an  area
             of the law, subjective though that is, can in my view add to a
             court's objective analysis of where the public interest  lies:
             in this context it can strengthen the case for concluding that
             interference with a person's rights under article 8 by  reason
             of his deportation is justified by a pressing social need."

    125. We take  into  account  that  OR's  index  offence  occurred  about
         fourteen years ago at a time when he was  still  a  child  himself.
         However, even accepting that OR may have rehabilitated in the  time
         since then (and we do take note of the further offences of which he
         was convicted in 2008 in this  regard),  we  accept  Mr  Anderson's
         submission that rehabilitation may be a relevant factor but is  not
         weighty.  He relies in this regard on the  observations  of  Moore-
         Bick LJ in Danso v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
         [2015] EWCA Civ 596 and Taylor v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
         Department [2015] EWCA Civ 845 which are to that effect.

    126. For those reasons, in spite of  the  passage  of  time  since  OR's
         offending, his age at the time and that he may  have  rehabilitated
         since,  we  nonetheless  give  significant  weight  to  the  public
         interest in this case.  The index offence was a  serious  one,  one
         which undoubtedly caused trauma to his young victim, and one  which
         involved the implicit threat of the use of a knife.

    127. There is an additional facet to the public interest  in  this  case
         and that is OR's status when he was in the UK prior to deportation.
          He did not have any right to remain here.  He was here unlawfully,
         save for the first six months when he arrived with his sister as  a
         visitor to live with his mother.  We accept that he was a child  at
         that time and did not apparently become aware of his lack of status
         until much later (following his offending) but that cannot  detract
         from  the  public  interest  in  the   maintenance   of   effective
         immigration control to which we are bound to have regard by Section
         117B(1), nor from the fact that, by reason of section 117B(4),  his
         private life is to be given  little  weight  due  to  his  unlawful
         status.  We note in particular from the  2008  FtT  Decision  that,
         when that appeal was heard and determined in 2008,  notwithstanding
         OR's mental health problems which were by that time  apparent,  the
         Tribunal nonetheless concluded that it was proportionate to  remove
         OR, KR and their mother.

    Factors in the Appellant's Favour and Our Assessment

    128. As stated at [83] of the Supreme Court's judgment  in  Hesham  Ali,
         one way of structuring the balancing exercise is, having found  the
         facts, to "set out the "pros" and "cons" in what has been described
         as a "balance sheet" and then set out reasoned  conclusions  as  to
         whether the countervailing factors outweigh the importance attached
         to the public interest in the deportation of foreign offenders."

    129. Having set out the public interest which applies in this  case  and
         one side of the balance sheet, we now turn to the factors favouring
         OR, that is to say the factors which  demonstrate  an  interference
         with his private and family  life  which  may,  if  strong  enough,
         outweigh that public interest.

    130. We have regard to what is said at [57] and  [58]  of  the  Decision
         regarding the factors which militate for and against OR.   We  have
         already had regard to OR's lack of right to remain in  the  UK  and
         his offending.  We accept that English is spoken in  Jamaica  which
         is relevant to OR's ability to integrate there.  As we have already
         noted, KR and DH are no longer in the  UK  unlawfully.   Both  have
         limited leave to remain.  That is therefore now a  factor  in  OR's
         favour.

    131. The following factors in OR's favour are relevant:

         (a)      OR has a close relationship with his family members in the
         UK, and particularly with KR who now has limited leave to remain in
         the UK.  They have a very close bond.  OR's other sister KWS  is  a
         British citizen.

         (b)      OR has a genuine and subsisting relationship with  D,  his
         son.  Although we find,  in  common  with  the  Judge  in  the  FtT
         Decision, that D's best interests are to remain in the UK with  MB,
         it remains appropriate  to  have  regard  to  the  impact  of  OR's
         deportation on D.  We have found that this  impact  is  not  unduly
         harsh but it is clear that D misses his father and we accept  that,
         notwithstanding the limited communication between father and son at
         present, D remains important to OR and vice versa.

         (c)      OR had no  right  to  remain  in  the  UK  before  he  was
         deported.  However, he was brought to the UK as a child  aged  nine
         years and cannot be held responsible for that fact.

         (d)      Similarly, OR's age when he committed the index offence is
         relevant to the weight to be given to the public interest  although
         we accept that significant weight must still be  given  because  of
         the other facets of the public interest.

         (e)      Although we give little weight to OR's private life in the
         UK, as we are directed to do by Section 117B, and although we  have
         found that there is insufficient evidence that he was socially  and
         culturally integrated here, it remains relevant that he  came  here
         as a young child and spent his formative  years  here,  spending  a
         total of 14  years prior to deportation.

    132. If the above were the only factors in OR's favour in this case,  we
         would have no  hesitation  in  dismissing  the  appeal.   They  are
         factors in OR's favour on the other side of the balance sheet,  but
         they do not, individually  or  cumulatively,  outweigh  the  public
         interest in deportation.  However, in this case, we  consider  that
         there are additional particularly significant factors  which,  when
         added to the above factors, lead to the conclusion that deportation
         is disproportionate.  In other words, we find that  the  following,
         coupled with the foregoing are the very  compelling  reasons,  over
         and above the statutory exceptions, for  finding  that  the  appeal
         should be allowed.

    133. First, OR's medical condition.  We do not repeat  the  findings  of
         the various doctors who have examined OR both prior  to  and  since
         deportation.  In finding this a relevant factor in OR's favour  and
         one which is to be given significant weight, we recognise that  the
         Tribunal has dismissed the appeal on Article 3 grounds.  Nothing we
         say is intended to displace that finding.  In particular,  we  have
         regard to what is said by Laws LJ about the interaction of  Article
         3 and Article 8 in  medical  cases  in  GS  (India  and  others)  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA  Civ  40  at
         [86] as follows:

             "If the Article 3 claim fails (as I would hold it does  here),
             Article 8 cannot prosper without some separate  or  additional
             factual element which brings the case  within  the  Article  8
             paradigm - the capacity to form and enjoy relationships - or a
             state of affairs having some affinity with the paradigm.  That
             approach was, as it seems to me, applied  by  Moses  LJ  (with
             whom McFarlane LJ and the Master of the Rolls  agreed)  in MM
             (Zimbabwe) [2012] EWCA Civ 279 at paragraph 23:

             "The only cases I can foresee where the  absence  of  adequate
             medical treatment in the country to which a person  is  to  be
             deported will be relevant to Article 8,  is  where  it  is  an
             additional factor to be weighed in  the  balance,  with  other
             factors which by themselves engage Article 8. Suppose, in this
             case, the appellant had established firm family ties  in  this
             country, then the availability of continuing medical treatment
             here, coupled with his  dependence  on  the  family  here  for
             support, together establish 'private life'  under  Article  8.
             That conclusion would not involve a comparison between medical
             facilities here and those in Zimbabwe. Such  a  finding  would
             not offend the  principle  expressed  above  that  the  United
             Kingdom is under no Convention obligation to  provide  medical
             treatment here when it is not  available  in  the  country  to
             which the appellant is to be deported."

    134. We remind ourselves of course  that  this  is  a  deportation  case
         (unlike the cases in GS (India)).  As  such,  we  accept  that  the
         weight to be given to the public interest  is  that  much  stronger
         than in those cases.  However, what leads us to our  conclusion  in
         OR's favour rests on another passage of Laws LJ judgment  in  those
         cases when dealing with the potential application of Article  8  to
         medical cases at [44] and [45] as follows:

             "Article 8

             44. As I have said, Article 8 has two  linked  paradigms:  the
             capacity to form and enjoy relationships,  and  the  right  to
             privacy. We are not concerned with the  latter  (as  to  which
             there is a substantial body of case-law). As for the former, I
             will first cite Bensaid, in which the court said at paragraph
             47:

                  "'Private  life'  is  a  broad  term  not  susceptible  to
                  exhaustive definition. The Court  has  already  held  that
                  elements such as gender identification,  name  and  sexual
                  orientation and sexual life are important elements of  the
                  personal sphere protected by Article  8...  Mental  health
                  must also be regarded as a crucial part  of  private  life
                  associated with the aspect of moral integrity.  Article  8
                  protects a right to identity and personal development, and
                  the right to  establish  and  develop  relationships  with
                  other  human  beings  and   the   outside   world...   The
                  preservation of mental stability is  in  that  context  an
                  indispensable precondition to effective enjoyment  of  the
                  right to respect for private life." (my emphasis)

             Paragraph 61 in Pretty v UK (2002) 35 EHRR 1 is comparable:

                  "As the Court has had previous  occasion  to  remark,  the
                  concept of 'private life' is a broad term not  susceptible
                  to exhaustive  definition.  It  covers  the  physical  and
                  psychological integrity of a person...  It  can  sometimes
                  embrace aspects of an  individual's  physical  and  social
                  identity...  Elements  such  as,   for   example,   gender
                  identification, name and  sexual  orientation  and  sexual
                  life fall within the personal sphere protected by  Article
                  8.   Article  8  also  protects  a   right   to   personal
                  development,  and  the  right  to  establish  and  develop
                  relationships with other  human  beings  and  the  outside
                  world ... Although no previous  case  has  established  as
                  such any right to self-determination as being contained in
                  Article 8 of the Convention, the Court considers that  the
                  notion of personal  autonomy  is  an  important  principle
                  underlying the  interpretation  of  its  guarantees."  (my
                  emphasis)

             The diffuse nature  of  the  Article  8  paradigm  is  further
             emphasised by paragraph 65 in Pretty:

                  "The very essence of the Convention is respect  for  human
                  dignity and human freedom. Without in any way negating the
                  principle  of  sanctity  of  life  protected   under   the
                  Convention, the Court considers that it is under Article 8
                  that notions of the quality of life take on significance."

             45. These and other passages  tell  us  that  the  core  value
             protected by Article  8  is  the  quality  of  life,  not  its
             continuance. Life itself is protected by  Article  2.  And  it
             requires no sophisticated philosophy to tell us  that  central
             to the quality of life is  the  capacity  to  form  and  enjoy
             relationships.   Other   elements   referred   to   in   these
             authorities,  such  as  gender  identification,  name,  sexual
             orientation, sexual life and mental health are  self-evidently
             integral to that same capacity."

    135. We have already  referred  when  dealing  with  the  first  of  the
         exceptions under Section 117C to  the  very  significant  obstacles
         which OR faces in Jamaica.  We do not think it overstates the  case
         to say, as did KR in her evidence, that OR has "shut down".  He has
         no  relationships  with  anyone  there.   He  has  even  ceased  to
         cooperate with Mr Beckford who was helping him.   Although  he  has
         been found a room in a private house, he has formed no relationship
         with the householder and, as we said at paragraph  [73]  above,  he
         may well, in fact, be sleeping on the streets.  He is certainly not
         caring for himself.  In short, he appears to  have  no  quality  of
         life at all.

    136. Coupled with the above is the importance of OR's family support  in
         the UK, to which Dr Sewell refers in his  recommendations  and  the
         lack of any support from family or friends in Jamaica.   We  accept
         the evidence that when OR was in the  UK,  both  KR  and  KWS  were
         responsible for supporting OR.  That  involved  ensuring  he  dealt
         with everyday activities, such as washing, dressing and eating, but
         also ensuring that he attended medical appointments  and  took  his
         medication. There is no evidence whether  OR  is  being  prescribed
         medication in Jamaica.  Certainly, there is no evidence  that  such
         medication as he needs is not available.  However,  in  this  case,
         without that family support, OR does not have the ability  to  know
         that he ought to be taking that medication for his own good and, on
         all the evidence that  we  have,  is  not,  therefore,  taking  any
         medication that may have been prescribed.  OR's level of dependency
         on family who are all in the UK is a weighty factor in OR's favour.

    137. Although we accept that the medical evidence does not show that  OR
         is currently suicidal or harming himself,  we  do  accept  that  it
         shows that OR has lost all sense of being and has effectively given
         up.  Without his family support which is, we find, all in  the  UK,
         we accept Dr Sewell's opinion that  OR's  mental  health  will  not
         recover. Without a recovery in his mental health, we find that  his
         private life will remain very significantly affected in the way  we
         have described.

    138. As we have noted, OR has not had leave to remain in  the  UK  other
         than for the first few months of his time here.   We  have  already
         recorded the requirement to take into account the need to  maintain
         effective immigration  control  in  the  public  interest  and  the
         requirement to give OR's private life in the UK little weight as  a
         result.    However,  little  weight  does  not  mean   no   weight.
         Moreover, it is the combined effect of the impact on  OR's  private
         life since deportation in Jamaica and his high level of  dependency
         on family support all of which is in the UK that is in our view the
         main factor here rather than the  impact  of  deportation  on  OR's
         private life formed in the UK.

    139. For those reasons, balancing the very compelling  circumstances  in
         OR's  favour  against  the  public  interest  which  we  accept  is
         significant  in  this  case,  we  conclude  that   deportation   is
         disproportionate and a breach of  Article  8  ECHR.   We  therefore
         allow the appeal on that ground.

    DECISION

    The Respondent's decision to deport the Appellant  is  disproportionate
    and therefore a breach of the Appellant's Article 8 ECHR  rights.   The
    appeal is allowed.
         Signed   [pic]      Dated: 26 April 2019
         Upper Tribunal Judge Smith


         -----------------------
[1] Although at [19] of the Second FtT Decision, Judge Abebrese says it was
OR's "brother" who gave evidence, the reference there is clearly to OR's
elder sister (now known as KWS).  OR does not have a brother.
[2] Although we do not have the sentencing remarks before us, we understand
from other documents that the sentence was one of thirty months and we
assume this to be a typographical error.

