





UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/16804/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 16 September 2014                         |On: 19 September 2014        |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                             Mr Suman Yung Shahi
                         no anonymity direction made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Entry Clearance Officer:
                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr A Shoeb, Solicitor (Howe and Co)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant is a national of Nepal born on 1st July 1987. His appeal
      against the decision of the respondent refusing  his  application  for
      entry clearance to the UK as an adult dependant relative of  a  person
      present and settled in the UK was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge
      Traynor in a determination promulgated on 1st July 2014. He  dismissed
      the appeal under the Immigration Rules as well as pursuant to  Article
      8 of the Human Rights Convention.


   2. The appellant had contended that the appeal should  be  allowed  under
      Article  8.  The  Judge  found  that  information  placed  before  the
      respondent in the present application was no different to the  earlier
      application, considered and refused in 2010. That had  been  dismissed
      on appeal in 2011. The appellant had not  advanced  any  reason  which
      would suggest that his circumstances had changed, or were in  any  way
      different to the earlier application.


   3. The Judge referred to Gulshan v SSHD [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC) and found
      that there were no arguably good grounds  advanced  by  the  appellant
      which would lead him to the conclusion that it would  be  unreasonable
      not to consider his free standing Article 8 rights. The respondent had
      carefully considered the appellant's  circumstances.  The  appellant's
      application did not meet the requirements. There were no arguably good
      grounds  advanced  by  the  appellant  which  would  "show  that  such
      consideration  has  in  any  way  been  effective."  Accordingly,  the
      appellant was  not  entitled  to  have  his  circumstances  considered
      outside the rules.


   4. In referring to Gulshan, the Judge stated at paragraph 48 that  it  is
      only where there are arguably good grounds that a person's  Article  8
      rights should be considered outside the rules. He  went  on  to  state
      that essentially the test is whether or not it is reasonable for  such
      rights to be considered in circumstances where the respondent may  not
      have had all the relevant information before him/her when the decision
      was made. The circumstances in the appellant's witness  statement  and
      the oral testimony of his father  show  that  the  circumstances  were
      exactly the same in the present application.


   5. The Judge found that there was no family life between the  appellant's
      son and either of his elderly parents. The Judge considered in  detail
      whether or not there was any financial dependency by the  son  on  his
      father (52-56). Although the appellant may speak to his  father  about
      once a week, there is no evidence that he is  able  to  speak  to  his
      mother  as  she  is  profoundly  deaf.   There   is   essentially   no
      communication between them other than what is conveyed to her  through
      his father. Based on the above conclusions, the Judge found that there
      is no financial dependency which the appellant or sponsor  had  proved
      which would suggest that the appellant is reliant upon his  family  in
      order to subsist [56].


   6. With regard to proportionality, the Judge found  that  even  if  there
      were family life, any interference would be proportionate.  He  agreed
      with the respondent's submission that the burden of proof is upon  the
      appellant, through his father, to prove that he would have settled  in
      the UK following his discharge from the Brigade  of  Gurkhas  in  1969
      [58].


   7. The Judge found that because the sponsor had never applied to come  to
      the UK before, he must conclude on the balance of  probabilities  that
      he had never formed any intention to come  to  the  UK  prior  to  the
      recent changes in the law.


   8. At the hearing before me, Mr Shoeb submitted that the Judge  erred  in
      law. Firstly, there is nothing from Gulshan which says that  the  test
      to consider whether to  apply  Article  8  is  whether  there  is  now
      something new not before the Entry Clearance Officer. The Judge stated
      that the very essence of the test was to ask  whether  the  respondent
      had all the relevant information before  him  when  the  decision  was
      made.


   9. He submitted that this is plainly wrong. Gulshan  has  nothing  to  do
      with asking whether there is any fresh material before  the  Tribunal.
      The effect of Gulshan as set out at paragraph 27 of  the  decision  is
      that only if there were arguably good grounds for  granting  leave  to
      remain outside the rules is it necessary for Article 8 purposes to  go
      on  to  consider  whether  there  were  compelling  circumstances  not
      sufficiently recognised under the rules.


  10. Mr Shoeb submitted that there were such good grounds  and  that  there
      were accordingly compelling circumstances not sufficiently  recognised
      under the rules.


  11. The case involved an adult dependant relative of a Gurkha veteran. The
      good grounds for  granting  leave  to  remain  outside  the  rules  is
      demonstrated by the fact that the Secretary of State had a  policy  in
      place for granting leave outside  the  rules  in  such  circumstances.
      There were self evidently compelling  circumstances  not  sufficiently
      recognised by the rules, because the rules as they applied to  Gurkhas
      and  their  families  had  been  found  to  be  fundamentally  unfair.
      Accordingly, this is a case where it is appropriate and  necessary  to
      consider Article 8. The rules did not cater for every eventuality.


  12. Moreover, there can be little confidence that in  asking  himself  the
      wrong question at the outset, that this  did  not  affect  the  entire
      analysis by the Judge of the appellant's alternative case.


  13. Mr Shoeb also submitted that the Judge's reasoning in that  there  was
      no family life was defective. The Judge  did  not  take  into  account
      relevant factors. He concentrated excessively, if not exclusively,  on
      financial dependency. He failed to take into account  the  potentially
      more than normal emotional ties.


  14. He also misdirected himself regarding the mother. It  did  not  follow
      from the fact that the she is profoundly deaf that the appellant could
      not enjoy a family life with her. The Judge noted  that  communication
      was through the father. However, he did not have any proper regard  to
      this when determining whether this might mean that there are more than
      normal emotional ties between the son and his profoundly deaf mother.


  15. The reality is that as a profoundly deaf mother, it is  all  the  more
      likely that there exists a particularly acute bond between the  mother
      and son. She is all the more likely to miss her  son  intensely  given
      that she cannot otherwise communicate  with  him  at  all.  The  Judge
      accordingly failed to engage properly with the impact of the  mother's
      deafness on the relationship between them.


  16. Insofar as proportionality is concerned, the Judge found that even  if
      there were family life, any interference would be proportionate.


  17. Mr Shoeb submitted that the burden was on the appellant  to  establish
      that there is family life. If there  is,  the  burden  shifts  to  the
      respondent to establish the proportionality of the interference.


  18. The Judge however completely ignored the 'categorical' evidence of the
      sponsor, both in written and oral evidence that if he had been able to
      apply to come to the UK at the date of his discharge,  he  would  have
      done so. The Judge  concluded  that  because  the  sponsor  had  never
      applied to come before, he had never formed an intention to come  here
      prior to the recent changes in the law. That  was  a  misdirection  as
      there was no way that the sponsor could have applied to come to the UK
      prior to the change in the  law.  The  Judge's  finding  would  be  to
      undermine the very basis of the "historic injustice" principle to  say
      that the fact that someone failed to apply for something they were not
      entitled to weighs against them.


  19. On the contrary, the evidence was that the sponsor relocated to  Saudi
      Arabia on discharge. That underscores his evidence that  if  he  could
      have come to the UK then he would have. If he went to Saudi Arabia,  a
      country with which he had no connection, it is  all  the  more  likely
      that he would have come  to  the  UK  if  he  could  have,  given  the
      connection of the Gurkha regiment.


  20. Mr Shoeb relied on the European authority  of  AA  v  UK  [2011]  ECHR
      8000/08 and in particular paragraphs 47-49. There, the court held that
      an examination of  its  case  law  would  tend  to  suggest  that  the
      applicant, a young adult of 24, who resided with his  mother  and  has
      not yet founded a family of his own, can be regarded as having "family
      life." It was not necessary to decide that  question  given  that,  as
      Article  8  also  protects  the  right  to   establish   and   develop
      relationships with other human beings and the outside  world,  it  can
      sometimes embrace aspects of an individual's social identity, it  must
      be accepted that the totality of social ties between settled  migrants
      and the community in which they are living  constitutes  part  of  the
      concept of "private life" within the meaning of Article 8.  Therefore,
      regardless of the existence  or  otherwise  of  a  "family  life"  the
      expulsion of a settled migrant constitutes an  interference  with  the
      right to respect for private life.


  21. At the  outset  of  his  submissions,  Mr  Walker  on  behalf  of  the
      respondent initially sought to uphold the determination on  the  basis
      that the Judge had made a  full  analysis  of  the  situation  of  the
      appellant and his parents. He had concluded that the appellant was not
      a dependant of his father in the UK, and found that he was working and
      maintaining himself and his sisters.


  22. Eventually, however, Mr Walker stated that on  reflection  and  having
      regard to the reasons relied on by the appellant in the grounds before
      the Upper Tribunal, the decision did involve the  making  of  material
      errors of law.


  23. In the circumstances, both parties submitted that the decision  should
      accordingly be  set  aside.  Mr  Shoeb  submitted  that  this  was  an
      appropriate case to be remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  having
      regard to the fact that the appellant had not had the  opportunity  of
      having his  case  properly  considered  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
      Moreover there would have to be a complete re-hearing.


  24. Mr Walker did not oppose that application but remained neutral.


      Assessment


  25. I have had regard to the grounds of appeal raised  by  the  appellant,
      and in particular the misapplication of Gulshan. I  accept  that  this
      error has the potential of affecting the analysis of  the  appellant's
      alternative submissions, and in particular with regard to the  finding
      that there was no family life.


  26. In the approach to family life with an adult family member, the  Judge
      had regard to the decision in Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31.  He  stated
      that in order to be satisfied whether family life subsists between the
      appellant  and  his  parents,  he  had  to  determine   whether   that
      relationship goes beyond the normal emotional ties of family life.  It
      does not appear that the submission made by  the  appellant's  counsel
      that he should view  family  life  in  the  round,  having  regard  to
      cultural circumstances applicable  regarding  the  reliance  of  adult
      children upon parents in  Nepal,  was  a  factor  establishing  strong
      emotional ties sufficient to amount to family life.


  27. Finally, for the reasons given in the grounds of appeal, I  find  that
      the Judge's finding that any interference with family  life  would  be
      proportionate was affected by  his  failure  to  have  regard  to  the
      evidence of the sponsor both in his written and oral evidence that had
      he been able to apply to come to the UK on discharge,  he  would  have
      done so.


  28. In the circumstances, as agreed  by  the  parties,  I  set  aside  the
      decision. I accept the  submission  that  there  will  have  to  be  a
      complete re-hearing.


  29. I also consider that it is appropriate for the appeal to  be  remitted
      to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I  have  had  regard  to  the   Senior
      President's Practice Statement in this regard. I am satisfied that the
      nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which  is  necessary  in
      order for the decision in the appeal to be remade is such that  having
      regard to the overriding objective in Rule 2,  it  is  appropriate  to
      remit the case.


  30. I have also had regard  to  the  fact  that  the  errors  referred  to
      resulted in the appellant's case not being properly considered by  the
      First-tier Tribunal.  I also find that the  issues  are  not  complex,
      requiring any special expertise of the  Upper  Tribunal.   There  will
      have to be a complete re-hearing in the circumstances.


  31. Instructions to  the  administration  for  remitted  cases  have  been
      prepared. The agreed hearing date  is  29th  January  2015  at  Taylor
      House.










                               Signed
                                   Date 16 September 2014


                               C R Mailer
                               Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge





