




Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: OA/16430/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |     Decision & Reasons           |
|                                          |Promulgated                       |
|On 16 November 2017                       |     07 December 2017             |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                                   J D W M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - PRETORIA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     H C, the brother of the sponsor
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe born on  23  December  1997  who
    appeals, with permission against a decision of Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Davey, who  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  26  August  2016
    dismissed her appeal against the refusal of entry clearance made by the
    Entry Clearance Officer, Pretoria, on 4 November 2014.  She was refused
    under the provisions of paragraph 319X of the Immigration Rules and  on
    human rights grounds.

2.   The appellant's appeal had originally been heard in the  First-tier  by
    Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Jones  on  20  August  2015.   She
    determined  the  appeal  on  the  papers  before  her.   After  further
    submissions on behalf of the sponsor her judgment was set aside and the
    appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Davey on  24  June
    2016.

3.   The grounds of appeal did not appear to argue that the decision was  in
    breach of the appellant's rights under the Immigration Rules but merely
    argued that the judge had erred in  his  consideration  of  her  rights
    under Article 8 of the ECHR.  Before  Judge  Davey  the  appellant  was
    represented, and Judge Davey did consider the provisions  of  paragraph
    319X(i) and accepted that the appellant met the provisions of paragraph
    319X(i). Moreover, in paragraph 2 of the determination he stated:

          "I am also satisfied that the circumstances in which the appellant
          was living were serious  and  compelling  and  were  circumstances
          which made exclusion undesirable."


    He then went  on  the  comment  on  the  adequacy  of  maintenance  and
    accommodation.  He appears to conclude that  the  appellant  would  not
    meet the requirements under paragraph 319X(vi) and (vii),  in  that  is
    that the appellant could not be accommodated adequately by the relative
    the child was seeking to join without recourse to public  funds  or  be
    maintained adequately by the relative without recourse to public funds.

4.   There appears to be evidence before me which  would  indicate  that  at
    the time of the application there may well have been accommodation  and
    sufficient maintenance available for the appellant to join her aunt  in
    Britain. And I note that he had accepted  that she would be joining her
    aunt and her aunt's  two  younger  children  who  had  lived  with  the
    appellant in Zimbabwe.  He noted statements not only from  the  sponsor
    but also from the appellant's other aunt, I, and  her  uncle,  HC,  who
    represented her before  me.   He  noted  further  submissions  made  in
    various statements by  other  members  of  the  family  and  stated  he
    recognised they all wished the appellant to  join  the  family  in  the
    United Kingdom for various reasons.  However, he then stated that  none
    of those seemed to meet a threshold of exceptional  circumstances.   In
    paragraph 7 he stated:-

         "One person's view of exceptional circumstances  may  be  different
         from another but I do not find the circumstances  as  described  in
         which the appellant was living at the material time disclosed  such
         circumstances.  They were not  serious  and  compelling  family  or
         other considerations and the  threshold  requirement  of  paragraph
         391[319X](ii) was not met",


    He therefore found that Article 8 was not engaged.


5.   At the hearing before me Mr C spoke eloquently on his  niece's  behalf.
    He referred to a large number of documents which  had  been  submitted.
    Largely, however, these did not relate to the appellant.  There were  a
    very considerable number of documents from prominent members of society
    here who expressed support for the appellant and for other  members  of
    her family as well as expressing sympathy to the sponsor for the  death
    of  her  sister.   These,  however,  do  not  help  in  assessing   the
    appellant's circumstances at the date of the decision.   What  they  do
    show is the considerable support that the  family  have  been  able  to
    muster in support of the  appellant's  claim.   The  further  documents
    indicated that Mr C had had an award as a  "carer  of  the  year"  from
    Lambeth Council and there were numerous birth  and  death  certificates
    relating to members of the family.  There is also  a  large  bundle  of
    documents relating  to  F  C,  the  appellant's  uncle,  who  has  very
    considerable mental health issues.  It was argued before  me  that  the
    fact that the appellant was not here exacerbated his mental illness but
    it is not clear why that is the case although it  appeared  to  be  put
    forward that he felt responsible for the appellant.  Given the terms of
    the various medical reports it is unlikely  to  be  the  case  that  he
    himself would be able to give any support to his niece.

6.      I  consider  that  there  are  material  errors  of   law   in   the
    determination. There is clearly conflict in what  the  judge  wrote  in
    paragraphs 2 and 7 which I have   quoted above and the fact  that  that
    conflict is not resolved amounts to a material error of law.  Moreover,
    there is no structured approach to the  issue  of  the  rights  of  the
    appellant under Article 8  of  the  ECHR.  Such  an  approach  requires
    findings on the appellant's family life at the date of  decision,  with
    whom she had lived   including her aunt and her cousins, as well  as  a
    consideration of the issues of accommodation  and  maintenance  at  the
    date of decision and clear findings of fact should be made.

7.    For these reasons, having found that there is a material error of  law
    I set aside the decision of the judge in the First-tier and  remit  the
    appeal for a hearing afresh in the First-tier. I would  emphasise  that
    the appellant's representatives must produce  a  coherent  schedule  of
    evidence  regarding  accommodation  and  maintenance  and  ability   to
    support.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is remitted for a hearing afresh in the First-tier.


Signed   [pic]                      Date: 29 November 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

