
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/16734/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2nd December 2015                 |On 6th January 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                             Mr Abdi Awed Arale
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Pentcheva, Duncan Lewis & Co Solicitors (Harrow
Office)
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a citizen of  Somalia  who  lives  in  the  Netherlands,
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against a  decision  of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer (ECO) dated 25th July 2013 refusing  his  application
    for a family reunion with his Sponsor in the UK.   First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge R Cassel dismissed the appeal and the Appellant  now  appeals  to
    this Tribunal with permission granted by the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The background to this appeal is that the Sponsor was granted asylum in
    the UK in 2007 and was granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  22nd
    February 2012. With his application for entry clearance  the  Appellant
    submitted a marriage  certificate  dated  8th  March  2002.  The  Entry
    Clearance Officer decided that  it  was  impossible  to  establish  the
    reliability of the  marriage  certificate  provided  in  light  of  the
    internal disorder in Somalia and, in the absence of additional evidence
    to authenticate the declared marriage  certificate,  the  ECO  was  not
    satisfied that the document was genuine.  The  ECO  also  relied  on  a
    number of discrepancies between the Sponsor's  SEF  interview  and  the
    Appellant's application form. In their letter of 30th January 2012  the
    Sponsor's representative said that the Appellant and the Sponsor  lived
    together for five years prior to the Sponsor's departure  from  Somalia
    in 2007 but the ECO pointed out that there was  no  evidence  that  the
    couple cohabited for five years in Somalia.  The ECO concluded that the
    Appellant had failed to establish that he had a pre-flight relationship
    with the Sponsor prior to her application to remain in the UK.  The ECO
    also noted that the Appellant was previously refused an application for
    leave to remain in  the  UK  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  on  19th
    December 2003 and that he was removed from the UK.

 3. At the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal the judge heard evidence from
    the Sponsor and from another witness.  The  judge  concluded  that  the
    Sponsor was an unreliable witness and did not accept her evidence.  The
    judge also considered that  the  witness,  who  claimed  to  have  been
    present at the marriage ceremony between the Appellant and the Sponsor,
    was not credible.  The  judge  placed  little  weight  on  the  witness
    statements of two witnesses who did not attend the hearing.  The  judge
    concluded at paragraph 34 that he did  not  accept  that  the  document
    referred to as a marriage certificate is authentic  and  did  not  find
    that there was a marriage as  required  under  paragraph  352A  of  the
    Immigration Rules and the judge dismissed the appeal under the Rules.

 4. The judge went on to consider Article 8 of the ECHR.  The judge did not
    accept that there were compelling circumstances to go  outside  of  the
    Rules.  The judge concluded that the Appellant has little  family  life
    with his "wife and child" and, apart  from  each  other,  there  is  no
    evidence of any other family life [36].  The judge concluded that there
    was no  evidence  that  the  best  interests  of  the  child  would  be
    jeopardised by being required to leave the UK.  He concluded  that  the
    child, in company  with  his  mother,  can  visit  his  father  in  the
    Netherlands where he now resides and is free to return to the  UK  with
    his mother.  The judge dismissed the appeal on human rights grounds.

Error of Law

 5. Three grounds are put forward in the Grounds of  Appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal. The first ground contends that the judge made irrational  and
    perverse findings in that at paragraph 34  the  judge  found  that  the
    couple were not married whereas at paragraph 36  the  judge  said  "the
    Appellant has little family life with his wife and child".

 6. At the hearing before me Ms Pentcheva disputed the  suggestion  in  the
    Respondent's Rule 24 notice that the reference to "wife and  child"  at
    paragraph 36 was a mere typographical error.  She submitted that it  is
    a clear inconsistency of material relevance to  the  overall  findings.
    She submitted that this inconsistency meant that it is not clear to the
    Appellant why his appeal was dismissed.

 7. Ms Willocks-Briscoe submitted that the word "wife" at paragraph 36  can
    be read in one of two ways.  She submitted that the Sponsor's  evidence
    was that she and the Appellant had lived together as man and  wife  and
    that it could be that the judge referred to wife in a sense that it  is
    used in the UK to refer to a partner.  She submitted that it  does  not
    detract from the meaning of the judge's findings and it  perhaps  would
    have been better had the judge used  the  word  "partner"  or  "alleged
    wife" but she submitted that one word does not detract from the overall
    findings. She submitted that the issue for the judge  was  whether  the
    marriage had taken place before the flight from Somalia and  the  judge
    clearly found that the evidence does not show that it did.   The  judge
    found that no marriage had taken place at all and  she  submitted  that
    the judge made clear findings on this matter.

 8. I accept that the judge used inconsistent terminology when he  referred
    to the Sponsor as the Appellant's "wife" at paragraph 36.   However,  I
    consider that this is not a material error which affects  the  findings
    in this case.  This is because the judge made very  clear  findings  at
    paragraphs 29 to 34 that he did not accept that the Appellant  and  the
    Sponsor were married at all. The judge  was  obliged  to  consider  the
    appeal under Article 8 and did so.  In  considering  the  appeal  under
    Article 8 the judge took into account the issue of family life  between
    the Appellant and the Sponsor and  it  was  in  this  context  that  he
    referred to the Sponsor as the Appellant's "wife".   Whilst  I  do  not
    consider that the  use  of  the  word  "wife"  at  paragraph  36  is  a
    typographical error I do  consider  that  it  is  simply  an  issue  of
    inappropriate terminology and  does  not  affect  the  meaning  of  the
    determination.  Had the judge used the word "alleged wife" or "partner"
    or "mother of the Appellant's child" in paragraph 36 that clearly would
    have covered the scenario in this situation.  The use of the wrong word
    does not affect the findings in paragraph 36 and  is  not  therefore  a
    material error.  Accordingly I reject the first Ground of Appeal.

 9. The second ground contends that the judge  erred  in  failing  to  give
    adequate reasons for his finding that  there  was  little  family  life
    between the Appellant and the Sponsor  and  her  child.   Ms  Pentcheva
    submitted that there was significant documentation  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.  She submitted that pages 21 to 85 and 105 of  the
    Appellant's bundle before the First-tier Tribunal contained evidence of
    telephone contact, email contact and a money  transfer  document.   She
    submitted that the judge did not engage  with  this  evidence  and  she
    submitted  that  the  judge  focused  too  much  on  credibility  which
    detracted from the main issue to be determined.  She submitted that the
    judge had not adequately reasoned his decision that  there  was  little
    family life in this case.

10. In relation to this  matter  Ms  Willocks-Briscoe  submitted  that  the
    finding made by the judge must  be  considered  in  the  light  of  the
    circumstances.  She submitted that the history of this  case  is  that,
    after just a few months of  living  together,  the  Appellant  and  the
    Sponsor  have  spent  the  majority  of  their  time  separately.   She
    submitted that the only evidence of contact was  some  telephone  calls
    and visits but nothing else.  She submitted  that  the  judge  had  not
    ignored family life but in light of the history and  circumstances  the
    judge found that there was  little  family  life.   In  any  event  she
    submitted that the judge went on to consider proportionality, so he did
    consider the balance of family life in light of  the  circumstances  in
    light of the other factors. Whilst she accepted that the judge did  not
    specifically refer to the evidence in relation to telephone  calls  and
    emails and the one remittance she submitted that this does not  detract
    from the assessment at paragraph 36.  She submitted that the  Appellant
    has not demonstrated that there would have been a  material  difference
    if the judge had referred to all the evidence. She submitted that there
    was  no  overbearing  emphasis  on  credibility  in  relation  to   the
    assessment under Article 8.  She submitted that the judge did  consider
    credibility in the context of the Rules but went on to consider Article
    8 at paragraphs 35 to 37 and did not make reference to  credibility  in
    that context.

11. I have considered the judge's approach to Article 8.  The judge set out
    the proper approach  at  paragraph  35  and  considered  Article  8  at
    paragraphs 36 and 37.  The judge did not consider there was  no  family
    life.  Had he done so he would have  stopped  his  assessment  at  that
    point.  The judge considered the circumstances overall, considered  the
    evidence before  him  including  the  credibility  assessment  made  in
    relation to the marriage and the credibility of the Sponsor and of  the
    witness and the background  and  nature  of  this  relationship.  I  am
    satisfied that, in the context of the  relationship  and  the  evidence
    before him, it was open to the judge  to  make  the  finding  that  the
    Appellant and the Sponsor have little family life.

12. The judge considered all relevant matters at paragraphs 36 and 37 and I
    do not accept that the judge made any error of law in relation  to  the
    finding about family life or the overall assessment of Article 8.

13. The third Ground of Appeal put forward on behalf of  the  Appellant  is
    that it is contended that the judge made a material misdirection of law
    in relation to the consideration of the best interests of the child.

14. At the  hearing  before  me  Ms  Pentcheva  submitted  that  the  judge
    considered the best interests of the child at paragraph 37 but that the
    wording  used  indicates  that  the  judge   considered   this   matter
    erroneously.  At paragraph 37 the judge said:
         "It follows that in relation to my assessment of the relationship I
         accept the interests of the child are a primary  consideration  and
         that there may be circumstances where regard has to be aid  to  the
         best interest of the child.  But this is generally where there  are
         reasons to believe that the child's welfare may be  jeopardised  by
         being required to leave the  United  Kingdom.   There  is  no  such
         evidence in this case.  The child, in company with his  mother  can
         visit his father in the Netherlands where he  now  resides  and  is
         free to return with his mother."

15. I asked Ms Pentcheva whether there was evidence  before  the  judge  in
    relation to the best interests of the child in this case.  She accepted
    that there was no reference in the witness statement to the child.  She
    accepted that the record of the oral evidence set out by the  judge  in
    the determination was silent in relation  to  the  issue  of  the  best
    interests of the child.  However, she  submitted  that  the  judge  was
    aware that the effect of this decision  would  be  to  keep  the  child
    separated from his father.

16. Ms Willocks-Briscoe submitted that as there was  no  reference  in  the
    witness statement to the child and no reference in the oral evidence to
    the child the judge was entitled to deal with the matter as he  did  at
    paragraph 37.  She submitted that, even though the  judge  referred  to
    the general situation, he still went on to consider that the  child  in
    this case child can visit his father in the Netherlands and  return  to
    the UK with his mother.  The judge  therefore  concluded  that  contact
    between the father and son can continue.  In  these  circumstances  the
    child's best interests must be to be with the primary carer, who is the
    mother, and that will not change as a result of this decision  and  she
    submitted that there was nothing untoward in relation  to  the  judge's
    consideration of this issue.

17. It is clear from the papers before me  and  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision that there was little evidence before the judge in relation to
    the child.  There was no dispute in relation to the  paternity  of  the
    child.  However, it is very difficult for a judge to make a decision in
    relation to Section 55 in a vacuum.  The judge's conclusions  that  the
    child can continue to visit his father as he previously has  done  were
    in the circumstances completely  open  to  him  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence before him.  I am satisfied that the judge made  no  error  in
    relation to his consideration of the best interests of the child.

18. I am satisfied that the judge reached  findings  open  to  him  on  the
    evidence in relation to  the  Immigration  Rules  and  in  relation  to
    Article 8 and that the judge carried out a proper Article 8  assessment
    on the basis of the evidence before him.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses no material error of  law.
 The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 4th January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date: 4th January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
