
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/16319/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 2nd July 2014                                |On 4th August 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                        master George Hayes el-haddad
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                      Entry Clearance Officer - manila

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Elvira Gutierrez (Sponsor)
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Appellant

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of the Philippines born on  27th  May  2005.
    He appealed against a decision of the Respondent dated 9th July 2013 to
    refuse his application for entry clearance  to  settle  in  the  United
    Kingdom with his parents pursuant to  paragraph  297  and  301  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  The Appellant wished to join his mother Mrs  Elvira
    Gutierrez ("the Sponsor") and his father  Mr  Sami  El-Haddad  who  was
    originally a citizen of the Lebanon who has been granted  discretionary
    leave to remain which is valid until 2017.

2.   The Appellant's parents began living together in the United Kingdom  in
    or about  1994.   They  were  working  full-time  as  live-in  domestic
    workers.  In 2004 the Sponsor fell pregnant with the Appellant but  due
    to their immigration and working status she decided to  return  to  the
    Philippines to give birth to the Appellant as it was not  possible  for
    the couple to keep the Appellant here when he was a baby  due  to  work
    commitments.  The Appellant was born on 27th May 2005  and  was  looked
    after by an uncle  (the  Sponsor's  brother)  and  his  family  in  the
    Philippines.  Both of the  Appellant's  parents  however  continued  to
    provide the Appellant with financial and  emotional  support  and  took
    decisions regarding the Appellant's upbringing such as which school  he
    was going to, his religious practice and  his  day-to-day  care.   They
    supported  the uncle financially in return for him  looking  after  the
    Appellant.

3.   In or about 2010  the  Appellant's  father  was  granted  discretionary
    leave for three years and in December 2012 the Sponsor  was  granted  a
    settlement visa thus acquiring a permanent right of residence  in  this
    country.  A month later in January 2013 the Appellant's father  applied
    to extend his discretionary leave for a further three years.   On  30th
    April 2013 before the  Appellant's  father's  application  was  decided
    application was made for the Appellant  to  join  his  parents  in  the
    United Kingdom.

4.   In order to satisfy paragraph 297 the Appellant had  to  show  that  he
    was seeking leave to enter to join his parents in one of the  following
    circumstances:

    (a)  both parents were present and settled in the United Kingdom, or


    (c)  one parent is present and settled in the United  Kingdom  and  the
         other is being admitted on the same occasion for settlement, or


    (f)  one parent is present and settled in the United Kingdom and  there
         are serious and compelling family  or  other  considerations  which
         make exclusion of the child undesirable and  suitable  arrangements
         have been made for the child's care.


5.   The alternative was for the Appellant to satisfy  the  requirements  of
    paragraph  301  of  the  Immigration   Rules   which   prescribes   the
    requirements to be met by a person seeking limited leave  to  enter  or
    remain in the United Kingdom with a view to settlement as the child  of
    parents given limited leave.  The requirement under paragraph 301(i)(a)
    is that one parent should be present and settled in the United  Kingdom
    and the other parent "is being given or has been given limited leave to
    enter or remain in the United Kingdom with a view to settlement".  Sub-
    paragraph (c)  has  similar  provisions  with  regard  to  serious  and
    compelling family or other considerations as are contained in paragraph
    297.  The burden  of  establishing  that  the  requirements  of  either
    paragraph are met rested upon the Appellant and the standard  of  proof
    was the usual civil standard, the balance of probabilities.

6.   The Respondent issued his decision on  9th  July  2013  to  refuse  the
    Appellant's application. The Respondent was aware that the  Appellant's
    father had made an application to extend his discretionary leave  which
    had been valid until February 2013. However  the  Respondent  concluded
    that there was no indication that the  father's  application  would  be
    approved as a result of which he "currently does not hold any leave for
    the UK and there is no indication that he will be granted leave in  the
    UK".

7.   The Appellant  appealed  against  that  decision  and  the  matter  was
    considered at first  instance  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Baldwin sitting at Hatton Cross on 21st March 2014.  He heard  evidence
    from the Appellant's parents who  were  not  legally  represented.   He
    considered that the Respondent had failed to refer to Section 55 of the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and had failed to address
    the welfare of the Appellant.  The child was entitled to be brought  up
    by his parents who had worked for the same employer in London for  many
    years.  The Appellant's father had been in the United Kingdom for about
    24 years and had been granted discretionary leave to remain until 2013.
     The Judge accepted  that  it  was  highly  likely  that  the  father's
    application  for  further  leave  would  be  granted  (as   indeed   it
    subsequently was).

8.   The  Judge  did  not  consider  it  right  that  the  Appellant's  best
    interests could be frustrated by a failure to make a  decision  on  his
    father's application.  Over a year had passed by  the  time  the  Judge
    heard the appeal since the father's application  was  received  by  the
    Secretary of State.  He added at paragraph 18:

         "There must come a time when it is wholly wrong to rely solely on a
         refusal of a child's application  based  solely  on  the  continued
         failure  of  the  Secretary  of  State  to  address  the   father's
         application.  That time I find has come particularly given that  it
         is a case where it is exceptionally difficult to see how or why the
         father's application might not succeed."

9.   At paragraph 19 he decided that the appeal could not be  allowed  under
    the Rules but should be allowed on Article 8 grounds outside the Rules.
     At paragraph 20 the Judge wrote:

         "On the totality  of  the  evidence  before  me  I  find  that  the
         Appellant has discharged the burden of proof and that  the  reasons
         given by the Respondent do not justify the refusal.  Therefore  the
         Respondent's decision is not in accordance with  the  law  and  the
         applicable Immigration Rules."


10.  Having found that the decision was not in accordance with the law,  the
    Judge at that point no longer had a valid decision before him  and  the
    correct course would have been to have said that  the  matter  remained
    outstanding for the Entry Clearance  Officer  to  decide.   Instead  at
    paragraphs 21 and 22 the Judge went on to say:

         "The appeal under the Immigration Rules is dismissed.   The  appeal
         is allowed on human rights grounds."


11.  The Respondent evidently chose to interpret  the  Judge's  decision  as
    being to allow the appeal outright.  The grounds of onward appeal noted
    that the Judge had erred in finding that Section 55  of  the  2009  Act
    applied (FT [2011] UKUT 00483).  The Respondent  took  issue  with  the
    decision of the Judge to allow the appeal outside the Rules citing  the
    case of Gulshan [2013] UKUT 640. Only if there  may  be  arguably  good
    grounds for granting leave to remain outside the Rules was it necessary
    for Article 8  purposes  to  go  on  to  consider  whether  there  were
    compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised under them.

12.  The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Cox on 9th May 2014.  In granting  permission
    to appeal he wrote:

         "I find that I have to allow that the grounds have  arguable  merit
         notwithstanding that the  conclusion  the  Judge  reached  is  very
         understandable in the circumstances.  The  determination  does  not
         altogether inspire confidence, particularly when paragraphs 20  and
         21 appear to be in conflict.  More  specifically  in  allowing  the
         appeal on Article 8 grounds outside the Rules it  is  not  apparent
         that the Judge applied his mind to the guidance  in  Gulshan.   The
         point made in the grounds about Section 55 of the 2009 Act is  also
         technically correct. The  grounds  disclose  an  arguable  material
         error of law in the determination and permission is granted."

13.  On 16th June 2014, shortly before the hearing was  due  to  take  place
    the Appellant's father wrote to the Tribunal enclosing a  copy  of  the
    residence permit issued to him by the Secretary of State  on  3rd  June
    2014 valid until 26th May 2017 (as the  Judge  at  first  instance  had
    predicted it would be).

The Hearing Before Me

14.  The matter came before me to decide firstly whether there was an  error
    of law in the Judge's determination such that it fell to be set  aside.
    If there was then I would proceed to re-hear the matter and remake  the
    decision.  The Presenting Officer submitted that the Judge had erred in
    law by indicating that Section 55 should have been considered  when  it
    did not apply as the child was out of the country.  The  Appellant  had
    not been able to meet the Rules as, although the Appellant's mother was
    present and settled in the  United  Kingdom,  she  did  not  have  sole
    responsibility for the Appellant.  Although the Appellant's father  had
    been given a second grant of discretionary leave valid  until  2017  it
    would only be when he obtained a third grant that he would be deemed to
    be settled.
15.  The obstacle to the Appellant's  appeal  was  whether  the  Appellant's
    father had limited leave to remain leading to settlement.   He  had  3C
    leave at the time of the decision on  the  Appellant's  application  by
    virtue of the Immigration Act 1971.  However an extension of his  leave
    by reason of Section 3C would not  be  an  extension  with  a  view  to
    settlement.  Arguably now that the  Appellant's  father  had  a  second
    grant of leave he was granted leave with a view to settlement but  that
    would not be to look  at  the  case  at  the  date  of  decision.   The
    preferential course of action would be for the Appellant  to  submit  a
    new application which might have reasonable prospects of  success.   It
    was not disproportionate to refuse the application.

16.  For the Appellant his father said that he had downloaded from the  Home
    Office  website  the  provisions   in   the   Immigration   Directorate
    Instructions relating to  the  grant  of  discretionary  leave.   These
    stated that those who before 9th July 2012 had been granted leave under
    the discretionary leave policy in force  at  the  time  would  normally
    continue to be dealt with under that policy through  to  settlement  if
    they qualified for it, normally after accruing  six  years'  continuous
    discretionary leave.  It appears that that has  been  followed  in  the
    case of the Appellant's father since he was given a further  period  of
    three years albeit over a year after he lodged his application.

17.  Furthermore he said that his  brother-in-law,  the  Appellant's  uncle,
    had put the uncle's plans on hold whilst  the  Appellant's  application
    for entry clearance was being resolved.  There was  a  mistake  in  the
    decision of the Entry Clearance Officer.   The  decision  was  made  in
    July, five months after he, the Appellant's father, had  made  his  own
    application for further discretionary leave  and  therefore  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer was not in a position to know  what  the  outcome  of
    that was.  The Secretary of State should not have taken as long as  she
    did in deciding his, the father's, application for discretionary leave.
     He was unlucky that it took so long because of a backlog at  the  Home
    Office.  It was agreed that there were no objections over finances.

Findings

18.  Although the decision at first instance is not entirely clear, it  does
    appear that the Judge was satisfied that the Appellant could  not  meet
    the Immigration Rules.  If that is wrong and in fact the Appellant  can
    meet the  Rules,  then  there  is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination such that it falls to be set aside and  I  should  remake
    the decision in this case by allowing the Appellant's appeal.   Whether
    there is an error of law depends on the meaning of  the  expression  in
    paragraph 297 that a parent "is being admitted on the same occasion for
    settlement".  The difficulty in this case was that although there  were
    two applications at the same time, one for the Appellant  and  one  for
    his father, they were being considered by two quite different entities,
    the Entry Clearance Officer in the case of the Appellant, the Secretary
    of State in the case of the father.  As a result they were not  decided
    together.  There  was  a  considerable  gap   after   the   Appellant's
    application was refused before his father's  application  was  granted.
    It is difficult to see therefore how the Appellant's father could bring
    himself within paragraph  297(i)(c)  as  being  admitted  on  the  same
    occasion as the Appellant for settlement.

19.  The Appellant's argument is that the Respondent was wrong to treat  his
    father's application  as  of  no  importance  to  the  Appellant's  own
    application. The Respondent's reason was that the father's  application
    had not yet been decided upon and therefore the Appellant's father  did
    not hold  any  leave  for  the  United  Kingdom  at  the  date  of  the
    Appellant's decision.  That is not quite right because the  Appellant's
    father had 3C leave whilst his further  application  for  discretionary
    leave was  being  considered  and  it  was  within  the  terms  of  the
    Respondent's own policy that  that  discretionary  leave  ought  to  be
    granted.  The Respondent however was obliged to decide the  Appellant's
    application and as at the date of decision the Secretary of  State  had
    not decided the father's application and thus the Appellant  could  not
    bring himself within the Rules.

20.  In dismissing the appeal under the  Immigration  Rules  the  Judge  was
    also indicating that he did not consider that there  were  serious  and
    compelling family or other considerations which made exclusion  of  the
    Appellant  undesirable.   The  information  regarding  the  Appellant's
    personal circumstances was somewhat sparse.   He  was  evidently  being
    looked after by an uncle in the  Philippines  with  considerable  input
    into his care from his parents in  the  United  Kingdom.   However  the
    Judge was right not to find that  there  were  serious  and  compelling
    family or other considerations on that evidence.  I find therefore that
    the  Appellant  could  not  bring  himself  within  the  Rules  and  in
    consequence it was open to the Judge to dismiss the  appeal  under  the
    Rules. There was no error of law in that aspect of the decision.

21.  Although the determination was muddled, in that the Judge  referred  to
    the decision as being not in accordance with the law, I take  the  view
    that as the Judge went on to decide the matter under Article 8, he  did
    not intend to mean  that  there  was  no  valid  decision  before  him.
    Certainly the Respondent has not treated the Judge's decision  in  that
    way. For the purposes of this appeal I do not find that the  Judge  did
    intend to say that the Respondent's decision was not in accordance with
    the law. Unless it could be shown that the  Respondent  had  failed  to
    take into account his own policy, it could not be seriously argued that
    the decision was not in accordance with the law.  To that extent if the
    Judge did mean that he was in error and I would set that aspect of  his
    decision aside.  The  decision  clearly  was  in  accordance  with  the
    Immigration Rules.

22.  This means that the only remaining part of  the  decision  to  consider
    whether it was or was not in accordance with the  law  is  the  Judge's
    decision in relation to Article 8.  The Judge's assessment of Article 8
    was clearly influenced by his mistaken belief that Section  55  applied
    in this case as the Appellant was a minor.  The Appellant  was  out  of
    the country and therefore Section 55 did not apply.  The second  factor
    which influenced the Judge was the length  of  time  the  Secretary  of
    State was taking to  consider  the  father's  application  for  further
    leave.  It was indeed a very long time, well over a year  and  in  that
    time the family were unable to make a successful  application  for  the
    Appellant to come and join them.  That was unfortunate but the  purpose
    of Article 8 is not to rewrite the Immigration Rules (see  CDS  Brazil)
    rather, as explained in authorities such as Gulshan, once the Appellant
    has raised the fact that there is an arguable case under Article 8,  it
    is only where there are compelling circumstances such that  the  appeal
    should be allowed outside the Rules that Article 8 can come into  play.



23.   It  is  difficult  to  see  how  the  Judge  could  have  found   such
    circumstances if he had dismissed the appeal under the Rules which also
    talk about serious  and  compelling  family  or  other  considerations.
    Although the Judge talked about a child being entitled to be brought up
    by his parents, the reason why the child was not being  brought  up  by
    his parents was because of the decision of the  parents  to  leave  the
    child in the Philippines whilst they continued to work  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The disruption to the  family  was  caused  by  the  family's
    decision to separate rather than by a decision of the Respondent.  Even
    if the Secretary of State had decided the father's  application  before
    the Entry Clearance Officer had decided  the  Appellant's  application,
    the Appellant would still not have been able to satisfy  paragraph  297
    because the father still was not settled  in  the  United  Kingdom,  he
    would only have had a second period of discretionary leave.

24.  It is only when the Appellant's father is granted settlement  that  the
    Appellant will be able to join them under the Immigration Rules.  Until
    that time what the Appellant's parents are seeking  to  do  is  to  use
    Article 8 to avoid the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  That  is
    not permitted and only if there are compelling reasons can an appeal be
    allowed  outside  the  Rules.    The   Judge   did   not   assess   the
    proportionality of the interference with  family  life  caused  by  the
    Respondent's decision correctly. That would have  involved  giving  due
    weight to the legitimate aim being pursued.  He  was  in  error  and  I
    therefore set the decision aside.

25.  I proceed therefore to remake the decision.  As Judge Cox  remarked  in
    granting permission to appeal, the  Judge's  conclusion  to  allow  the
    appeal under Article 8 was very understandable  in  the  circumstances.
    The Appellant's parents are a hardworking couple  who  have  lived  and
    worked in the United Kingdom for a very  long  time.   The  Appellant's
    father is on the way to achieving settled status just  as  the  Sponsor
    has achieved.  The frustration of the family in those circumstances  of
    being separated from their child is understandable but it is not in  my
    view such a compelling circumstance that the appeal should  be  allowed
    outside the Rules.  The interference with family life has  been  caused
    by the decision of the Appellant's parents to leave  the  Appellant  in
    the Philippines and for them both to return to the  United  Kingdom  to
    work.  Whilst the Appellant and his parents undoubtedly have  a  family
    life, that family life could be pursued  elsewhere  since  his  parents
    could return to the Philippines  and  live  with  the  Appellant.   The
    Respondent's decision is in  accordance  with  the  legitimate  aim  of
    immigration control since the Appellant  cannot  meet  the  Rules  itis
    proportionate to that decision in the circumstances of this case.
26.   Given  that  the  Appellant's   father's   application   for   further
    discretionary leave has now been  granted,  it  is  a  matter  for  the
    Respondent whether he chooses to nevertheless grant entry clearance  to
    the Appellant on a purely discretionary  basis  given  the  significant
    change in the factual matrix since the refusal decision was made.  That
    is not a matter on which I can direct the Respondent and I leave it  to
    the Respondent. It would presumably require another application  to  be
    made by the Appellant. What I can say  in  the  meantime  is  that  the
    decision of the Respondent does not breach this  country's  obligations
    under Article 8 and having set aside the decision at first  instance  I
    remake the decision by dismissing the Appellant's appeal.


Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law and I have set it aside.

I remake the decision by  dismissing  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
Respondent's decision to refuse to grant entry clearance.

Appeal dismissed.


Signed this 31st day of July 2014


.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft


