
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Numbers:
OA/16440/2012

                                                       OA/16448/2012

                                                       OA/16461/2012

                                                       OA/16463/2012

                                                       OA/16465/2012

                                                       OA/16467/2012

                                                       OA/16468/2012

                                                       OA/16469/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 8 August 2013                           |On 13 August 2013          |
|                                           |                           |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

                                  MRS L M D
                         and seven other appellants
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NAIROBI
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:

                            For the Appellant: Mr S Jaisri of counsel
           instructed by Freemans solicitors
          For the Respondent: Mr P Deller a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellants are citizens of Somalia. The first  appellant  (I  will
      refer to her either  as  "the  wife"  (although  the  relationship  is
      disputed) or "the first appellant"  as  the  context  merits)  is  the
      mother of all the other appellants except  for  the  second  appellant
      ("I") (I will refer to them  as  "the  children").  Her  husband,  the
      sponsor, is the father of all the children. He arrived in this country
      on 29 October 2010 and claimed asylum. He was granted  refugee  status
      on 25 November 2010. The appellants were born  in  1970,  1999,  2002,
      2004,  2006,  2007,  2008  and  2009.  I  have  put  these  dates   in
      chronological order. They are  not  the  order  in  which  the  appeal
      numbers appear or in which they are  listed  in  the  heading  to  the
      determination under appeal.


   2. The appellant has been given permission to appeal the determination of
      First-Tier Tribunal Judge Wiseman who dismissed their appeals  against
      the respondent's decisions of  28  July  2012  to  refuse  them  entry
      clearance for settlement  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  the  wife  and
      children of the sponsor under the provisions  of  paragraph  352A  (in
      respect of the wife) and 352D (in respect  of  the  children)  of  the
      Immigration Rules.


   3. The respondent was not satisfied that the wife and  the  sponsor  were
      married, that their marriage was subsisting or that they  intended  to
      live permanently with each other. The application  was  refused  under
      the Immigration Rules and after consideration of Article 8 grounds. In
      relation to the children  the  respondent  did  not  accept  that  the
      sponsor was their father or that the requirements of  paragraphs  352D
      (iii) and (iv) were met.


   4. The appellants appealed and the appeal was heard by the judge on 1 May
      2013. Both parties were represented, the appellant by Mr  Jaisri,  who
      appears before me. The sponsor gave evidence through  an  interpreter.
      By this stage there were DNA reports showing that  the  wife  and  the
      sponsor were the parents of all the children other than I and that the
      sponsor was his father. The position appears to have been accepted  by
      the respondent's representative, the judge accepted that  the  claimed
      relationships were established and they  have  not  been  called  into
      question since then.


   5. After a careful review of  the  evidence  the  judge  found  that  the
      appellants had not established that the marriage of the wife  and  the
      sponsor was subsisting, that they were together when he left  for  the
      United Kingdom or that the children were part of the sponsor's  family
      unit at that time. He dismissed  the  appeals  under  the  Immigration
      Rules and on Article 8 human rights grounds.


   6. The judge also made an  anonymity  direction  which  I  direct  should
      remain in force.


   7. The appellants appealed and permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  a
      judge in the First-Tier Tribunal. The four  grounds  of  appeal  argue
      that the judge erred in law. Firstly, by misunderstanding  the  nature
      of the relationship between the sponsor, his wife and his other  wives
      in the light of both the evidence and Islamic  culture.  Secondly,  by
      failing to make a clear finding as to the credibility of  the  sponsor
      in particular as to how the family became separated. Thirdly,  and  in
      the alternative, by rejecting the sponsor's evidence  as  to  how  the
      family came to be separated without giving proper  reasons.  Fourthly,
      that if the judge had concerns about the evidence he should  have  put
      these to the appellants' representatives so that they could  be  dealt
      with at the hearing.


   8. I heard oral submissions from both representatives. Mr  Jaisri  relied
      on the grounds of appeal. He  submitted  that  the  sponsor  had  been
      married four times  but  that  only  three  of  these  marriages  were
      potentially relevant. Apart from his marriage to the  first  appellant
      the two subsequent marriages were both in 2006 and were terminated  by
      divorces in 2008 and 2009. They  were  barely  relevant  because  they
      ended long before the applications were made. I is the  child  of  the
      sponsor by one of these two marriages  in  2006.  Mr  Jaisri  drew  my
      attention to the sponsor's screening interview, which was  before  the
      judge. He also said that those instructing him had  now  produced  the
      sponsor's full interview record, although he accepted  that  this  was
      not before the judge. He was of the view that this did not impinge  on
      or make any difference to the question of whether the judge  erred  in
      law. He submitted that when, in paragraph 56, the  judge  referred  to
      the "odd history" he had shown that he had failed to consider this  in
      the light of Somali culture and values.


   9. Mr Deller submitted that the main difficulty encountered by the  judge
      was not so much contradictory evidence as a dearth of evidence  needed
      to establish the circumstances on  which  the  appellants  relied.  He
      submitted that the judge correctly applied  the  relevant  Immigration
      Rules. It was clear that he appreciated the situation in this war-torn
      country. Looking  carefully  at  the  evidence  before  the  judge  he
      submitted that there was a proper appreciation of  the  religious  and
      cultural norms of the country and that, absent expert evidence,  these
      did not explain the unusual circumstances of two of the sponsor's four
      marriages and divorces. Both parties were represented at the  hearing,
      the appellants by competent and experienced counsel. It was clear that
      the judge had not applied and overly literal or strict  interpretation
      of the Immigration Rules. On their own evidence the  family  were  not
      together when the sponsor left Somalia.


  10. In his reply Mr Jaisri said that the sponsor  had  been  a  prosperous
      shopkeeper.  He  had  had  to  divorce  two  wives  because   of   the
      deteriorating situation in Somalia. He was not  able  to  explain  why
      there was no witness statement from the wife.  The  judge  should  not
      have taken  account  of  the  circumstances  of  the  sponsor's  other
      marriages and divorces. These were irrelevant bearing in mind that the
      last of them had come to an end in 2009. The last of the children  was
      born in November 2009, only one month before the family  separated.  I
      was asked to find that the judge erred in law and  to  set  aside  the
      decision. I reserved my determination.


  11. The judge records that at the beginning of the  hearing  he  expressed
      concerns that he might not have had the full  respondent's  bundle(s).
      Both representatives assured  him  that  he  had.  I  agree  with  his
      conclusion expressed in paragraph 2 that there is likely to have  been
      further material in the respondent's bundles, but  since  then  nobody
      has suggested that anything relevant was missing except  possibly  the
      record of the sponsor's full interview when he came to  this  country.
      This would not necessarily  have  been  in  any  of  the  respondent's
      bundles. Mr Jaisri said that he had seen it and it had no relevance to
      the grounds of appeal.


  12. In paragraph 53 of the determination the judge said that  after  about
      eight years of marriage  to  his  wife  during  which  four  of  their
      children were born the family situation then went "somewhat  haywire".
      He went on to explain what  he  meant  by  this  and  to  address  his
      concerns in the following paragraphs. I can find  no  indication  that
      this very experienced judge assessed the facts in the light of British
      perceptions or that he  failed  to  take  into  account  the  history,
      religious requirements and cultural norms of Somalia. The whole  tenor
      of the determination indicates that he did take  these  into  account,
      for example the references to the "war-torn  country"  and  "the  very
      different customs in countries such as Somalia" (paragraph 46).


  13. Whilst it would not be unusual for the sponsor to take more  than  one
      wife the fact that he had married a second and a  third  wife  in  the
      same year, 2006, and then divorced them in 2008 and 2009  was  unusual
      and merited further explanation. The judge was entitled to  find  that
      the sponsor's explanation, that as a Muslim he was  entitled  to  take
      more than one wife and he wanted more children,  was  not  persuasive.
      The explanation provided by Mr Jaisri at the hearing before  me,  that
      the sponsor  married  his  second  and  third  wives  when  he  was  a
      prosperous shopkeeper but had to divorce them when conditions  in  the
      country deteriorated, was not the explanation the sponsor provided  at
      the hearing before the judge.


  14. I do not accept the submission that the judge's consideration  of  the
      sponsor's second and third marriages was irrelevant. He  was  entitled
      to find that it was relevant to his consideration of his  marriage  to
      the first appellant and the  family  situation  generally.  The  close
      interconnection of the wives and children is emphasised  by  the  fact
      that I is the child of one of the wives the sponsor married in 2006.


  15. I can find no merit in the argument that the judge failed  to  make  a
      clear finding in relation to the sponsor's  evidence  as  to  how  the
      family became separated. In paragraph 59 the judge accepted  that  the
      sponsor and the appellants had lived apart for  a  significant  period
      prior to his departure because  they  "had  become  scattered  by  the
      problems in Somalia".


  16. The appellants were represented by experienced and  competent  counsel
      to whom the gaps in the sponsor's evidence would  have  been  obvious.
      The judge did not raise any new issues not covered by the reasons  for
      refusal and I can find no merit in the argument that  there  were  any
      points which the judge should have put to the appellants'  counsel  or
      the sponsor at the hearing.


  17. It is significant and the judge was entitled to take into account  the
      surprising absence of any  statement  from  the  wife.  The  sponsor's
      explanation, that he was not aware  of  the  need  to  this  takes  no
      account of the fact that he was legally represented and said  that  he
      was "comfortable" with his representation. The way in which the  judge
      dealt with the lack of a statement from the wife  (paragraph  62)  was
      not so much as a matter going to credibility but  because  she  should
      have been able to shed light on the important areas relating to  their
      relationship where the sponsor's evidence was vague, unpersuasive,  or
      incomplete.


  18. The judge found that the appellants had failed to show that  they  met
      the requirements of the Immigration Rules. On the evidence that was  a
      conclusion open to him. There is no error of  law  and  I  uphold  the
      judge's determination.







      .............................................
            Signed                                             Date 9
      August 2013
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

