
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/16753/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 28 August 2013                               |On 12 November 2013        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                       Djenan Claude Symophorine Koffi

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Djenan Claude Symophorine Koffi, was born on 26 May 1982
    and is a female citizen of Ivory Coast.  The appellant had appealed  to
    the First-tier Tribunal against  a  decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer, Accra, dated 13  June  2012  refusing  her  application  under
    paragraph 317 of HC 395 (as amended) to settle in the United Kingdom as
    the daughter of Bi Koffi Pierre  Dje  (hereafter  referred  to  as  the
    sponsor).  The First-tier Tribunal, in a determination  promulgated  on
    21 May 2013, dismissed the appeal in respect of the  Immigration  Rules
    but allowed the appeal under Article 8 ECHR.  Permission was granted to
    the appellant by Judge Lewis on 22 July 2013:

         The application argues that in  relation  to  the  requirements  of
         paragraph   317   the   judge   misunderstood   and    consequently
         misinterpreted the evidence.  It also argues that he failed to have
         regard to the best interests of the 13 year  old  daughter  of  the
         sponsor.  That  issue  was  not  addressed  in  the  determination;
         whether it was submitted to the judge is not immediately clear.

 2. The respondent has also obtained permission to  appeal  the  Article  8
    ECHR determination.  Granting permission on 13 June 2013, Judge Osborne
    wrote:

         Although the judge was entitled to make his  own  findings  on  the
         basis of the evidence  adduced,  those  findings  have  to  be  for
         adequate reasons.  It is at least arguable that the  judge  has  in
         this case on the particular issue of the sponsor's mental condition
         failed to give adequate reasons why the appellant's  presence  will
         have  a  very  significant  beneficial  impact  on  the   sponsor's
         wellbeing.  The judge finds that there are emotional  ties  between
         the appellant and her father  but  has  failed  to  [identify]  any
         likely improvement in his mental condition in the  context  of  the
         medical evidence.

 3. I shall deal first with the  Article  8  ECHR  appeal  brought  by  the
    respondent.  The judge had been satisfied that the relationship between
    the sponsor and the appellant was that of  father  and  daughter  [15].
    That finding has not been challenged  by  the  respondent.   The  Judge
    accepted that the sponsor sends money to the appellant in  Ivory  Coast
    but he did not find that dependency had been established.  He  was  not
    satisfied that there was no close relative in Ivory Coast to  whom  the
    appellant could turn.  He found  that  the  appellant  was  not  living
    alone, "giving [that] phrase its full and proper meaning".  At [15]  he
    found  that  she  was  not  living  alone  in  the   most   exceptional
    compassionate circumstances.  The judge noted that the appellant  could
    not qualify for entry clearance under Appendix FM  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  Following the relevant jurisprudence,  the  judge  went  on  to
    consider Article 8 ECHR separately  from  the  Immigration  Rules.   At
    [17], he found:

         "The sponsor's mental condition leaves me in no doubt of the  truth
         of  his  claimed  circumstances  in  leaving   the   Ivory   Coast.
         Government forces broke into his house,  ransacked  the  place  and
         when the sponsor's 7 year old son clung to  his  side  one  of  the
         soldiers smashed his gun down on his head before dragging him  away
         to his death.  The sponsor himself was then  gravely  and  brutally
         beaten before being able to  make  his  escape.   His  claims  were
         consistent with the scars examined.  The severity of the trauma  he
         suffered is extreme and continues after more than  a  decade.   The
         reports from well qualified experts are unanimous that  he  suffers
         from severe post-traumatic stress disorder and moderate  depressive
         disorder with psychotic symptoms.  He is  treated  by  an  atypical
         anti-psychotic hand and anti-depressant.  He  has  severe  physical
         disabilities  too.   Whilst  he  is  making  some  progress   under
         treatment his reaction to the  earlier  objections  of  his  asylum
         claim is instructive, and repeated when his application for ILR was
         rejected and he was placed in  detention  surrounded  by  uniformed
         guards.

         I was able to observe his extraordinary behaviour at  the  hearing.
         He is a man in torment.  I found it very easy  to  agree  with  the
         comments in the report of Dr  Goldwin  that,  'Koffi  is  the  most
         distraught person I have seen, he is uncontrollably sad'."

 4. The first ground of appeal submitted by  the  respondent  concerns  the
    operation of Appendix FM.  By failing to engage  with  the  Immigration
    Rules, it is asserted that the judge had failed to have regard  to  the
    public interest  (expressed  through  the  Rules)  concerned  with  the
    exclusion of this appellant from the United Kingdom.  I  consider  that
    the judge was right to apply Article 8 ECHR on a free-standing basis in
    this appeal.  I note also that the new Rules were not in force  at  the
    date of the decision to refuse.  In any event, I find  that  the  judge
    did not err in law by failing to say more about the  relevance  to  the
    Article 8 ECHR appeal of the new Appendix FM.

 5. The second ground of  appeal  from  the  respondent  is  essentially  a
    "reasons" challenge to the determination.  The respondent submits  that
    the judge failed to provide adequate reasons  for  finding  that  "more
    than emotional ties" exist between the sponsor and appellant given that
    there was no evidence of contact.  No evidence  had  been  produced  to
    show why the sponsor could not travel to Ivory Coast in order to  visit
    the appellant.

 6. The Tribunal should hesitate before setting aside  a  determination  of
    the First-tier Tribunal for the inadequacy  of  its  reasoning  (Shizad
    (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 00085 (IAC)).  I reject
    the submission that the judge has failed to relate his reasoning to the
    evidence before him.  I refer to the  passage  from  the  determination
    which I have quoted above which, in turn, make  several  references  to
    the medical evidence regarding the  sponsor's  mental  condition.   The
    judge had before him letters from  three  counsellors,  a  medico-legal
    report from Dr Goldwin and a further  psychiatric  report  (which  gave
    details of the sponsor's risk of suicide) from  Dr  Ali,  a  consultant
    psychiatrist.  Further, I reject the  submission  that  the  judge  has
    found an especially strong link between the appellant's absence and the
    sponsor's poor  mental  health.   There  was  no  suggestion  that  the
    "extraordinary behaviour" demonstrated by the sponsor  at  the  hearing
    was in any way false; the judge's finding that the sponsor was  "a  man
    in torment" could not have been expresed in stronger terms.  The  judge
    had the advantage of hearing the sponsor give evidence.   At  [19],  he
    commented, "what emerges from the reports is the huge  part  played  in
    the sponsor's continuing torment by what he sees as the abandonment  of
    the appellant".  Medical evidence may only (as it was required  to  do)
    establish that the sponsor's poor mental condition  may  have  been  at
    least in part as a result of the appellant's absence and the  sponsor's
    guilt at having abandoned her, but it appears to me to be a  reasonable
    inference to draw from the medical evidence that, if  the  sponsor  and
    appellant were to be reunited, this would have, as the judge found,  "a
    very significant impact on [the sponsor's] wellbeing" [19].  The  judge
    was well aware that his decision to  allow  the  appeal  on  Article  8
    grounds was an unusual one ("I have  found  that  the  refusal  of  her
    application  would,  quite  exceptionally,   create   an   interference
    sufficient to engage the  1950  Convention").   On  the  basis  of  the
    evidence before him, the  decision  cannot  be  described  as  perverse
    although I accept that another judge, faced with the same evidence, may
    have reached a different conclusion.  That observation does not  render
    the judge's determination wrong in law.  He has considered the evidence
    very carefully.  He has not ignored evidence which was relevant nor has
    he had regard to evidence which was irrelevant.  Although he  does  not
    deal in detail with the public interest in this case, it is clear  from
    the judge's remarks about the exceptionality of his  decision  that  he
    was well aware that the public interest should  generally  require  the
    exclusion of the appellant from the United Kingdom.   However,  I  have
    concluded  that  the  judge  has  not  erred  in  law  such  that   his
    determination falls to be set aside.

 7. I shall now deal with the  Immigration  Rules  appeal  brought  by  the
    appellant.  I find that that appeal should be dismissed.   The  grounds
    suggest that the appellant, whilst  she  lives  with  her  stepmother's
    sister, is, in effect, living  alone  because  she  is  psychologically
    isolated.  That submission is not supported by  the  evidence  and  the
    fact that the appellant may be living with a relative only in the short-
    term (grounds, paragraph 9) is also of little  assistance  in  enabling
    the appellant to meet the requirements of paragraph  317.   As  regards
    the  judge's  findings  on  "living  alone"  and  in   "in   the   most
    compassionate circumstances" the grounds  submitted  by  the  appellant
    amount to little more than a disagreement  with  the  judge's  findings
    which were clearly available to him on the evidence adduced.

 8. I therefore dismiss both the  appellant's  appeal  in  respect  of  the
    Immigration Rules and the respondent's appeal  against  the  Article  8
    ECHR decision.

DECISION

 9. The appellant's appeal is dismissed.

    The respondent's appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 30 October 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

