

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/17556/2012



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Laganside Courts Centre, Belfast     |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10 January 2014                            |On 3 February 2014           |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                  The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey, President

                                   Between

                      ABDIRAHMAN  ISMAIL MO ALLIM OMAR
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                    ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ADDIS ABABA
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

Appellant:    Mr McTaggart (of Counsel), instructed by R P Crawford & Co.,
Solicitors

Respondent:   Mrs O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This written determination both  summarises  and  supplements  the  ex
      tempore Judgment of the Upper Tribunal pronounced at the conclusion of
      the appeal hearing conducted on 10 January 2014.

   2. The Appellant is a national of Somalia, aged  29  years.   His  appeal
      originates in a decision of the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  for  Addis
      Ababa (the "ECO"), dated  15  August  2012,  whereby  the  Appellant's
      application for entry clearance  for  family  reunion  in  the  United
      Kingdom was refused.  The ECO reasoned, firstly, that "little  weight"
      could be attributed to the photocopied marriage certificate submitted,
      purporting to establish the Appellant's marriage  to  his  sponsor  in
      Somalia.  The ECO noted further the absence of any supporting  witness
      statements  or  wedding  photographs.   He  pronounced   himself   not
      satisfied about  the  asserted  marriage.   He  further  recorded  the
      absence of sufficient "evidence" of  asserted  regular  telephone  and
      email contact between the Appellant and his sponsor.  He cast doubt on
      the photocopied documents purporting to  demonstrate  money  transfers
      from the United Kingdom to the  Appellant  in  January,  February  and
      March 2012.  He considered the two emails provided  insufficient.   He
      further noted that the sponsor had not sought to visit  the  Appellant
      in Ethiopia since at least February 2012, the sponsor having  obtained
      limited leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  with  effect  from  16
      August 2011.  Finally, the ECO concluded that there was no family life
      between the Appellant and the sponsor, with the result that Article  8
      ECHR was engaged.

   3. Fundamentally, the ECO refused to accept the Appellant's claim that he
      and the sponsor were married in Somalia in 2009  and  lived  there  as
      husband and wife until the  latter  fled  in  2011,  securing  refugee
      status in the United Kingdom on 16 August 2011.

   4. In order to secure family reunion entry clearance, the  Appellant  had
      to satisfy the requirements of paragraph 352A of the Immigration Rules
      which are that one of the parties to the  marriage  has  been  granted
      refugee status; the applicant must be married  to  the  refugee;  they
      must intend to live permanently together; and  the  marriage  must  be
      subsisting.  Thus the validity of the asserted marriage was a  crucial
      issue.

   5.     In its Determination, the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT")  noted  that
      the  evidence  available  to  it  included  an  original   certificate
      purporting to record the marriage of the parties on 13 April 2009;  an
      expert report attesting to the  authenticity  of  this  document;  the
      aforementioned money transfer records; and several photographs said to
      depict husband and wife.  Evidence was given by the sponsor (the wife)
      and her sister.  The Judge conducted  an  intricate  analysis  of  the
      marriage certificate document.  This exercise occupied  a  substantial
      part of his determination.  It commenced with the following statement:

     "Dr. Bekakalo does not analyse the contents and format of the  marriage
           certificate in sufficient detail.  I will do that now".




     Having enunciated this intention, the  Judge  proceed  to  analyse  and
      dissect the document in extensive detail, concluding:

     "The marriage certificate shows on its face that  it  is  patently  the
           product of a digital  computer  printer  easily  produced  on  a
           personal computer.  I find it to be a fake".

     This was followed by a finding that the  photographs  were  either  not
    authentic  or  not  descriptive  of  their   alleged   content.    This
    incorporated a discrete finding that  photographic  studios  could  not
    have been functioning in a particular area of Somali in 2007.  Finally,
    the Judge purported to  consider  the  documentary  evidence  of  money
    transfers from the sponsor to  the  Appellant.   However,  he  made  no
    findings of any kind concerning this issue.

 6. The grant of permission to appeal  was  based  on  concerns  about  the
    exercise  which  the  Judge  had  conducted  regarding   the   marriage
    certificate.  The submissions of the parties' representatives  to  this
    Tribunal confirmed that, at the first instance hearing,  the  Secretary
    of State had not made the case that any of the Appellant's evidence was
    fabricated.  Ultimately, there was little dispute between  the  parties
    about the shortcomings  in  the  FtT's  determination.   These  may  be
    summarised thus:

        a) the propriety of the exercise undertaken by the Judge concerning
           the marriage certificate.


        b) the inadequately reasoned rejection of expert evidence affirming
           that the certificate was authentic.

        c) an absence of findings relating to the sponsor's evidence  about
           the marriage and the evidence relating to  money  transfers  and
           Lycamobile contact between Appellant and spouse (sponsor).

        d) the outright failure to address and  determine  the  Appellant's
           case under Article 8 ECHR.

 7.  The  importance  of  making  all  necessary  findings   supported   by
    appropriate reasoning was highlighted in the  recent  decision  of  the
    Upper Tribunal in MK -v- Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2013] UK UT.  This decision has particular application to cases of the
    present kind.  As the decision in MK makes clear, errors of  this  kind
    can have the effect of depriving the losing party of  its  right  to  a
    fair hearing.  I consider that this occurred in the present  case.   In
    the espects  set  out  above,  I  consider  that  there  were  material
    shortcomings in relation to both findings and reasoning of the FtT.


DECISION

 8. For the reasons elaborated above, the decision of the FtT cannot stand.
     It must be set aside and remade.

 9. The appeal is allowed to the extent that the decision of the FtT is set
    aside and will be remade before a differently constituted FtT.

10. Given the overall history, in particular the elapse of almost two years
    since the settlement application was made, it is highly desirable  that
    the re-listing of this case for a fresh hearing at  first  instance  be
    undertaken without undue delay.






                                    [pic]

                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                    Date:   31  January 2014

















