
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: OA/17638/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Determination Promulgated |
|On 25 February 2015                    |On 5 March 2015           |
|Prepared 25 February 2015              |                          |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER CHENNAI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                               RATHEES NANTHAN
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Vidvadharan, Senior Home Office Presenting
                       Officer
For the Respondent:    No attendance

                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. The Respondent, born on 25 March 1983 is a citizen of Sri Lanka. On
        12 March 2013 he applied for a grant  of  entry  clearance  as  the
        partner of a British citizen  pursuant  to  paragraph  EC-P.1.1  of
        Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules. That application was  refused
        on 26 August 2013 on the basis the Appellant was not satisfied that
        the Respondent met the requirements of paragraph EC-P.1.1 (c,  (d),
        2.6 2.7 and 2.10 of Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  The
        application was also refused  by  reference  to  paragraph  320(11)
        because it was  said  the  Respondent's  past  immigration  history
        showed that he had contrived in a significant way to frustrate  the
        intentions of the Immigration Rules. In short the Appellant took  a
        number of points against the Respondent.
     2.    The ECM reviewed the refusal in the  light  of  the  grounds  of
        appeal, and evidence  filed  in  support,  on  12  March  2014.  He
        maintained the overall decision to refuse the application, and each
        of the bases upon which that had been reached.
     3.    The appeal was heard by  First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cohen  at
        Taylor House on 2 October 2014, and in a Decision promulgated on 21
        October 2014 it was allowed under the Immigration Rules.
     4.    By a decision of First Tier Tribunal Judge Saffer of 13  January
        2015 the Appellant was granted permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
        Tribunal on the basis it was arguable the  Judge  had  fallen  into
        error, if, as the Appellant asserted, he had told  the  parties  at
        the hearing that he intended to dismiss the appeal.
     5.    The Respondent filed  no  Rule  24  Notice.  Neither  party  has
        applied for permission to rely upon further  evidence  pursuant  to
        Rule 15(2A) of the Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules 2008.
     6.    Thus the matter comes before me.


   The hearing
     7.    When the appeal was called on for hearing neither  the  sponsor,
        nor any other representative for the  Respondent  was  present.  No
        application  for  an  adjournment  had   been   received   on   the
        Respondent's behalf, and no explanation offered for the failure  to
        attend.
     8.    By letter dated 20 February 2015 the Respondent's solicitors had
        advised the Upper Tribunal that despite a  number  of  attempts  to
        gain  instructions  they  had  received  none,  and  would  not  be
        representing him further, and wished to be removed from the  record
        as acting for him. In the circumstances I was  satisfied  that  the
        Respondent had been properly served with notice of the hearing.
     9.    I could see no useful purpose being served by the Upper Tribunal
        adjourning the appeal of its own motion in these circumstances  and
        I proceeded to hear the appeal in the absence of any representation
        for him.


   Error of law?
    10.     The  Judge's  decision  was  to  allow  the  appeal  under  the
        Immigration Rules, although in the final sentence of  paragraph  19
        of the Decision he stated that he dismissed the  appeal  under  the
        Immigration Rules. On any view something went awry.
    11.    When the Decision is read as a whole it becomes clear that it is
        the final sentence to paragraph 19 of the Decision which is out  of
        step with the rest of the text. If that was the end of the  matter,
        then I would be  satisfied  that  the  Judge  had  simply  made  an
        unfortunate typographical error in the course of writing  paragraph
        19, and there would be no material  error  of  law  disclosed  that
        required me to set aside the decision on the appeal and remake it.
    12.    There is however a good deal more to the story than that. In the
        application  for  permission  the  Appellant  asserted   that   the
        Respondent had conceded at the hearing that he could not  meet  the
        requirements of Appendix FM and that the appeal had to be dismissed
        under the Immigration Rules, and, that the Judge had accepted  that
        concession, and, then stated in consequence to the parties that  he
        would dismiss the appeal.
    13.    The Respondent has filed no Rule 24 response  to  the  grant  of
        permission, and thus has offered no challenge  to  the  Appellant's
        assertions.
    14.    There is very limited assistance to be derived from  the  almost
        entirely illegible record  of  proceedings  written  by  the  Judge
        during the course of the hearing, save that towards its  end  there
        appears to be a record  of  a  submission  by  the  HOPO  that  the
        requirements of Appendix FM were not  met.  The  skeleton  argument
        filed by Counsel for the Respondent  was  referred  to.  The  notes
        appear to conclude as follows;
           "Reserved. Dismissed but strong findings of fact."
    15.    The grant of permission to  appeal  required  the  Appellant  to
        produce the notes of the hearing prepared by the  HOPO.  Those  are
        placed before me. They are dated the same date as the hearing,  and
        I am satisfied that they were prepared contemporaneously  and  that
        they are consistent with both the legible parts of the ROP and  the
        complaints made in the grounds to the application  for  permission.
        They note that a concession was made by Counsel for the  Respondent
        in the skeleton argument prepared for the hearing,  which  was  not
        withdrawn. They note that "after much discussion" the Judge decided
        to dismiss the appeal and make positive findings on the genuineness
        of the marriage, because at face value the  sponsor's  funds  would
        meet the requirements in the event of a fresh application.
    16.    What then was the concession referred to? At paragraph 6  of  an
        undated skeleton argument prepared by Counsel  for  the  Respondent
        for the purpose of the hearing before the Judge, there is in  plain
        terms  the  concession  that  the  Respondent  did  not  meet   the
        evidential requirements of the Immigration Rules  when  making  his
        application, and that his appeal under the Immigration  Rules  must
        therefore be dismissed.
    17.    Looking at this material in the round I  accept  therefore  that
        the HOPO's understanding was that the appeal was to  be  dismissed,
        not merely under the Immigration  Rules,  but  also  on  Article  8
        grounds, although positive findings were to be made as  to  whether
        the claimant and sponsor had entered into a legally valid  marriage
        that was subsisting at the date of  decision,  in  the  expectation
        that the  Appellant  would  make  a  fresh  application  for  entry
        clearance filing the requisite evidence to show  that  he  met  the
        requirements of the Immigration Rules.  I  also  accept  that  this
        understanding was the result of what the Judge said in  the  course
        of the hearing, and that this was his intention  at  the  time,  as
        recorded in the notes he made of the hearing.
    18. In these circumstances I am satisfied that the Judge did fall  into
        a material error of law, requiring his decision to be set aside.  I
        have considered with the Appellant whether this  is  one  of  those
        appeals which should simply be remitted to the First Tier  Tribunal
        for a fresh hearing, but in the circumstances of this appeal  I  am
        not satisfied that this is the expedient  course,  or  that  it  is
        required by the Presidential  guidance,  and  I  shall  remake  the
        decision myself.


   The decision remade
    19. The Respondent has taken no step to withdraw the concession made on
        his behalf by Counsel on 2 October 2014. I am satisfied that it was
        properly made by experienced Counsel, and I accept it.  The  appeal
        must be dismissed under the Immigration Rules.
    20. Whilst I have no intention of disturbing the findings of fact  made
        in the favour of the Respondent and the sponsor in relation to  the
        issues of whether their marriage  was  a  legally  valid  one,  and
        whether it was a genuine and subsisting marriage at the date of the
        refusal of entry clearance; the  decision  does  disclose  a  clear
        error of material fact on the part of the Judge in relation to  the
        immigration history which goes to the  heart  of  his  findings  in
        relation to the application of paragraph 320(11).
    21. Whereas the Judge  states  in  paragraph  14  that  the  Respondent
        voluntarily returned to Sri Lanka in 2011, it had been conceded  by
        the Respondent in his witness statement made for the purpose of the
        appeal in the face of the immigration history relied  upon  by  the
        Appellant, that he had not. Thus the Respondent  conceded  that  he
        had been detained in September 2011 pending removal and that he had
        then been the subject of a forced return at public expense. If  the
        Judge was making a finding of fact in this respect, he had no basis
        upon which to go behind the Respondent's own  concession,  and  was
        plainly wrong to do so.
    22. Judge Cohen went on in paragraph 14 of his Decision to  reject  the
        suggestion that the Respondent could in  any  way  be  regarded  as
        having previously contrived in a significant way to  frustrate  the
        intentions of the Immigration Rules.  His  erroneous  finding  upon
        voluntary removal was plainly a key part of his reasoning  in  that
        respect, going to the heart of the issue. Thus this error  of  fact
        was one that amounted to an error of law.
    23. The Judge's approach to the proportionality  of  the  removal  also
        appears however to have been based upon the fact that Sri Lanka was
        in a state of civil war, the dates of which are not  identified  by
        the Judge, and in relation to which he makes no findings of fact as
        to the impact of war upon either the Respondent or his family.  The
        Judge appears to have overlooked the failure of the  Respondent  to
        make any timeous and well  founded  claim  for  asylum,  Article  3
        protection, or humanitarian protection during the currency of  that
        war.
    24. Moreover the Judge gave no consideration to  the  applicable  Entry
        Clearance Guidance at the date of decision, and made  no  reference
        to the decision in PS (paragraph 320(11) discretion:  care  needed)
        India [2010] UKUT 440, so the impression is given  of  an  entirely
        free-wheeling approach to the issue of whether the application  was
        properly  refused  by  reference  to  paragraph  320(11).   It   is
        abundantly plain in my  judgement  that  the  Judge's  approach  to
        paragraph 320(11)  was  so  obviously  flawed  as  to  be  entirely
        unsustainable.
    25. The ECO put in issue from the outset  that  in  his  judgement  the
        Respondent's conduct between 2002 and his  detention  in  September
        2011 was such as to contrive to frustrate  the  intentions  of  the
        Immigration Rules. The Respondent offered no explanation  for  that
        conduct in his witness statement prepared for the  purpose  of  the
        appeal, dated 17 September 2014 [ApB p10]. He was the only one  who
        could explain his actions, and justify them. The sponsor could  not
        do so. Thus no matter what view the Judge formed of her, she  could
        not assist in relation to the Respondent's state of mind during the
        relevant period.
    26. The Respondent having failed to seek  to  explain  or  justify  his
        actions, I am unable  to  see  any  proper  basis  upon  which  any
        decision maker could reach a  different  decision  upon  the  issue
        raised by the reliance upon paragraph 320(11) to  that  which  both
        the ECO and ECM had reached. The Respondent never had any grant  of
        leave in the UK. He has not challenged  the  assertions  that;  his
        application for ILR made  in  October  2002  was  entirely  without
        merit, based upon a story that the Tribunal rejected as false after
        having had the benefit of hearing his oral  evidence,  and  thus  a
        frivolous  application  made  for  the  sole  purpose  of  delaying
        removal. Once his appeal rights were exhausted in June 2003 he  did
        not leave the UK  voluntarily,  but  simply  went  to  ground.  The
        representations submitted on his behalf in 2010, and  in  2011  did
        not rely  upon  the  relationship  that  was  the  subject  of  the
        application for entry clearance  -  even  though  it  was  said  to
        predate them. They found no favour with the Appellant, and whatever
        their content, were not considered sufficiently weighty to  be  the
        foundation of any challenge by way of judicial review  application,
        or appeal to the Tribunal, to the decision to remove him.  Moreover
        they were not sufficient to be found an application for bail,  once
        the decision was taken to detain him pending removal.
    27. That then  is  the  context  in  which  the  Judge  ought  to  have
        approached any consideration of an Article  8  appeal  outside  the
        Immigration Rules.
    28. As the Judge appears to have discussed with the parties during  the
        course of the hearing, it was open to  the  Respondent  to  make  a
        fresh application for entry clearance, in which, barring any issues
        arising from the application of paragraph 320(11) he could hope  to
        demonstrate that he  met  the  requirements  of  Appendix  FM.  The
        proportionality of the decision to refuse entry clearance has to be
        viewed in the context that the Respondent  was  asserting  that  he
        could meet those requirements, and that he was not  asserting  that
        there would be  such  a  serious  period  of  delay  in  the  ECO's
        consideration of his application that it  was  disproportionate  to
        require him to make it.
    29. To the extent that the Respondent was arguing that he should not be
        put to the trouble and expense of making a fresh application, there
        is no obvious reason why he should be relieved of the obligation.
    30. There are no children affected by the decision under appeal.
    31. In my consideration of the Article 8 appeal I have to determine the
        following separate questions:
            . Is there an  interference  with  the  right  to  respect  for
              private life (which includes the right to physical and  moral
              integrity) and family life?
            . If so  will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such
              gravity as to potentially engage Article 8?
            . Is that interference in accordance with the law?
            . Does that interference have legitimate aims?
            . Is the interference proportionate in a democratic society  to
              the legitimate aim to be achieved?
    32. Since the Judge  accepted  that  the  sponsor  and  the  Respondent
        enjoyed a legally valid, and genuinely subsisting marriage  at  the
        date of decision it follows that the Respondent   and  the  sponsor
        have established that a "family life" between them existed at  that
        date. I am content to proceed on the basis that the decision  would
        have such consequences as to potentially engage Article 8, although
        it plainly did not affect the status quo at that date.
    33. As set out above I am satisfied  that  the  decision  was  made  in
        accordance with the law. There can be no issue  that  the  decision
        under appeal was  made  by  the  Appellant  in  the  pursuit  of  a
        legitimate aim; the protection of the economic security of the  UK,
        and the maintenance of public confidence in immigration controls.
    34. Nevertheless,  given  the  nature  of  the  failures  to  meet  the
        requirements of the Immigration Rules it is extremely difficult  to
        see any basis upon  which  the  Respondent  should  nonetheless  be
        entitled to succeed  in  his  appeal  on  Article  8  grounds.  The
        marriage was entered into when both parties would  have  been  well
        aware that there was a very real prospect that the Respondent would
        not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules for a  grant  of
        entry clearance. If the sponsor  nevertheless  entered  a  marriage
        with the Respondent, having taken the decision  that  she  was  not
        prepared to live with him in Sri Lanka, then that was their choice.
        It is not a choice that the Appellant is required to respect.
    35. Moreover  the  refusal  of  entry  clearance  for  the  purpose  of
        settlement did not affect the ability of the sponsor to  visit  the
        Respondent in Sri Lanka. The decision only prevented the Respondent
        from  entry  into  the  UK  for  settlement.  If,  and  when,   his
        circumstances changed materially he would be  entitled  to  make  a
        fresh application.
    36. The evidence did not establish that the sponsor or  the  Respondent
        were unable to access any care they required in Sri Lanka, nor that
        they would suffer any lack of safety in the event  they  sought  to
        live there together.
    37. Accordingly I am not satisfied that the Judge's findings  permit  a
        conclusion that the Respondent is entitled to a discretionary grant
        of entry clearance outside the Immigration  Rules.  The  mere  fact
        that the sponsor is a British  citizen  does  not  entitle  her  to
        insist that entry clearance be  granted  to  the  Respondent,  even
        though he does not meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules;
        MM & Others [2014] EWCA Civ 985.
    38. In my judgement the evidence falls well short of establishing  that
        there were at the date of  decision  any  compelling  compassionate
        circumstances that meant the refusal to  grant  to  the  Respondent
        entry clearance led to an unjustifiably harsh outcome.



   DECISION


      The Decision of the First Tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on  21
      October 2014 did involve the making of an error of law.  The  decision
      to allow the appeal under the Immigration  Rules  is  accordingly  set
      aside.


      I remake the Decision on the appeal so as to dismiss the appeal  under
      the Immigration Rules and on Article 8 grounds.





Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008

No anonymity direction was made by the First  Tier  Tribunal,  and  none  is
sought from the Upper Tribunal. There  is  no  good  reason  for  the  Upper
Tribunal to make one of its own motion.







Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 25 February 2015
