
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/17546/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 October 2014                              |On 30 October 2014            |
|                                                |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - pretoria
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                    O O M
                      (anonymity directioN DISCHARGED)

                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:

For the Entry Clearance Officer:  Mr E Tufan, Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent/Claimant:        Mr K Alim, Counsel instructed by Yaqub
                           & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Specialist Appeals Team appeals on behalf  of  an  Entry  Clearance
    Officer from the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  on
    Article 8 grounds the claimant's appeal  against  the  decision  by  an
    Entry Clearance Officer to refuse to grant her entry clearance  as  the
    spouse  of  a  refugee.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  made  an  anonymity
    direction, but there was no obvious justification for this.  I  do  not
    consider that the claimant or her spouse (who has been recognised as  a
    refugee and so no longer faces the threat  of  an  enforced  return  to
    Zimbabwe)  require  anonymity  for  these  proceedings  in  the   Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. The claimant is a national of Zimbabwe, whose date of birth is 11 April
    1975.  Her application  for  entry  clearance  from  South  Africa  was
    sponsored by Ellias Magwaza, whom she married in Zimbabwe on  23  April
    2000.  The sponsor arrived in the United Kingdom  on  5  December  2001
    travelling on his own passport, was granted six months leave  to  enter
    as a business visitor.  Following the expiry of his visa, he failed  to
    regularise his stay and remained as an overstayer.  He  claimed  asylum
    on 25 October 2005.  The application was refused on  9  December  2005,
    and his appeal against the refusal of asylum  came  before  Judge  John
    Pullig sitting in the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross on 13 January
    2006.  Judge Pullig rejected his claim to be involved with the MDC, and
    did not believe that the adverse attention of ZANU-PF had compelled him
    to leave the country in 2001.  However, he allowed the  appeal  on  the
    ground that the claimant would face a real risk of  persecution  as  an
    involuntary returnee to Zimbabwe.

 3. Reconsideration of the decision was ordered by Mr Justice Burton on  13
    February 2009.  The appeal came before Judge Verity on 10 November 2009
    for a rehearing, and she dismissed the appeal.  The matter ended up  in
    the Court of Appeal, which ordered that the appeal be remitted  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  On 19 November  2012  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  McGeachy
    allowed the sponsor's appeal against the refusal of asylum.

 4. The sponsor was granted  limited  leave  to  remain  as  a  refugee  in
    consequence of Judge  McGeachy's  ruling,  and  shortly  thereafter  he
    sponsored the claimant's application to join him in the UK.

 5. The application was refused on 7  August  2013.   The  Entry  Clearance
    Officer in Pretoria was not satisfied that the marriage was genuine  or
    subsisting.  This was because of a  lack  of  evidence  of  contact  or
    support between 2001 and 2010; and thereafter the amount of contact  or
    financial support had been minimal.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The claimant's appeal came before  Judge  Harmes  sitting  at  Columbus
    House  in  Newport  on  9  July  2014.   Both  parties   were   legally
    represented.  The judge received oral evidence from the sponsor.  In  a
    subsequent determination, he held at paragraph 21 that at the  time  of
    the  initial  decision  and  the  subsequent  ECM  review   there   was
    insufficient evidence to show that the claimant and the sponsor were in
    a genuine relationship:

         Based on the evidence presented I find as a fact that  they  simply
         have not proved that relationship on the balance of  probabilities.
         The [claimant] therefore fails under the Immigration Rules, and the
         decision was in accordance with the law.

 7. The judge went on to address an alternative claim under Article 8 ECHR.
     He observed that since the decision by the ECO and ECM, further  facts
    have been presented.  He said  he  was  entitled  to  take  these  into
    account to  determine  whether  the  relationship  is  (present  tense)
    genuine and subsisting.  The sponsor and the claimant had been reunited
    since he was able to travel outside the UK.  They had met in  Pretoria,
    and had renewed their  marital  vows  on  23  February  2014.   It  was
    accepted by the Entry Clearance  Officer  that  the  sponsor  had  been
    prevented from doing so from the time of his entry to the  UK  until  9
    December 2013, when he was finally given a travel  document  after  his
    asylum claim eventually succeeded.  The judge continued as  follows  in
    paragraph 23:

         Having had the benefit of hearing and seeing him give his evidence,
         something denied to the ECO and  ECM,  for  my  part  I  found  his
         evidence to be  honest  and  open.   His  answer  to  the  personal
         questions he was asked  I  found  to  be  genuinely  emotional  and
         heartfelt.  In particular I found his answers at paragraphs 12  and
         13  above  to  have  led  me  to  conclude  that  he  has  suffered
         considerably  from  the  separation  for  many,  many  years  while
         awaiting the result of his immigration  proceedings.   During  that
         time he was unable to travel because he had no documents to  do  so
         ... I find as a fact the marriage is genuine and the [claimant] and
         sponsor do intend to live and stay together if reunited.

 8. The judge went on to dismiss the appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules,
    but to allow the appeal under Article 8.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

 9. On 5 September 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge M J Gillespie granted the
    Entry Clearance Officer permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  He
    observed in passing that the Entry Clearance  Officer  did  not  appeal
    against the finding that a genuine and subsisting relationship  existed
    between the couple as at the date of the appeal hearing.   However,  it
    was arguable that in his favourable findings concerning the  Article  8
    claim,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  engaged  in  a   freewheeling
    assessment of the circumstances of the claimant without regard  to  the
    principles in Gulshan, Nagre and MF (Nigeria) and in doing so  made  an
    error of law.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

10. For the purposes of the hearing in the Upper Tribunal, Mr  Alim  relied
    on an extensive  Rule  24  response  which  had  been  settled  by  his
    instructing solicitors.  After hearing submissions from both parties, I
    ruled that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal was  vitiated  by  a
    material error of law such that it should be set aside and remade.   My
    reasons for so finding are set out below.  I then invited Mr Alim in to
    tender the sponsor as  a  witness  for  the  purpose  of  remaking  the
    decision.  The sponsor was cross-examined by Mr Tufan, and he  answered
    the questions for clarification  purposes  from  me.   In  his  closing
    submissions on behalf of the Entry Clearance Officer, Mr Tufan  invited
    me to dismiss the appeal.  In reply, Mr Alim pointed out that Mr  Tufan
    had  not  cross-examined  the  sponsor  on  aspects  of  his  evidence,
    including his evidence that he had been sending money to his wife on  a
    regular basis prior to the refusal decision.

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

11.  The  judge  misdirected  himself  in  law  at  paragraph  19  of   his
    determination, where he held that Section  85(5)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 did not apply to an  Article  8  claim.
    The judge wrongly proceeded on the premise that for the purposes of the
    Immigration Rules he could only consider the circumstances appertaining
    at the date of the decision to refuse entry clearance; whereas for  the
    Article 8 claim, he could consider the  circumstances  appertaining  at
    the date of the hearing.  But Section  85(5)  applies  no  less  to  an
    appeal against the refusal of entry clearance on Article 8 grounds than
    it does to an appeal under the Immigration Rules against the refusal of
    entry clearance.

12. The judge's incorrect starting point  generated  a  series  of  further
    material  errors.   Most  notably,  the  judge  wrongly   treated   the
    postdecision evidence as only being relevant to the  Article  8  claim,
    and as being inadmissible to the claim under paragraph  352(a)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  As was held in Naz (subsisting marriage -  standard
    of proof) Pakistan [2012] UKUT 0040 (IAC), a decision of a presidential
    panel, postdecision visits by a sponsor to his spouse are admissible in
    appeals to show that the marriage is subsisting.

13. Having found that the marriage was genuine and  subsisting  as  at  the
    date of the hearing, the judge  failed  to  ask  himself  the  question
    whether it was more likely than not  that  the  relationship  was  also
    genuine and subsisting at the date of decision.  The implication of his
    findings at paragraph 23 is that the judge  would  have  answered  this
    question in the claimant's favour.  However, he wrongly  found  against
    the claimant under the Rules on the ground that there was  insufficient
    evidence in existence at the date of the initial decision  and  on  the
    date of the subsequent ECM review.  If this  has  been  a  points-based
    system appeal, such considerations would  have  been  highly  relevant.
    But they were wholly  irrelevant  to  the  task  which  the  judge  was
    required to perform which  was  to  assess  whether  the  marriage  was
    genuine and subsisting at the date of  decision  by  reference  to  the
    totality  of  the   available   evidence,   which   included   relevant
    postdecision evidence.

14. Although  there  was  no  cross-appeal  by  the  claimant  against  the
    dismissal of his appeal under the Rules,  the  errors  in  the  judge's
    approach are "Robinson obvious" ones which it is proper for  the  Upper
    Tribunal to take of its own motion.

15. For the sake of completeness, I agree  that  the  judge's  approach  to
    Article 8 was also flawed for the reasons given by Judge Gillespie when
    granting permission to appeal.  However, as I have indicated earlier in
    this error of law ruling, the judge should not have  been  entertaining
    the Article 8 claim in the first place.

The Remaking of the Decision

16. The pre-decision evidence is considerably stronger than is suggested by
    Judge Harmes' determination.  The bundle for the hearing in the  First-
    tier Tribunal contained some eighteen pages of what is described in the
    index as email communications, but which are  in  fact  text  exchanges
    between  the  claimant  and  the  sponsor  through  an  app  knows   as
    "WhatsApp".  The printouts begin on 15 December 2012, which is some six
    months before the date of decision.  The content of the  communications
    is  entirely  consistent  with  a  genuine   and   subsisting   marital
    relationship.  The sponsor gave credible,  and  unchallenged,  evidence
    that he had been engaging in similar communications with his wife  long
    before mid-December 2012, but that their  earlier  communications  have
    been automatically deleted.  So he was  only  able  to  print  off  her
    exchanges from mid-December 2012.

17. Additional evidence of the marriage being genuine and subsisting  prior
    to the date of the refusal decision is to be found in the determination
    of Judge Pullig.  He refers in passing to a letter from the claimant to
    the sponsor which is  addressed  to  "beloved  husband".   It  is  also
    apparent from his determination that the sponsor was  in  communication
    with the claimant in October 2005, as the judge refers to a letter from
    the claimant dated 21 October 2005 which is addressed to  the  sponsor.
    She also sent  a  letter  dated  29  October  2005  to  the  claimant's
    solicitors by way of support  for  the  claimant's  asylum  claim.   In
    short,  the  evidence  that  can  be  gleaned   from   Judge   Pullig's
    determination about the status of the relationship between the claimant
    and the sponsor in early 2006 is supportive of the  relationship  being
    genuine and subsisting in 2005 and 2006, rather than it having withered
    away.

18. The appellant's bundle also contains  two  signed  letters  from  third
    parties, who give their  mobile  telephone  numbers.  They  testify  to
    having conveyed gifts from the sponsor to the claimant over the  years.
    Mr Shoniwa says that on two trips he has made to Zimbabwe over the past
    years the sponsor has given him an assortment of  gifts  consisting  of
    clothes, shoes, mobile telephone and chocolates to give his wife  Olga.
    He usually leaves them at their home in the city of Kwekwe in Zimbabwe,
    as the appellant is currently working in South  Africa.   Ms  Muklukane
    says that every year when she visits South  Africa,  the  sponsor  will
    give her money and some presents for  Olga.   She  attaches  her  South
    African visa and passport stamps which show how many times she has been
    to South Africa.

19. Mr Tufan submits that if the marriage had been genuine  and  subsisting
    at all material times, the sponsor would have made greater  efforts  to
    facilitate his wife's entry to the UK as a  visitor  or  student.   The
    sponsor agreed in cross-examination that at the time  when  he  entered
    the country in 2001, there were no visa requirements.  So there is some
    force in the argument that in 2001 it would have been  relatively  easy
    for the claimant to have followed the sponsor to the UK.  But once  the
    sponsor had claimed asylum, he could not realistically be  expected  to
    sponsor his wife to join him in the United  Kingdom  as  a  visitor  or
    student.  The claimant would not  have  been  granted  entry  clearance
    while her husband's  status  was  uncertain  and  when  she  could  not
    demonstrate that she had an adequate incentive to return  to  Zimbabwe.
    I do not consider the credibility of the relationship at  the  date  of
    the refusal decision is called into question  by  the  sponsor's  prior
    failure to attempt to achieve the impossible.

20. Finally, I see no reason to deprive the claimant of the benefit of  the
    positive findings of fact made by the FTT judge at paragraph 23 of  his
    determination.

21. Accordingly, I find that the claimant  has  discharged  the  burden  of
    proving that at the date of  decision  the  marriage  was  genuine  and
    subsisting, and that each of the parties to the  marriage  intended  to
    live permanently with the other as husband and wife  respectively.   As
    this was the only issue under the  Rules,  I  find  that  the  claimant
    succeeds in her appeal under the Rules.  It is not therefore  necessary
    for me to consider an alternative claim under Article 8 ECHR.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly the  decision  is  set  aside  and  the  following  decision  is
substituted: this appeal against the refusal of entry clearance  is  allowed
under the Rules.








Signed                              Date: 30 October 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
















