

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/17448/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 21 March 2014 and 10 June 2014             |On 7th July 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                            MAHA TAHIR SAEED BOY

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - CAIRO

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Hodgetts instructed by South West Law (on 21
                 March) and Mr D McConnell (on 10 June)
For the Respondent: Mr I Richards (on 21 March) and Mr T Wilding (on 10
                 June),      Home Office Presenting Officers

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Sudan who was born on  1  January  1988.
      On 27 June 2012, she applied for entry clearance to join  her  spouse,
      Jafar Osman Bassi who is a British citizen.  On 31  August  2012,  the
      Entry Clearance Officer  refused  the  appellant's  application  under
      paragraph 281 of the Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended).   The  ECO
      was not satisfied that the appellant met the requirements of paragraph
      281 of the Rules:

           1) the English language requirement (para 281(i)(a)(ii));

           2) that the appellant and sponsor  were  validly  married  (para
              281(i)(a)(i));

           3) that their marriage was a genuine and subsisting one and that
              they intended to live together permanently as spouses in  the
              UK (para 281(iii));

           4) that adequate  accommodation  was  available  to  them  (para
              281(iv)); and

           5) that they would be adequately maintained in  the  UK  without
              recourse to public funds (para 281(v)).

The First-tier Tribunal

   2. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a determination
      promulgated on 16 May 2013 Judge A D Baker dismissed  the  appellant's
      appeal under para 281.  It was conceded before Judge  Baker  that  the
      appellant  met  the  English   language   requirement   of   paragraph
      281(i)(a)(i) and, on the evidence before her, the Judge accepted  that
      the appellant also met the maintenance and accommodation  requirements
      in paragraph 281(iv) and (v).  However, Judge Baker was not  satisfied
      that the appellant and sponsor were  validly  married  or  that  their
      marriage was a genuine and subsisting one and that  they  intended  to
      live together permanently as spouses in the UK.

The Hearing Before the Upper Tribunal on 21 March 2014

   3. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.   On
      19 June 2013, the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Kamara)  granted  the
      appellant permission to appeal.  Thus, the appeal came before us on 21
      March 2014.

   4. At that hearing, Mr Hodgetts who represented the appellant,  submitted
      that the Judge had erred in law in a number of respects.   First,  she
      had erred in concluding that the parties' marriage  was  not  genuine.
      The Judge was wrong to disregard  the  original  marriage  certificate
      submitted at the hearing by the appellant.  Mr Hodgetts submitted that
      at paragraph 15 of her  determination,  Judge  Baker  had  misdirected
      herself when she had said:

           "I do not accept that the  appellant's  production  now  of  the
           original certificate meets  the  requirements  in  circumstances
           where there has been a challenge to the validity of the Rule. As
           pointed  out  by  the  Home  Office  Presenting   Officer,   the
           submission of the original certificate was to  allow  the  Entry
           Clearance Officer to examine it in order to determine whether it
           could be accepted."

   5. Mr Hodgetts submitted that there was no requirement in  law  or  under
      the Rules to submit an  original  certificate  of  marriage  before  a
      marriage could be accepted as valid.  In any event, section  85(5)  of
      the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  contemplated  the
      Tribunal  considering   evidence   relevant   to   the   circumstances
      appertaining at the date of decision which had only been submitted  at
      the appeal hearing.  Relying on the  grounds,  Mr  Hodgetts  submitted
      that the Judge had erred in law in failing to examine and consider for
      herself whether the marriage certificate could be relied upon  in  the
      light of the fact that the  ECO  had  produced  no  evidence  (through
      verification  procedures)  that  the  marriage  certificate  was   not
      genuine.

   6. Secondly, Mr Hodgetts submitted that Judge Baker had erred in  law  in
      reaching her conclusion that the parties' marriage was not genuine and
      they did not intend to  live  together  permanently  as  spouses.   Mr
      Hodgetts submitted that it was irrational not  to  take  into  account
      that the parties had, subsequent to their claimed marriage met on  two
      occasions.  First, there was a joint visit of some two months  between
      March and May 2012 in Cairo which was supported by  the  evidence  and
      appeared to be accepted by the Judge at para 16 of her  determination.
      Secondly, there was a joint visit again in Cairo of about a month from
      early January 2013 until early February 2013.

   7. Further, Mr Hodgetts submitted that the Judge had failed to take  into
      account  all  the  evidence  contained  in  the  appeal  bundle   that
      demonstrated "intervening  devotion"  and  financial  support  of  the
      appellant  by  the  sponsor.   As  regards  the  former,  Mr  Hodgetts
      submitted that the Judge had only referred to  three  emails  (one  of
      which she had found unreliable) when, in fact, there were a number  of
      emails at pages 81-93 of the bundle. He submitted that the  Judge  had
      also failed to take into account evidence of phone calls made  between
      the couple set out in the phone bill  at  pages  37-47.   Finally,  as
      regards  financial  support,  Mr  Hodgetts  relied  on  the  financial
      remittances between the sponsor and appellant at pages  26-37  of  the
      bundle; none of which, he submitted, had been taken  into  account  by
      the Judge.

   8. On behalf of the  ECO,  Mr  Richards  submitted  that  the  Judge  was
      obviously  in  some  difficulty  when  the  marriage  certificate  was
      produced on the day of the hearing.  He submitted that  there  was  no
      error on the Judge's part to reject that  document.   As  regards  the
      subsistence of the marriage, he submitted that even if  another  Judge
      could have made a different conclusion it  was  not  established  that
      Judge Baker's finding was not properly open to her.

   9. At the conclusion of the submissions at the hearing on 21 March  2014,
      we indicated to the parties that we were minded to find  an  error  of
      law in the Judge's conclusion that the parties'  marriage  (if  valid)
      was not a genuine and subsisting one and that they had no intention to
      live together permanently.  We indicated that we were  minded  on  the
      evidence to reverse that finding of fact.  However, we indicated  that
      we were troubled by the fact that the certificate of the marriage  had
      not been authenticated.

  10. In the light of that, we decided to adjourn the hearing  in  order  to
      give the  ECO  an  opportunity  to  authenticate  (or  otherwise)  the
      genuineness of that document.  We directed that the ECO should have  8
      weeks to carry out that process.  We directed that the ECO  should  by
      Friday 16 May send to the Vice President's Office at Field  House  the
      results  of  the  authentication  process  and  serve  them   on   the
      appellant's  representative.   Thereafter,  by  30   May   2014,   the
      appellant, through her representatives, should make any response to be
      sent to the  Vice  President's  Office  at  Field  House  and  to  the
      Presenting Officer, Mr Richards at the Cardiff Office.

  11. In the result, no communication (whether in the form of a verification
      report or other representations) was made by the ECO by Friday 16 May.



The Hearing Before the Upper Tribunal on 10 June 2014

  12. Consequently, the appeal was listed for a 'for mention' hearing before
      UTJ Grubb on 10 June 2014.

  13. At that hearing, Mr Wilding (who then represented  the  ECO)  informed
      the Tribunal that no verification report had been  received  from  the
      ECO in Cairo.  He indicated that a request had been made on  2  April,
      following the initial hearing and that had subsequently been chased up
      by the Presenting Officer's Unit in Cardiff on 9 May and 5 June but no
      response had been received from the ECO

  14. In the light of that, Mr Wilding invited UTJ Grubb to further  adjourn
      the appeal in order to give the ECO more time.  Mr McConnell (who then
      represented the appellant) invited the Upper Tribunal to determine the
      appeal.  UTJ Grubb concluded that the ECO had had  ample  opportunity,
      including two reminders from the Presenting Officer's Unit, since  the
      previous hearing to obtain  and  file  in  accordance  with  the  UT's
      direction a verification report or other  evidence  dealing  with  the
      authentication of the parties' claimed marriage certificate.   It  was
      not, in the  circumstances,  appropriate  to  exercise  discretion  to
      further adjourn the hearing.  The  Upper  Tribunal  would,  therefore,
      determine the appeal on the basis  of  the  submissions  made  at  the
      previous hearing.

Discussion

      Error of Law

  15. As regards the  validity  of  the  parties'  marriage,  we  accept  Mr
      Hodgetts'  submissions  that  the  Judge  was  wrong  to  conclude  in
      paragraph 15 that the appellant  could  not  rely  upon  the  original
      marriage certificate produced at the hearing for the first time simply
      because it had not been produced earlier.  The Judge was, in our view,
      entitled to take that fact into account but was required  to  consider
      the reliability of the document in the light of all the evidence.  She
      could not disregard it out of hand simply  because  it  had  not  been
      produced earlier.  Indeed, one practical way forward might have  been,
      as it was for us at the earlier hearing, to allow time for the ECO  to
      carry out enquiries and produce such evidence as the ECO wished on the
      authenticity or genuineness of the document.  It does not appear  that
      any such application was made by either party before the Judge in this
      appeal.  However, as we have said, in our view the Judge erred in  law
      by simply disregarding this piece of evidence which was before her.

  16. Secondly, it is clear to us that, whilst the Judge gave  a  number  of
      reasons for not accepting the genuineness of the parties' marriage and
      that their intentions were to live together permanently as spouses, in
      doing so she failed to take into account relevant  evidence  to  those
      issues.

  17. In her determination, Judge Baker referred to three emails between the
      parties.  As we have said,  she  found  one  of  those  emails  to  be
      unsatisfactory.  However, at pages  81-93,  there  were  a  number  of
      emails between December 2010 and January 2013 showing contact  between
      the parties consistent with a genuine  and  loving  relationship.   In
      addition, at pages 37-47 there is a phone bill covering the period  11
      June 2012 to 10 August 2012 showing, it is claimed, a telephone number
      linked to phone card calls abroad (see page  36  of  the  bundle)  and
      which, at least for that period, offers support to there  having  been
      contact between the parties.  It does not seem to have been  suggested
      before Judge Baker, nor was it before us, that the calls do not relate
      to contact between the parties.  Finally at pages 26-34  there  are  a
      number  of  documents  including  Western  Union  remittances  showing
      payments by the sponsor to the appellant over a period of time between
      June 2009 and April 2013.

  18. In failing to take this evidence into account in reaching her finding,
      Judge Baker erred in law.

  19. For these reasons, her findings in relation to  the  validity  of  the
      parties' marriage and as to whether  their  marriage  is  genuine  and
      subsisting and that they intend to live  together  permanently  cannot
      stand and we set them aside.

      Re-making the Decision

  20. We now turn to remake the decision.   We  remind  ourselves  that  the
      burden of proof is upon the appellant to establish  on  a  balance  of
      probabilities that she meets the requirements of para 281 of the Rules
      at the date of decision, namely 31 August 2012.

  21. As we have already indicated, it was conceded before Judge Baker  that
      the appellant met the English language requirement and  Judge  Baker's
      findings that the appellant  met  the  maintenance  and  accommodation
      requirements of para 281 are not challenged and stand.  Therefore, the
      only outstanding issues relate to the validity of the marriage and the
      genuineness of the parties' relationship and their intentions.

  22. As regards the  former,  the  appellant  has  submitted  a  bi-lingual
      marriage certificate from the Elfashia Family Court in Sudan dated  30
      November 2010 stating  that  on  10  November  2010  the  sponsor  and
      appellant were married.  Whilst we accept that it is for the appellant
      to establish the validity of  her  marriage,  despite  being  afforded
      ample opportunity to do so, the ECO has not adduced any evidence as to
      the authenticity or otherwise of this  document.   It  is  for  us  to
      consider the reliability of this document in  the  light  of  all  the
      evidence.  Nothing was drawn to our attention that suggested that this
      document was other than genuine and it  seems  to  us  that  in  these
      circumstances a decision-maker is driven  to  accept  it  as  what  it
      purports to be .

  23. We turn, therefore, to  consider  the  evidence  in  relation  to  the
      genuineness of the parties' relationship.  The parties'  evidence  was
      that they had met on two occasions  and,  in  effect,  lived  together
      during those periods following their marriage.  The first occasion was
      between 14 March 2012 and 9 May 2012 when they travelled to Cairo  and
      stayed together for about two months.  The second occasion,  again  in
      Cairo, was between 8 January 2013 and 11 February 2013,  a  period  of
      just over one month.  We do not agree with  Judge  Baker's  assessment
      (at para 20) that these visits do not "go to substantiate"  the  claim
      that their  relationship  is  subsisting.   The  evidence  is  clearly
      consistent with  them  having  a  subsisting  relationship  given  the
      cultural context in  which  they  have  lived.   It  would  be  rather
      surprising if an unmarried woman and man  originating  from  Sudan,  a
      Muslim  country,  would,  if  not  married  and   having   a   genuine
      relationship, spend periods of time of this sort living together in  a
      third country.   The appellant and sponsor  also  gave  evidence  that
      following their marriage they went to  Khartoum  for  their  honeymoon
      where they stayed in a hotel  and  it  was  there  that  the  "studio"
      photographs were taken.

  24. Further, there is the evidence of intervening devotion in the form  of
      phone calls and emails.  Even if Judge Baker's criticism of one of the
      three emails she considered has merit (see paras 20-23), that  has  to
      be seen in the context in the bulk of the evidence which has not  been
      challenged by the ECO.

  25. Further, there is also the evidence of financial remittances  made  by
      the sponsor  to  the  appellant  which  are  also  consistent  with  a
      commitment  to  one  another  supporting  the  evidence  of  both  the
      appellant and sponsor that they  are  genuinely  married,  that  their
      relationship is subsisting and  that  they  intend  to  live  together
      permanently as spouses in the UK.  We note, as Judge Baker did in  her
      determination, that there are no wedding photographs and no supporting
      evidence from family members concerning the marriage or  any  evidence
      of the marriage ceremony itself.  The  photographs  submitted  by  the
      appellant, it is accepted, were taken at a "studio".  In reaching  our
      findings, we take into account the explanation given by the sponsor in
      his oral evidence in which  he  frankly  accepted  that  they  had  no
      photographs of the actual wedding.

  26. Looking at the evidence  as  a  whole,  the  preponderance  of  it  is
      supportive of the evidence of the appellant and sponsor that they  are
      genuinely married  and  intend  to  live  together  permanently.   The
      evidence  of  intervening  devotion  exists  and  does  not,  in   our
      judgement, appear to be contrived or manufactured in order to  support
      an otherwise false claim.  We  accept  the  evidence  of  their  post-
      marriage visits as supportive of their accounts.  They  have  produced
      what is claimed to be  an  original  marriage  certificate  and  which
      stands unchallenged by any evidence from the  ECO.   We  consider  its
      reliability in the light of all the evidence.  We  find  it  to  be  a
      reliable document.

  27. We find, on  a  balance  of  probabilities,  that  the  appellant  has
      established that she is validly married to the sponsor and that  their
      marriage is genuine and  subsisting  and  that  they  intend  to  live
      together permanently  in  the  UK  as  spouses.   The  appellant  has,
      therefore, established  the  requirements  in  para  281(i)(a)(i)  and
      (iii).  As we have already indicated, it was  either  conceded  before
      Judge Baker or Judge Baker found as satisfied that the  appellant  met
      the remaining requirements of paragraph 281.   Consequently,  we  find
      that the appellant, at the date of decision, met the  requirements  of
      para 281 of the Rules.

Decision

  28. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
      appeal under para 281 of the Rules involved the making of an error  of
      law.  That decision is set aside.

  29. We remake the decision allowing the appellant's appeal under para  281
      of the Rules.





                               Signed






                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:






TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Having allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules, we consider it
appropriate to make a full fee award.




                               Signed






                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:








