
IAC-AH-KEW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/17262/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19th June 2015                    |On 6th July 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                    MOAA
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ACCRA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms P Yong of Counsel, instructed by Davies, Blunden
                    and Evans Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Walker promulgated following a hearing on 10th September 2014.



 2. The Appellant is a male Ghanaian citizen born  8th  November  1996  who
    applied for entry clearance to the United Kingdom as the adopted  child
    of a parent present and settled in this country.  I shall refer to  the
    parent as the Sponsor, who is a male British citizen.

 3. The application was refused on 2nd  August  2013,  the  Respondent  not
    being satisfied that the application met the requirements of  paragraph
    310  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  and  in  particular   sub-paragraphs
    (i)(e)(vi), (vii), (x), and (xi).

 4. In giving reasons for refusal the Respondent accepted that the  Sponsor
    is a British national settled in the United Kingdom.  It was noted that
    an adoption order dated 9th August 2012 had  been  made  in  Ghana  and
    submitted with the application for entry clearance.  It was noted  that
    the Appellant appeared to be 16 years of age at the time of adoption.

 5. The Respondent contended that in order for  an  adoption  to  be  valid
    there must be a consent form signed by the adopter and the child but no
    such form had been submitted, neither was there any  consent  from  the
    Appellant's biological mother.

 6. It was noted that the Appellant had changed his  name  without  a  duly
    authorised court order and it was not accepted that the  correct  legal
    procedures had been carried out.

 7. It was noted that it appeared that the Sponsor  was  a  friend  of  the
    Appellant's late  father  and  therefore  there  should  have  been  an
    application made for adoption to the Social Welfare Department.   There
    should  have  been  a  home  study   report   requested   through   the
    international social services in order to assess  the  eligibility  and
    suitability of the prospective adopter.  It was  contended  that  there
    should be a director's report tendered to the court and no such  report
    had been submitted, and  the  home  study  report  submitted  with  the
    application did not evidence the source of  information  provided.   In
    addition there was no consent letter from the Social Welfare Department
    giving permission for the Appellant to be taken out of the country.

 8. The documents submitted  did  not  demonstrate  that  the  Sponsor  had
    followed the required procedures in Ghana nor did they demonstrate that
    he had undertaken any of the required steps in  the  UK  prior  to  the
    adoption.

 9. The Appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  Grounds  of
    Appeal prepared by his solicitors  are  critical  of  the  Respondent's
    decision describing it as  shoddy  and  incompetent  and  accusing  the
    Respondent of "desperately clutching on to straws  in  his  attempt  to
    refuse the application."  It was also contended that the Respondent had
    wasted the Sponsor's time and money "in the haphazard manner  in  which
    he considered the application."  In summary it was pointed out that the
    adoption order had been made by a duly authorised court in Ghana.   The
    consent form signed by  the  Appellant's  biological  mother  had  been
    submitted with the application as  had  the  statutory  declaration  in
    relation to the change of name.

10. There had been an application to the Social Welfare  Department  as  if
    there had been no such application an adoption  order  could  not  have
    been  made.   There  had  been  no  consent  from  the  Social  Welfare
    Department to the Appellant leaving Ghana but such an application would
    have been made once entry clearance had been granted.

11. The application was reviewed by the Entry  Clearance  Manager  on  12th
    February 2014, following receipt of the appeal grounds.  It  was  noted
    that adoptions in Ghana had been recognised by the United Kingdom,  but
    were no longer recognised from 3rd January 2014.

12. The Respondent noted that the Appellant remained in  contact  with  his
    biological mother and  was  not  satisfied  that  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 310(x) had been met.

13. It was noted that the Appellant was almost 16 years  of  age  when  the
    adoption order was made, and that the application explained that he was
    adopted following the death of his father, as his mother was struggling
    to manage with six children, and he was at  risk  of  dropping  out  of
    school.  It was not clear why the Sponsor adopted the Appellant who was
    almost at school leaving age and in a position to support  his  mother,
    rather than adopt one of his younger siblings.  The Respondent believed
    that the adoption was one of convenience  rather  than  necessity,  and
    noted that the Appellant looked considerably older than his  stated  16
    years on his application photograph.  The Respondent was not  satisfied
    that  the  requirements  of  paragraph  310(XI)  were  satisfied.   The
    concerns in the Respondent's refusal had not been fully addressed,  and
    therefore the decision to refuse entry clearance was maintained.

14. The Appellant's appeal was heard by Judge Walker (the  judge)  on  10th
    September 2014.  The judge heard evidence from the  Sponsor  and  found
    that the application had not complied with Ghanaian  law  and  adoption
    procedures and found that the adoption was not valid.   The  judge  was
    not satisfied that the proposed adoption was in the best  interests  of
    the Appellant.

15. The judge noted that Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention on Human
    Rights (the 1950 Convention) was not raised  as  a  Ground  of  Appeal,
    although it had been raised in a  skeleton  argument  produced  at  the
    hearing.  The judge found that the Appellant's best interests  had  not
    been properly considered, and the evidence did not show any established
    family or private life with the Sponsor, and concluded that  Article  8
    was not engaged.

16. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    The appeal came before me on 1st May 2015.  Ms Yong  appeared  for  the
    Appellant and relied upon the principles in  Buama  [2012]  UKUT  00146
    (IAC) contending that the judge had materially erred  in  law  and  had
    failed to adequately consider paragraph 310 of the  Immigration  Rules,
    and had also erred in not adequately considering Article 8.

17. Mr Avery appeared  for  the  Respondent  and  confirmed  that  Ghanaian
    adoptions were no longer recognised by the  United  Kingdom,  following
    The Adoption (Recognition of Overseas Adoptions) Order 2013 which  came
    into force on 3rd January 2014.  However it was acknowledged that  this
    was not a retrospective order, and therefore  Ghanaian  adoptions  were
    recognised by the United Kingdom when entry clearance  was  refused  to
    the Appellant on 2nd August 2013.  Mr Avery contended that the decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain a material error of law  and
    should stand.

18. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  In brief  summary
    I found that the judge had not taken into account  the  principles  set
    out in Buama.  There was evidence that an adoption order had been  made
    by a Ghanaian court on 9th August  2012  which  prima  facie  satisfied
    paragraph 310(vi)(a) as being a decision taken by a competent court, in
    a country whose adoption orders were recognised by the United Kingdom.

19. The judge made no adequate findings in relation to the adoption  order,
    but sought to challenge the adoption procedures that  were  undertaken,
    although there did not appear to have been any  evidence  submitted  by
    the Respondent on  this  issue.   This  approach  conflicted  with  the
    principles in Buama which indicated that a challenge to the validity of
    the court order had to be by way of  expert  evidence.   There  was  no
    expert evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.

20. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  with  no  findings
    preserved.  The hearing was adjourned so that the decision could be re-
    made by the Upper Tribunal after  further  evidence  was  given.   Full
    details of the application for  permission  to  appeal,  the  grant  of
    permission by Judge Brunnen, and my reasons for finding an error of law
    are contained in my decision dated 6th May 2015.

Re-Making the Decision

Preliminary Issues

21. I ascertained that I had  all  documentation  upon  which  the  parties
    intended to rely.  I had the Respondent's bundle, and  the  Appellant's
    bundle that had been before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  comprising  179
    pages, the Appellant's skeleton argument that was before the First-tier
    Tribunal, and a skeleton argument prepared by Ms Yong  which  had  been
    submitted at the error of law hearing.

22. Ms Everett advised that she did not  have  a  file.   The  hearing  was
    therefore put back  to  allow  Ms  Everett  to  consider  the  relevant
    documentation.  Ms Yong indicated that she had  received  some  further
    documentation from her instructing  solicitors.   I  advised  that  the
    Tribunal had not  received  any  further  documentation.   I  asked  Ms
    Everett to confirm which requirements of paragraph 310 it was contended
    that the Appellant did not satisfy.

23. When the hearing resumed both representatives indicated that they  were
    ready to proceed and there was no application for  an  adjournment.   I
    was not provided with any further documentation.

24. Ms Everett confirmed that it was contended that the Appellant  did  not
    satisfy the paragraph 310 requirements specifically referred to in  the
    Entry Clearance Manager review which I set out below;

         '310.

         (x)  has lost or broken his ties with his family of origin;

         (xi) was adopted, but  the  adoption  is  not  one  of  convenience
             arranged to facilitate his admission to or  remaining  in  the
             United Kingdom.'

25. Ms Everett acknowledged that as it had been conceded at  the  error  of
    law hearing that Ghanaian  adoptions  were  recognised  by  the  United
    Kingdom when entry clearance was refused, the Respondent would  not  be
    seeking to contend that the requirements of paragraph  310(vi)(a)  were
    not satisfied, which relate to an adoption  having  taken  place  by  a
    court in a country whose adoption orders are recognised by  the  United
    Kingdom.

Oral Evidence

26. Oral evidence  was  given  by  the  Sponsor  who  adopted  his  witness
    statement dated 29th August 2014 which may be summarised as follows.

27. The Sponsor is married and has two children, and his family are settled
    in the United Kingdom.  The Appellant is the son of his friend  KO  who
    is now deceased.  When the Appellant's father became  ill  the  Sponsor
    volunteered to take care of the Appellant to ease  the  burden  on  his
    family as the Appellant's parents had six children.

28. The Appellant's father passed away on 30th March 2010.  The Sponsor was
    solely responsible for  the  upkeep  of  the  Appellant  prior  to  his
    father's death and was supporting the family financially  in  order  to
    fund the Appellant's education.

29. The Appellant's mother gave her consent to the adoption because she had
    five additional children and was finding it hard to provide  for  their
    needs.  The Sponsor gave a power of attorney to a lawyer, KO,  who  had
    the same name as the Appellant's deceased father, and instructed him to
    process the adoption application.  The adoption order was made  on  9th
    August 2012.

30. On 1st  November  2012  a  statutory  declaration  was  sworn  and  the
    Appellant's name changed.  Since the grant of the  adoption  order  the
    Appellant has ceased all communication with his  extended  family,  and
    lives with the Sponsor's aunt in Ghana.

31. The  Sponsor  is  in  constant  communication  with  the  Appellant  by
    telephone and email and they have a father and son  relationship.   The
    Sponsor continually sends funds to the  Appellant  in  Ghana  while  he
    resides with the Sponsor's aunt.  The Sponsor and his family regard the
    Appellant as a member of their family.

32. In answering questions from Ms Yong the Sponsor  said  he  adopted  the
    Appellant because the Appellant's father had been a good friend of  his
    and he was asked to  look  after  the  Appellant.   He  said  that  the
    Appellant was the eldest child, and he did not wish to  adopt  a  young
    child as the Sponsor and his wife are both working and they  wanted  an
    older child who would be able to fend for himself.

33. The Sponsor was cross-examined.  He  said  the  Appellant  was  not  in
    contact with his biological mother.  When asked why  the  Sponsor  said
    that the Appellant's father had passed away  and  the  Appellant  lived
    with his aunt.  When asked again why the Appellant had no contact  with
    his mother the Sponsor said that both his parents had decided that they
    needed help and it was their wish that he  adopt  the  Appellant.   The
    Sponsor confirmed that the Appellant had five siblings and he  believed
    that they were with various friends and family but he was unsure as  he
    had no contact with the Appellant's mother.

34. The Sponsor said that the Appellant did not want to  have  any  contact
    with his mother.  The Sponsor is in daily  contact  with  him  and  the
    Appellant did not want to  have  any  contact  with  his  mother.   The
    Sponsor said that the Appellant's father had not asked him to help  his
    wife or other children, but only asked him to help the Appellant.  When
    asked again about the Appellant's contact with his mother, the  Sponsor
    said that he and the Appellant had not spoken about  it  and  that  the
    Appellant's mother is never discussed.

35. The Sponsor was re-examined  by  Ms  Yong  who  pointed  out  that  the
    Respondent did not accept that the Appellant had broken his  ties  with
    his birth family and asked the Sponsor what  he  wished  to  say.   The
    Sponsor replied that the Appellant had found happiness with him.

36. I asked some questions by way of clarification and asked the Sponsor if
    he knew when the Appellant had  last  spoken  to  his  mother  and  the
    Sponsor said December 2011.  The Appellant's mother lives approximately
    30 miles away from where the Appellant lives with the  Sponsor's  aunt.
    The Sponsor said that the Appellant had had no contact with his  mother
    since December 2011.  At that time the Appellant's  mother  had  wanted
    him to leave the house because he was being stubborn, and the death  of
    his father had shocked him.  He described the Appellant and his  mother
    as "having issues."

37. The Sponsor said that the last time he  had  a  conversation  with  the
    Appellant in which the Appellant's mother was  mentioned  was  December
    2011.

The Respondent's Submissions

38. Ms Everett relied upon the refusal decision dated 2nd August 2013,  and
    the review  dated  12th  February  2014  insofar  as  they  related  to
    paragraph 310(x) and (xi).

39. I was asked to find the Sponsor's evidence not  credible.   Ms  Everett
    submitted that no plausible explanation had been given as  to  why  the
    Appellant had ceased to have all contact with his mother, and there was
    no supporting evidence  to  confirm  this.   There  was  no  reasonable
    explanation for a loss of contact between the Appellant and his family.
     It was submitted that this adoption had been created for  the  purpose
    of the Appellant gaining entry to the United Kingdom.

40. In relation to Article 8, Ms Everett submitted that no family life  had
    been established that would engage Article 8, and if  I  found  to  the
    contrary, then family life could be carried  on  in  Ghana,  and  there
    would be no breach of Article 8 by reason of the Respondent's  decision
    to refuse entry clearance.

The Appellant's Submissions

41. Ms Yong submitted that the  Sponsor  had  given  clear  and  consistent
    evidence and that it should be accepted that the Appellant  had  broken
    all ties with his mother and his family.

42. I was asked to accept the Sponsor's evidence that there had been issues
    between the Appellant and his mother, and that it was  the  Appellant's
    father's wishes  that  the  Sponsor  take  on  responsibility  for  the
    Appellant.  I was referred to the home study  report  prepared  by  the
    Department of Social Welfare, dated 6th August  2012,  which  had  been
    prepared for the purposes of the adoption proceedings in Ghana.  I  was
    asked to note that the Appellant's mother had expressed  her  readiness
    to give the Appellant up for  adoption,  because  she  had  five  other
    children and was finding it hard to provide for  their  needs.   I  was
    also referred to an affidavit at pages 32 and  33  of  the  Appellant's
    bundle, prepared by the Sponsor's attorney in Ghana, who has  the  same
    name as the Appellant's father.  It is confirmed that  the  Appellant's
    father died on 30th March 2010, and that he wished the Sponsor to adopt
    the Appellant as his mother had five other children to care for.

43. Ms Yong indicated that she wished to rely upon the  Grounds  of  Appeal
    submitted to the First-tier Tribunal, and VB v ECO Ghana  [2002]  UKIAT
    1323, in particular paragraphs 8, 13 and 15 which considered  paragraph
    310(x) and what is meant by the expression "ties  with  his  family  of
    origin."  Ms Yong also relied upon the skeleton arguments.

44. I was asked to allow the appeal with reference to paragraph 310, but if
    I found that the requirements of paragraph 310 were  not  satisfied,  I
    was asked to allow the appeal with reference to Article 8  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.  It would be in the best interests of the  Appellant
    for entry clearance to be granted  to  enable  him  to  live  with  the
    Sponsor in the United Kingdom.

45. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

46. I have taken into account all the evidence, both oral  and  documentary
    that has been placed before me, and taken into account the  submissions
    made by both representatives.  I have considered the  evidence  in  the
    round,  and  because  this  is  an  appeal  against  refusal  of  entry
    clearance, I have considered the circumstances appertaining at the date
    of refusal, that being 2nd August 2013.

47. I bear in mind that in considering the Immigration Rules, the burden of
    proof is on the Appellant, and the standard of proof is  a  balance  of
    probability.

48. I find as a fact that the Sponsor is settled in the United Kingdom, and
    that an adoption order was made in Ghana on 9th August 2012, naming the
    Sponsor  as  the  Appellant's  adoptive  father.   I  find   that   the
    Appellant's biological mother signed a form consenting to the adoption.
     That form has been produced in evidence.

49. I find that the Respondent's refusal, and the First-tier  Tribunal  did
    not have regard to the principles set out in Buama,  and  for  ease  of
    reference I set out below paragraph 17 of that decision;

         "In relation to the order of the Ghanaian court it is on  the  face
         of the order  valid.   The  Immigration  Rules  do  not  appear  to
         contemplate a refusal to accept the validity  of  the  order  of  a
         competent court.  Further, any challenge to  the  validity  of  the
         order had to be by expert evidence in my view."

50. This is not a case where the Respondent  has  relied  upon  any  expert
    evidence to challenge the order of the Ghanaian court.  As accepted  at
    the error of law hearing, Ghanaian adoptions  were  recognised  by  the
    United Kingdom at the date entry clearance was refused.  That situation
    has now changed, but as accepted by  the  Respondent  at  the  previous
    hearing, the change is not retrospective.  It was therefore not, at the
    hearing  before  me,  suggested  that  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    310(vi)(a) were not satisfied.

51. I make a finding that the Appellant was adopted in  accordance  with  a
    decision taken by a competent court in Ghana, at a time  when  Ghanaian
    adoption orders were recognised by the United Kingdom.

52. The issues in dispute before me related to whether  the  Appellant  had
    lost or broken his ties with his family  of  origin,  and  whether  the
    Appellant had been adopted, but the adoption  was  one  of  convenience
    arranged to facilitate his admission to the United Kingdom.

53. In relation to whether the Appellant has lost or broken ties  with  his
    family of origin, I have considered the  evidence,  having  taken  into
    account the principles outlined in VB v ECO Ghana and I set  out  below
    paragraph 15 of that decision;

         "15. We are satisfied that 'ties with his family  of  origin'  does
             not have the wide meaning the Adjudicator has applied.  It  is
             intended to ensure  that  the  adoption  is  not  as  it  were
             temporary and that, once the child has obtained the  entry  to
             the United Kingdom which the adoption will achieve, the family
             of origin takes back responsibility.  There must be a loss  or
             break of the ties of responsibility.  Those of  affection  may
             remain.  Were it otherwise, a child of a single parent who was
             smitten with a terminal illness and was wholly unable to  care
             for him or her could not join adoptive parents merely  because
             he or  she  retained  affection  for  and  visited  the  dying
             parent."

54. I find that there is a lack of evidence to prove that the Appellant has
    lost or broken his ties with his family of  origin  and  therefore  the
    burden of proof has not been discharged.   I  find  that  there  is  no
    evidence from the Appellant's biological mother to prove he has lost or
    broken his ties with his family of origin, although I accept  that  she
    consented to the adoption.  That however, without more, does not  prove
    that he has lost or broken his ties with his family.  I find  there  is
    no satisfactory evidence from the Appellant to confirm what contact  if
    any he has with his biological family.  The Sponsor has said  that  the
    Appellant has been living with his aunt.  There is no evidence from the
    aunt.  It is not clear when it is contended that the Appellant  started
    to live with the Sponsor's aunt, and one would have  thought  that  she
    would be well placed, if the Appellant was living with her, to  confirm
    this, and to provide  evidence  as  to  the  relationship  between  the
    Appellant and his family.

55. I accept that there is an adoptive home study report dated  6th  August
    2012, which was prepared for the adoption proceedings in  Ghana.   This
    report states the Sponsor has been taking care of the  Appellant  since
    the Appellant's father died on 30th March  2010,  and  the  Appellant's
    mother  is  quoted  as  stating  that  the  Sponsor  has  been   solely
    responsible for the upkeep of the Appellant.  Although this report  was
    accepted by the court in Ghana I do not attach  substantial  weight  to
    it.  It is not accurate to say that the Sponsor has been taking care of
    the Appellant since 30th March 2010, as the Sponsor has in fact been in
    the United Kingdom for the majority of time.  It is contended that  the
    Appellant has been living with the  Sponsor's  aunt  and  there  is  no
    mention of the aunt in this report.

56. There is an error in the report under the heading 'Parenting', as  this
    indicates that the Sponsor has two children living on their own in  the
    United Kingdom.  According to the Visa Application Form the ages of the
    Sponsor's children at the time of  application  were  5  years  and  18
    months, and they were living with their mother in the United Kingdom.

57. There also appears to be an error  under  the  heading  'Background  of
    Child' where the Appellant is described as the third  of  his  parents'
    six children.  The evidence from the Sponsor is that the  Appellant  is
    the eldest child and this is  a  significant  discrepancy.   For  these
    reasons I do not attach significant weight to the claim in  the  report
    that the Sponsor has been solely responsible  for  the  upkeep  of  the
    Appellant since the death of his father.  In any event the report  does
    not indicate that the Appellant has lost or broken all  ties  with  his
    biological family.

58. The Sponsor's evidence is that the Appellant has no  contact  with  his
    family.  I do not find the evidence to be reliable  or  credible.   The
    Sponsor's evidence is internally inconsistent  when  one  compares  his
    oral evidence with the contents of a letter he wrote  dated  9th  April
    2013.  In that letter the Sponsor states that the Appellant has cut all
    links with his extended family since the adoption order  and  has  been
    living with his aunt.  This is not what the Sponsor stated in his  oral
    evidence, when cross-examined.   The  Sponsor  was  asked  whether  the
    Appellant had any contact with his mother, and when he said he did not,
    he was asked why.  He gave no satisfactory  answer  to  this  question,
    even though the question was repeated.  He could give  no  rational  or
    credible explanation as to why the Appellant would have no contact with
    his mother whatsoever, and why although he and the  Sponsor  had  daily
    telephone conversations, they never mentioned the Appellant's mother.

59. The Sponsor  said  in  oral  evidence  that  he  did  not  discuss  the
    Appellant's mother with him, but could give no rational explanation  as
    to why not.  He confirmed that the Appellant had had  no  contact  with
    his mother since December 2011,  which  was  the  last  time  that  the
    Sponsor had a conversation with the Appellant in which his  mother  was
    mentioned.  That would indicate that the Appellant had left the  family
    home a considerable period before the adoption order was made in August
    2012, but in his letter, the Sponsor indicated it was  only  after  the
    adoption order was made that the Appellant had ceased all contact  with
    his family.

60. In his oral evidence the Sponsor mentioned  for  the  first  time  that
    there were difficulties between the Appellant and his mother.  This had
    never been mentioned in the  initial  application,  and  the  Sponsor's
    witness statement, and there was no indication that this was  mentioned
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  If there  were  such  difficulties,  I
    would have expected this to have been mentioned prior to the hearing on
    19th June 2015, and I do not accept this evidence.

61. I find it relevant that there is a lack of evidence from the Appellant,
    his biological mother, and the Sponsor's  aunt.   I  do  not  find  the
    Sponsor's evidence reliable for the reasons given above, and I  do  not
    place any substantial weight upon the home study report.   I  therefore
    conclude that the burden of proof has not been discharged  in  relation
    to paragraph 310(x) and therefore the appeal fails.

62. In relation to paragraph  310(xi)  on  the  issue  of  an  adoption  of
    convenience, I take into account my  findings  that  it  has  not  been
    proved that the Appellant has lost or broken his ties with  his  family
    of origin.  I have  considered  this  issue  taking  into  account  the
    guidance given in Papajorgji Greece [2012] UKUT 00038 (IAC).   Although
    I accept that the guidelines in  Papajorgi  relate  to  a  marriage  of
    convenience, I find that the principles when considering a marriage  of
    convenience and an adoption of convenience are similar and  I  set  out
    below the first two paragraphs of the head note to that decision;

         "(i) There is no burden at  the  outset  of  an  application  on  a
             claimant to demonstrate that a marriage to an EEA national  is
             not one of convenience.

         (ii)  IS  (Marriages  of  Convenience)  Serbia  [2008]   UKAIT   31
             establishes only that there is an  evidential  burden  on  the
             claimant to address evidence justifying  reasonable  suspicion
             that the marriage is entered into for the predominant  purpose
             of securing residence rights."

63. In this case, the Respondent made reference to paragraph 310(xi) in the
    initial refusal, and  the  subsequent  review  of  the  decision.   The
    Respondent made the point that it was not clear  why  the  Sponsor  had
    adopted the Appellant, who was almost at school leaving age, and  would
    have been in a position to help his mother, rather than offer  help  to
    the Appellant's mother or one of the younger siblings.  I find that the
    Sponsor has not adequately explained this.  He had  said  that  he  was
    friends with the Appellant's late father and he was asked to look after
    the Appellant only.  I find no rational explanation has been  given  as
    to why the Sponsor was not asked to help the family financially, rather
    than offer no help at all to the Appellant's mother or  five  siblings,
    and adopt the Appellant.

64. I find it relevant in answering the questions put by Ms Yong, that  the
    Sponsor specifically said that he did not want to adopt a young  child,
    and the Appellant was the eldest, and that he and he and his wife  were
    both working, and they wanted an older child who would be able to  fend
    for himself.

65. My assessment of the  evidence  is  that  the  Tribunal  has  not  been
    provided  with  a  comprehensive  or  accurate   description   of   the
    Appellant's  circumstances  in  Ghana.   I  do  not   find   that   any
    satisfactory explanation has been given as to why he would cut off  all
    contact with his biological family, nor  do  I  find  any  satisfactory
    explanation has been given by the Sponsor as to why he would only  seek
    to assist  one  member  of  the  Appellant's  family,  that  being  the
    Appellant by adopting the oldest child in the family.

66. I find that the Respondent's  refusal  justified  reasonable  suspicion
    that this was an adoption entered into for the purpose of the Appellant
    securing entry clearance to the United Kingdom.  I accept that there is
    evidence that there has been some email contact between the Sponsor and
    Appellant, and that there has been some evidence of  telephone  contact
    and money being sent  to  Ghana.   I  have  taken  that  into  account.
    Nevertheless  I  conclude  that  the  burden  of  proof  has  not  been
    discharged by the Appellant, and I do not find that he  has  broken  or
    lost ties with his family of origin, and I conclude this is an adoption
    of convenience and therefore the appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules
    fails.

67. At the error of law hearing I found that the judge had erred in finding
    that Article 8 was not engaged.  That was on the  basis  that  adequate
    reasons had not been provided for making that decision.  In considering
    Article 8 I note that it  is  not  contended  that  the  Appellant  can
    satisfy Article 8 within the Immigration Rules, that being Appendix  FM
    in relation to family life, and paragraph 276ADE in relation to private
    life.  I find that to be the case.

68. I have decided to consider Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules,  on
    the basis that the Immigration Rules in this case are  not  a  complete
    code.

69. In considering Article 8 outside the rules, it is appropriate to  adopt
    the step-by-step approach referred to in Razgar [2004] UKHL  27,  which
    although relates to a removal case, can also be  applied  in  an  entry
    clearance case, in my view.

70. However the first issue to be decided  is  whether  the  Appellant  has
    established a private or family life would engage Article 8.

71. In my view it is clear that the Appellant's private life is  in  Ghana.
    He does not have a private life in  the  United  Kingdom.   Refusal  of
    entry clearance does not interfere with his private life.  Article 8 is
    therefore not engaged on that basis.

72. I do not find that the Appellant has established a family life with the
    Sponsor that would engage Article 8.  The Sponsor has a  wife  and  two
    children, and has made reference to them engaging with  the  Appellant,
    but the evidence does not indicate that they have ever met.

73. The Sponsor's wife has not adopted the Appellant.  The  adoption  order
    relates only to the Sponsor.  In view of my findings that the Appellant
    has not lost or broken ties with his biological family,  and  that  the
    adoption is one of convenience, I  conclude,  notwithstanding  that  an
    adoption order has been made in  Ghana,  that  the  Appellant  has  not
    proved that he has family life  with  the  Sponsor  that  would  engage
    Article 8.  For that reason I conclude that Article 8 is  not  engaged,
    and the decision to refuse entry clearance does not breach Article 8 of
    the 1950 Convention.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and  was
set aside.  I substitute a fresh decision.

The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules.

The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

At the error of law hearing I made an anonymity order pursuant  to  rule  14
of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 because the  Appellant
is a minor.  That order is continued.  The Appellant  is  granted  anonymity
and no report of these proceedings shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify
him or any member of  his  family.   This  direction  applies  both  to  the
Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure  to  comply  with  this  direction
could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 24th June 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.


Signed   Date 24th June 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
