
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/17192/2013
      OA/17193/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 30 January 2015                            |On 30 January 2015           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM

                                   Between

                          MOHAMMAD FAGHIRZADEH (1)
                            NORIA FAGHIRZADEH (2)
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                   THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ISLAMABAD
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Vijayatunga, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. The appellants are citizens of Afghanistan, born on 7 January 1945 and
      3 June 1946.  At  the  date  of  application  they  were  residing  in
      Pakistan. They have appealed with the  permission  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal against a  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Powell, promulgated on 15 September  2014,  dismissing  their  appeals
      against decisions of the respondent, made on 31 July 2013, refusing to
      issue them entry clearance to enable them to join their adult son,  Mr
      Sefattullah Faghirzadeh ("the sponsor"), in the UK.


   2.  The  respondent  refused  the  applications  by  reference   to   the
      Immigration Rules for adult dependents relatives,  found  in  Appendix
      FM. The appellants are a married couple and  they  live  together.  In
      their visa application forms they both confirmed that they could  look
      after themselves.  They  both  stated  they  had  no  special  medical
      conditions other than old age. The respondent found  that  neither  of
      the appellants had shown that they required long term personal care to
      perform everyday tasks (E-ECDR.2.4). Nor had they shown care could not
      be provided in Pakistan (E-ECDR.2.5).


   3. The appellants submitted grounds of appeal arguing the rules were met.
      A letter was submitted from Dr Tariq Khan (Hashim) from the  Northwest
      General Hospital & Research Center in Peshawar, dated 19 August  2013,
      stating the first appellant was suffering from an  intestinal  illness
      and the second appellant was suffering from stroke. Both were weak, in
      poor condition and suffering from stress. They were old  and  ill  and
      desired to join their sons for physical assistance and help  in  their
      daily lives. The grounds added that the son on whom the appellants had
      relied for assistance in Pakistan had moved to Canada.   Finally,  the
      grounds argued that the refusals were an  unlawful  interference  with
      the appellants' right to private and family life under  article  8  of
      the Human Rights Convention. The decisions to refuse  were  maintained
      by the entry clearance manager who found that no  new  information  of
      evidential significance had been added.


   4. The appellants were represented by counsel at the hearing.  The  judge
      identified the sole issue for hearing was whether the  appellants  met
      paragraph E-ECDR.2.4 of the rules, which required them  to  show  that
      one or both of them,  as  a  result  of  age,  illness  or  disability
      required long-term personal care to  perform  everyday  tasks[1].  The
      judge heard evidence from the sponsor. He found it  was  not  credible
      that the failure to mention health problems in  the  applications  was
      the fault of the agent employed to compete the application  forms.  He
      noted the sponsor had also failed to mention specific health needs  in
      his  sponsorship  declaration  submitted  and  no   medical   evidence
      accompanied the applications.  However,  he  accepted  the  appellants
      were, at the date of decision, affected by illnesses  for  which  they
      were both receiving treatment and medication.  The  first  appellant's
      intestinal  illness  was  longstanding.  The  second   appellant   was
      suffering from the effects of a stroke in  2006.  The  appellants  had
      returned to Afghanistan. They required financial support. It  was  not
      surprising they wished to  settle  in  the  UK.  The  judge  expressed
      sympathy for the appellants. However, on these  facts,  he  found  the
      rule was not met.

   5.  The  application  for  permission  to  appeal  was  prepared  by  new
      representatives. It is not necessary to  summarise  all  the  grounds,
      which are very widely drawn. The first ground alleges  the  Tribunal's
      decision was irrational because no reasonable Tribunal could have come
      to the same  conclusion  and  the  Tribunal  had  failed  to  consider
      relevant factors. Additionally,  the  Tribunal  erred  by  failing  to
      determine one of the grounds of appeal, namely the article 8 ground.


   6. The appellants were granted permission to appeal by Judge of the First-
      tier Tribunal Pooler. His order stated that it was arguable the  judge
      had erred by failing to consider the article 8 ground. It was unlikely
      the other grounds disclosed an arguable error of law  but  he  granted
      permission to argue all the grounds.

   7. The respondent filed a response opposing the appeal. This  argued  the
      Judge had given clear reasons for finding  the  rules  were  not  met.
      There were no good arguable grounds for considering article 8  outside
      the rules. This was a "mundane case"  and  there  were  no  compelling
      circumstances  outside  the  rules.  An  outcome  favourable  to   the
      appellants would have been "perverse".


   8. I heard submissions from the representatives as to whether  the  Judge
      made a material error of law in his  decision.  I  have  recorded  the
      submissions in full in my record of the proceedings and I only set out
      a summary here. Ms Vijayatunga maintained both that  the  decision  on
      the rules was erroneous and that the failure to consider article 8 was
      a material error. Greater emphasis was placed on the second  of  those
      arguments. She maintained that the correct approach to article  8  was
      to carry out a two-step process, whereby  the  judge  ought  first  to
      consider the rules and then article 8, following the Razgar[2]  steps.
      Mr Walker did not seek to argue that there was no error on the part of
      the Judge in failing to consider article 8 outside the  rules  but  he
      argued that any such error could not have been material on  the  facts
      found.


   9. I reserved my decision as to whether the Judge made a  material  error
      of law such that his decision has to be set aside.


  10. There is nothing in the  first  ground.  The  Judge  directed  himself
      correctly in law, took into account all the  evidence  and  reached  a
      conclusion which it was entirely open to him to reach on the available
      information. In other words, he was entitled to  find  the  appellants
      did not have long-term care needs as at the date of decision.  It  was
      entirely reasonable for him to infer from the absence of any reference
      to care needs in the applications that no such care needs existed. The
      Judge  gave  sympathetic  consideration  to  the  subsequent  evidence
      regarding the appellants' family circumstances  and  health  problems.
      However, he was perfectly entitled to conclude that it  had  not  been
      established that the rule was met as at the date of decision.


  11. Ms Vijayatunga's argument that the Judge failed to take  into  account
      the sponsor's oral evidence that his cousin  was  providing  temporary
      assistance in Jalalabad is unarguable given the Judge's  reference  to
      it in paragraph 29. In any event, these  findings  and  those  in  the
      following paragraph are not circumstances appertaining as at the  date
      of decision[3].


  12. Although not apparently drawn to the Judge's attention, the rules also
      impose evidential requirements in paragraph 34 of  Appendix  FM-SE[4].
      The only evidence adduced by the appellants emanating from a doctor or
      health professional consisted of the two letters from Dr  Khan,  dated
      19 August 2013 and 20  August  2014.  These  letters  contain  similar
      information and neither states  that  the  appellants  are  unable  to
      perform everyday tasks.


  13. The Judge's decision under the rules contains no error.


  14. On the face of it, the Judge gave no separate consideration to article
      8. The question is whether this is a material error.  The  grounds  of
      appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  were  drafted  by  solicitors.  In
      respect of both appellants, they stated as follows:


         "5. The Appellant has a vast network of family in  the  UK.  It  is
         submitted that denying the Appellant entry clearance is an unlawful
         interference with the appellant's rights to family and private life
         under article 8 ECHR."


  15. The entry clearance manager  responded  that  these  grounds  did  not
      specifically state how it was alleged the appellants' article 8 rights
      had been breached. Article 8 only has extra-territorial effect in  its
      family life aspect[5]. Article 8 did not confer a right on individuals
      to choose where they prefer  to  live  and  States  are  permitted  to
      control entry. The entry  clearance  manager  was  not  satisfied  the
      appellants' right to family life had been affected in any way.


  16. The Judge was under an obligation to determine any matter raised as  a
      ground of appeal by virtue of section 86(2)(a) of the  2002  Act.  The
      grounds of appeal did raise article 8. The  appellants'  counsel  does
      not appear to have abandoned the ground. I think there must  therefore
      be en error of law on the part of the judge in failing to address  it.
      Even if he considered there was no need to consider article 8  outside
      the rules, he was under an obligation to the parties to  say  so.  The
      question becomes whether his error was material to the outcome of  the
      appeal.


  17. The express purpose of Appendix FM of the rules is to give application
      to the  UK's  obligations  with  respect  to  family  life[6].  As  Ms
      Vijayatunga reminded me, there  has  been  judicial  consideration  of
      whether there is a two-stage approach in article 8 cases  and  whether
      the rules are a complete code.


  18. It is now clear there is no "threshold test" and the task of the Judge
      is to consider whether there are compelling circumstances, which might
      justify a favourable  decision  on  article  8  grounds,  not  already
      catered for by the correct application of the rules. In R  (Oludoyi  &
      Ors) v SSHD (Article 8 - MM (Lebanon) and Nagre) IJR [2014] UKUT 00539
      (IAC), the Tribunal explained as follows:


         "20. There is nothing in Nagre, Gulshan or  Shahzad  that  suggests
         that a threshold test was being suggested as opposed to  making  it
         clear that there was a need to look at the evidence to see if there
         was anything which has not already been  adequately  considered  in
         the context of the IRs and which could lead to a successful Article
         8 claim. If, for example, there is some feature which has not  been
         adequately considered under the IRs but which cannot  on  any  view
         lead to the Article  8  claim  succeeding  (when  the  individual's
         circumstances are considered cumulatively), there is no need to  go
         any further. This does not mean that a  threshold  or  intermediate
         test is being applied.  These  authorities  must  not  be  read  as
         seeking to qualify or fetter  the  assessment  of  Article  8.  The
         guidance given must be read in context and not construed as if  the
         judgments are pieces of legislation."


  19. Having carefully considered the  arguments  put  forward  against  the
      findings of fact made by the Judge, I have concluded his error was not
      material. That is because it was not conceivable that the Judge  could
      have allowed the appeal on article 8 grounds outside the rules.


  20. The rule in issue in these appeals is precisely  one  which  considers
      compassionate circumstances, albeit the threshold for success  is  set
      very high. It is the will of Parliament, shown by the enactment of the
      rules replacing paragraph 317 of the previous rules, for there to be a
      tightening of immigration controls in  respect  of  elderly  dependent
      relatives, such as these appellants. It is no longer  enough  to  show
      dependency on the sponsor. The only people now permitted  to  join  UK
      sponsors are those who cannot  look  after  themselves  in  their  own
      countries because they cannot obtain the  long-term  care  which  they
      need.


  21. As said, the Judge was entitled to  find  that,  as  at  the  date  of
      decision, the appellants did not  require  personal  care  with  their
      every day  tasks.  Whilst  the  factual  issues  for  considering  the
      proportionality of refusal under these circumstances  are  wider,  the
      starting-point must be that this elderly  couple  has  each  other  to
      support them and their physical frailties  had  not  yet  reached  the
      stage that  care  was  required  from  another  person.  There  is  no
      suggestion the Judge limited the evidence which could  be  called.  As
      the Judge noted, the appellants were able to  travel  to  Peshawar  to
      receive treatment and medication, which was paid for by  the  sponsor.
      The Judge was not  satisfied  that  the  cousin's  support  would  not
      continue in Jalalabad. He noted that, in  addition  to  the  sponsor's
      support, they derived some income from a shop and  agricultural  land.
      In short, there was nothing in the evidence which  could  have  led  a
      rational   decision-maker   to   conclude   these   were    compelling
      circumstances justifying a decision outside the  rules  in  favour  of
      entry clearance.


  22. It is, of course, the case that the appellants have the option to  re-
      apply if their circumstances change.


  23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not  contain  a  material
      error of law and shall stand. The appellants' appeals  are  dismissed.



NOTICE OF DECISION

     The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not make a material  error  of
    law and his decision dismissing the appeals shall stand.



                               Signed                 Date 30 January 2015




                               Judge Froom,
                               sitting as a Deputy Judge of the Upper
                               Tribunal
-----------------------
[1] "E- ECDR.2.4. The applicant or, if the applicant and their partner are
the sponsor's parents or grandparents, the applicant's partner, must as a
result of age, illness or disability require long-term personal care to
perform everyday tasks."
[2] [2004] UKHL 27.
[3] Section 85A(2) of the 2002 Act provides that the tribunal  may  consider
only the circumstances appertaining at the time of the decision  to  refuse.
This applies also to human rights ground of appeal (AS  (Somalia)  (FC)  and
another v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] UKHL 32).

[4] "34. Evidence that, as a result  of  age,  illness  or  disability,  the
applicant requires long-term personal care should take the form of:

(a) Medical evidence that  the  applicant's  physical  or  mental  condition
means that they cannot perform everyday tasks; and

(b) This must be from a doctor or other health professional."


[5] Sun Myung Moon (Human rights, entry clearance, proportionality) USA
[2005] UKIAT 00112.
[6] See paragraph GEN.1.1: "Purpose GEN.1.1. This route is for those
seeking to enter or remain in the UK on the basis of their family life with
a person who is a British Citizen, is settled in the UK, or is in the UK
with limited leave as a refugee or person granted humanitarian protection
(and the applicant cannot seek leave to enter or remain in the UK as their
family member under Part 11 of these rules). It sets out the requirements
to be met and, in considering applications under this route, it reflects
how, under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention, the balance will be
struck between the right to respect for private and family life and the
legitimate aims of protecting national security, public safety and the
economic well-being of the UK; the prevention of disorder and crime; the
protection of health or morals; and the protection of the rights and
freedoms of others. It also takes into account the need to safeguard and
promote the welfare of children in the UK."

