
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: oa/17823/2013
                                                               OA/17825/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 September 2015                 |On 21 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                           dhak bahadur pithakote
                            deepak bahadur thapa
                       (anonymity directions NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                          ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER,
                                  NEW DELHI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr R Jesurum of Counsel instructed by Howe & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   These are linked appeals against the decisions of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Prior promulgated on 5 August 2014 dismissing the appeals of  the
    Appellants, Mr Dhak Bahadur  Pithakote  and  Mr  Deepak  Bahadur  Thapa
    against decisions of the Respondent, the Entry Clearance Officer at New
    Delhi dated 28 August 2013 refusing entry clearance.

2.   The Appellants are brothers.  They are nationals of Nepal and the  sons
    of Mr Surja Bahadur Thapa and Miss Maina Kumari  Pithakote  Maga.   The
    Appellants' father enlisted in the British Army's Brigade of Gurkhas in
    January 1980 and served in that  brigade  until  his  discharge  on  14
    January 1995.  In 2006 the Appellants' father made an  application  for
    settlement in the UK which was refused.   Following  a  change  in  the
    policy of the UK Government a further application was allowed  in  July
    2009.  Unfortunately the Appellants' father died before he  could  take
    up the entry clearance that he had belatedly secured.  The  Appellants'
    mother however was granted  settlement  and  travelled  to  the  United
    Kingdom.

3.   The Appellants then made applications in July 2013 for entry  clearance
    to join their mother in the  UK  with  a  view  to  settlement.   Those
    applications were refused for reasons set out in respective Notices  of
    Immigration Decision dated 28 August  2013.   Essentially  it  was  the
    Respondent's  evaluation  that  the  Appellants  did  not  satisfy  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules, that  there  was  no  applicable
    policy outside the Immigration Rules, and that the Appellants could not
    benefit pursuant to Article 8  of  the  European  Convention  of  Human
    Rights.

4.   In respect of Article 8 issue was taken by the  Respondent  in  respect
    of the existence of family life as  between  the  Appellant  and  their
    mother, and also  in  the  alternative  in  respect  of  the  issue  of
    proportionality.  In this  latter  regard  the  Notice  of  Immigration
    Decision in respect  of  each  of  the  Appellants  contains  the  same
    wording:

         "However if I am wrong on that, [i.e. in respect of Article 8(1)] I
         consider that refusing this application  is  proportionate  in  the
         exercise of firm immigration control.  Your mother chose  to  apply
         for a settlement visa when you were already an adult.  You have  an
         adult sibling who is  settled  in  Nepal.   I  also  consider  that
         refusing this application is justified  and  proportionate  in  the
         exercise of the immigration control given that the requirements  of
         the Immigration Rules are not met and they are intended to maintain
         an effective immigration control and  guard  the  public  purse  in
         order to protect the rights and freedoms of others and the economic
         wellbeing of the country."

5.   The Appellants appealed to the IAC and their cases  were  dismissed  by
    Judge Prior for reasons set out in his 'Determination and Reasons'.

6.   Before the First-tier Tribunal it was acknowledged  on  their  behalves
    that the Appellants could not satisfy the requirements of Appendix  FM,
    the requirements of paragraph 317, or otherwise any of the  Immigration
    Rules. It was also acknowledged that  there  was  no  published  policy
    directly applicable to the Appellants' circumstances.  Accordingly  the
    Appellants advanced their cases before the Tribunal  on  the  basis  of
    human rights grounds, with reference specifically to Article 8  of  the
    ECHR.

7.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge directed himself in respect of Article  8
    at paragraph 4 of  his  decision,  and  although  he  made  no  express
    reference by name to the case of Razgar he set out  the  familiar  five
    Razgar questions at paragraph 4.  Thereafter the determination sets out
    the  respective  cases  being  advanced  by  the  Appellants  and   the
    Respondent before reaching a section headed 'Decision and Reasons'.

8.   Paragraph 17 is in the following terms:

         "There were no statements from the Appellants and their evidence in
         interview did not touch upon the strength  or  otherwise  of  their
         emotional ties to the second[1] sponsor. The  authorities  make  it
         clear that financial ties between adults are not  sufficient  alone
         to establish family life between them.  I do not accept even on the
         low standard  applicable,  that  the  refusal  of  the  Appellants'
         applications constitute a grave interference from their perspective
         of their family lives with the second  Sponsor.   From  the  second
         sponsor's perspective  I  do  accept  that  it  would  be  a  grave
         interference however I would bear in mind, in  that  context,  that
         the second sponsor whose extended family is very largely in  Nepal,
         could reasonably be expected to return to Nepal  where  she  has  a
         property having only been in the United Kingdom for 3 years  and  2
         months.  The second sponsor is aged 52 and has  spent  the  greater
         part of her life in Nepal."

9.   As regards the position of  the  'second  sponsor'  -  the  Appellants'
    mother - in my judgment the Judge's references to  the  possibility  of
    her returning to Nepal disregard what would be an appropriate  approach
    to the proportionality of her Article 8 private life established in the
    UK, and in particular disregard the fact that her settlement in the  UK
    is founded on her relationship to a member of the Brigade  of  Gurkhas.
    The Judge's notion of the 'reasonableness' of her now quitting  the  UK
    disregards the elements of historical justice  that  made  it  entirely
    appropriate for her to seek to establish a life in the  United  Kingdom
    irrespective of any elements of her private life that may exist abroad,
    and runs contrary to the established case law  on  proportionality  and
    those matters that informed the changes in policy by which she was able
    to secure entry clearance.

10.  Another troubling  aspect  of  paragraph  17  is  the  seeming  tension
    between the first part of it, in which the Judge finds  that  there  is
    not a grave interference in family life as between the  Appellants  and
    their mother, and the second part, where the Judge finds that there  is
    a grave interference with family life as between  the  mother  and  her
    children.  It may be possible to envisage some  circumstances  where  a
    family life can exist for one individual with another and  yet  not  be
    mutual.  Mr Jesurum suggested  an  example  of  a  person  in  a  coma.
    Theoretically that might be so, but on the face of it that is  not  the
    case here.  I struggle with the First-tier Tribunal Judge's approach at
    paragraph 17 which seems to deny the mutuality of family life.

11.  Be that as it may I am persuaded that  the  finding  that  family  life
    exists, and that there would be a grave interference with it in respect
    of the Appellants' mother, are findings that stand unchallenged  before
    me, and I accept that this establishes a proper foundation from which a
    consideration of proportionality must follow.  The  Judge's  conclusion
    that there would be a grave interference echoes the first  two  of  the
    Razgar questions to which he directed  himself  at  paragraph  4.   And
    indeed, thereafter, at paragraph 18, the Judge goes on to consider  the
    issue of proportionality.  It would not have been necessary for him  so
    to do if he had formed the view that family life did not exist and that
    therefore Article 8 was not engaged.

12.  Appropriate guidance in respect of the approach to be taken to  Article
    8(2) in the context of a case involving family members of a veteran  of
    the Brigade of Gurkhas is to be found in the case of Ghising  &  Others
    (Gurkhas/BOCs: historic wrong; weight) [2013] UKUT  00567  (IAC).   The
    case of Ghising was cited before the First-tier Tribunal Judge (see for
    example at paragraphs 10 and 11; the Judge also referred to Ghising  in
    his concluding paragraph in respect of proportionality at paragraph  18
    of his decision).  I do not propose to rehearse the background  in  the
    case of Ghising but I consider it instructive to set out the  following
    paragraphs from the head note:

         "(2) When an Appellant has shown that there is family/private  life
             and  the  decision  made  by  the  Respondent  amounts  to  an
             interference with it, the burden lies with the  Respondent  to
             show that a decision  to  remove  is  proportionate  (although
             Appellants will,  in  practice,  bear  the  responsibility  of
             adducing evidence that lies within their remit and about which
             the Respondent may be unaware).

         (3)  What concerned the Court in Gurung  and  Others  was  not  the
             burden of  proof  but,  rather,  the  issue  of  weight  in  a
             proportionality assessment. The Court held  that,  as  in  the
             case of BOCs,  the  historic  wrong  suffered  by  Gurkha  ex-
             servicemen should be given substantial weight.

         (4)  Accordingly, where it is found that Article 8 is engaged  and,
             but for the historic wrong,  the  Appellant  would  have  been
             settled in the UK long ago, this will ordinarily determine the
             outcome of the Article  8  proportionality  assessment  in  an
             Appellant's  favour,  where  the  matters  relied  on  by  the
             Secretary of State/entry clearance officer consist  solely  of
             the public interest in maintaining a firm immigration policy.

         (5)      It can therefore be seen that Appellants  in  Gurkha  (and
             BOC) cases will not necessarily succeed, even though (i) their
             family life engages Article 8(1); and (ii) the evidence  shows
             they would have come to the United Kingdom with their  father,
             but for the injustice that prevented the latter from  settling
             here earlier.  If the Respondent can point to matters over and
             above the public interest in maintaining  a  firm  immigration
             policy, which argue in favour of removal  or  the  refusal  of
             leave to enter, these matters must be given appropriate weight
             in the  balance  in  the  Respondent's  favour.  Thus,  a  bad
             immigration history and/or criminal  behaviour  may  still  be
             sufficient to outweigh the powerful  factors  bearing  on  the
             Appellant's side of the balance."

13.  I remind myself that the  Respondent's  decisions  in  these  cases  in
    respect of proportionality relied entirely upon the maintenance of firm
    immigration control.  On the face  of  it,  the  case  of  Ghising,  if
    applicable, would appear to secure the Appellants a favourable  outcome
    in their appeals.

14.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge however  does  not  follow  the  case  of
    Ghising.  He declines so to do on the basis that the Appellants' father
    did not intend to settle in the United Kingdom in 1995 at the point  of
    his discharge from the  Brigade  of  Gurkhas.    In  my  judgment  that
    approach was in error.  Indeed, subject to a  submission  that  I  will
    return to in due course, Mr Jarvis acknowledges that  the  approach  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge  to  the  issue  of  proportionality  was
    indeed in error.

15.  The reason for the error is that insofar as  the  Second  Appellant  is
    concerned it is to be noted that he was still a minor when  his  father
    made an application for entry clearance in 2006.  That application  was
    dismissed because the law at that time did not allow for entry  to  the
    United Kingdom for a person in the position of the Appellants'  father,
    a matter that was subsequently reversed  following  reconsideration  of
    this country's policy towards former servicemen of the Gurkha  Brigade.
    Necessarily, had  it  not  been  for  that  matter  -  which  has  been
    characterised as an historic injustice - the Second Appellant's  father
    would have entered the  United  Kingdom  at  a  time  that  the  Second
    Appellant was a minor, it is reasonable to infer  that  he  would  have
    wished to be accompanied by his wife and  minor  child,  and  in  those
    circumstances I am satisfied that the proportionality  balance  favours
    the Second Appellant.

16.  The position of the First Appellant is slightly  different  because  he
    is older.  It is necessary to consider what  the  position  might  have
    been for him as between his father's discharge in January 1995 and  his
    reaching his majority in January 2005.

17.  There was  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  written  and  oral
    evidence both from the Appellants' mother and also from a relative  and
    family friend, Mr Shree Man Ale  Magar.   Both  witnesses  indicate  in
    their respective witness statements that  the  Appellants'  father  had
    contemplated living in the United Kingdom, for example the  Appellants'
    mother states at paragraph 16 of her witness statement: "I believe that
    my late husband would have applied for settlement upon his discharge if
    there were  such  provision",  and  Mr  Magar  states  in  his  witness
    statement at paragraph 11, "I knew him  professionally  as  well  as  a
    relative.  I have no doubt he would have settled in the UK had  he  had
    the chance to do so".  The First-tier Tribunal Judge makes no  findings
    in respect of those matters and in those circumstances I  am  satisfied
    that his decision was in error and requires to be re-made.

18.  In considering re-making the decisions I have come to the view that  in
    circumstances where the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  identified  nothing
    adverse in respect of the credibility of either witness, and  otherwise
    in the absence of any factor to  suggest  a  lack  of  credibility,  it
    should be accepted that they  express  genuine  sentiments  as  to  the
    Appellants' father's intentions, or likely intentions  had  he  had  an
    earlier opportunity to avail himself of entry to  the  United  Kingdom.
    In this context I recognise that the concept of 'intention' is somewhat
    nebulous if possible action is  contingent  upon  factors  outside  the
    control of the actor: if it were the case, as it was, that a person who
    had served with the Gurkhas was  not  permitted  to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom pursuant to entry clearance for  the  purposes  of  settlement,
    then it may well be that he did  not  form  any  serious  intention  or
    ambition to settle in the UK, but dismissed it from  his  mind  as  not
    viable. The conduct of such a person in  establishing  himself  in  his
    home country (or indeed in another country) given  that  he  could  not
    enter the UK, cannot be taken as in some way  evidence  of  a  lack  of
    aspiration, wish or  intention  to  enter  the  UK  had  that  been  an
    opportunity open to him.  Given those circumstances, in my judgment  it
    should be concluded that the Appellant's father would more likely  than
    not have sought to settle in the UK at some point prior to the majority
    of each of his children. In turn, in those circumstances  the  guidance
    in Ghising is of application and I conclude  that  the  proportionality
    balance favours both Appellants and their  appeals  should  be  allowed
    accordingly.

19.  In doing so I bear in mind the requirement to  take  into  account  the
    public  interest  considerations  pursuant  to  section  117B  of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, and I do so.  However  it
    seems to me that the very particular nature of these type  of  cases  -
    which have been the subject of lengthy and  detailed  consideration  in
    the UK courts - is such that in the absence of any  compelling  adverse
    feature the element of historic injustice out-weighs the public  policy
    considerations set out under section 117B.

20.  I indicated above that there  was  one  aspect  upon  which  Mr  Jarvis
    sought to make submissions - as it were as a  'knockout'  blow  to  the
    Appellants' challenge - and that  was  in  respect  of  the  conclusion
    specified at the commencement of paragraph 17  that  there  was  not  a
    grave interference with the Appellants' family life with their  mother.
    Mr Jarvis argued that this was adversely determinative of  their  cases
    under  Article  8  and  any  -  accepted  -   error   in   respect   of
    proportionality was not material.

21.  I acknowledge that if Article 8(1) was not engaged  in  this  case  the
    issue of proportionality would not be a  live  issue.   Notwithstanding
    the tension between the first and second part of paragraph 17  for  the
    reasons already given I am satisfied that there is a valid  finding  in
    respect of family life as regards the mother; in turn, by reference  to
    the case of Beoku-Betts, that means that the proportionality issue must
    be considered.

22.  Mr Jarvis very fairly indicated that if he was  unable  to  succeed  on
    that particular point, then he would acknowledge the error of law.   He
    did not go so far as to concede that the outcome of this appeal  should
    thereafter inevitably be one favourable to the Appellants, and  invited
    consideration that it might be necessary to consider further  evidence.
    However, in circumstances where no such further evidence is required in
    respect of the Second Appellant (by reason of the agreed  fact  of  his
    father's application of 2006), and in circumstances where there  is  no
    basis for challenging the credibility of the mother or the witness,  it
    is not necessary to reconvene this hearing to hear further evidence.  I
    am satisfied that it  is  appropriate  to  conclude  on  the  available
    evidence that it is more likely than not  that  both  Appellants  would
    have been settled in the UK long ago but for the historic wrong.

23.  In  those  circumstances  the  Respondent's  decisions  to  refuse  the
    Appellants entry clearance  was  in  breach  of  their  mother's  human
    rights.  In such circumstances entry  clearance  should  properly  have
    been granted and should now be granted.

24.  In terms of the period of any grant of leave, it seems to  me  that  it
    may be appropriate for the Entry Clearance Officer to consider  that  a
    period of leave in-line with their mother would be appropriate, bearing
    in mind this was an application for settlement and but for the historic
    injustice they are individuals who would likely have secured settlement
    in the UK by now.  However, that is not ultimately a matter for me.

Notice of Decision

25.  The decisions of the First-tier Tribunal contained material  errors  of
    law and are set aside. I re-make the decisions in the appeals.

26.  Appeal OA/17823/2013 is allowed on human rights grounds.

27.  Appeal OA/17825/2013 is allowed on human rights grounds.

28.  No anonymity directions are made.

The above represents a corrected transcript of an ex tempore decision  given
following the conclusion of the hearing on 15 September 2015.


Signed   Date: 18 September 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have allowed the appeal and make a fee award of any  fee  which  has  been
paid or may be payable.


Signed   Date: 18 September 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
-----------------------
[1]   The  Judge  used  the  phrase  'second  sponsor'  in  respect  of  the
Appellants' mother to distinguish her from the 'first sponsor', that is  the
Appellants' deceased father.

