
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/17723/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 5 January 2015                     |On 3 February 2015                    |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ACCRA
                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      MISS ZUNON KATTY PRUDENCE BAROAN
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Bajwa, instructed by Bajwa & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS
The Appellant

 1. The appellant is the Entry Clearance Officer for Accra but  nonetheless
    I shall refer to the parties as they were described before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, that is the Entry Clearance Officer  as  the  respondent
    and Miss Zunon Katty Prudence Baroan as the appellant.

 2. The appellant was born on 4 May 1996 and is  a  citizen  of  the  Ivory
    Coast and appeals against the decision to refuse her entry clearance to
    join her father, Mr Zunon Sosthene Baroan, who was  a  citizen  of  the
    Ivory Coast. He arrived in the UK on 28 December 2002 and  applied  for
    political asylum two days later.  He was not granted refugee status  or
    humanitarian protection but was granted discretionary leave to  remain.
    This leave expires on 10 April 2015 when he will be eligible  to  apply
    for its extension and subsequently for indefinite leave to remain.

 3.  The  appellant  made  an  application  under  paragraph  297  of   the
    Immigration Rules on the basis that her father had sole  responsibility
    for her upbringing.  She submitted her application on 18th May 2013 and
    her application was refused further to paragraph 319R (family  reunion)
    on the basis that the father and sponsor  had  discretionary  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom and the Entry Clearance  Officer  was  not
    satisfied that she was the child of a parent who had been granted leave
    to remain as a refugee or beneficiary of humanitarian protection  under
    the Immigration Rules 319R(i).

 4. The matter came before Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal J  M
    Lewis who applied CP (Section 86(3) and (5);  wrong  immigration  rule)
    [2006] UKAIT 40 which held that where an application has  been  refused
    under the wrong Immigration Rules the Tribunal ought to  determine  the
    appeal under the right Rule unless there was not enough evidence to  do
    so.  He found that the Entry Clearance Officer had  applied  the  wrong
    Rule and it was acknowledged by Mr Dasgupta (accompanied  by  Ms  Butt)
    that the decision should have been made  under  paragraph  297  of  the
    Immigration Rules which relates to a child wishing to join a parent  in
    the UK.

 5. Judge Lewis found that on the facts the sponsor had sole responsibility
    [28].  An application for permission to appeal was made  on  the  basis
    that the judge had misunderstood the meaning of "present and settled in
    the UK" further to paragraph  6  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   As  the
    appellant's father and sponsor had discretionary leave to remain in the
    UK until 10 April 2015 he had limited leave to remain  in  the  UK  and
    there was no guarantee that  he  would  be  successful  in  any  future
    application leading to settlement.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Fisher.
    He noted that paragraph 6 of the Immigration Rules states that "settled
    in the UK"  is  to  find  that  the  judge  noted  as  "free  from  any
    restriction on the period for which he may remain".

 7. At the hearing Mr Nath confirmed that the issue was that set out in the
    grounds of appeal but he had had  the  opportunity  of  discussing  the
    matter with Mr Bajwa who had confirmed he conceded that  there  was  an
    error of law.

 8. Clearly paragraph 6 of the Immigration Rules which refers  to  "settled
    in the UK" is defined and as being "free from any  restriction  on  the
    period for which he may remain".  There was no doubt that the sponsor's
    current leave would expire on 10 April 2015 and thus he was clearly not
    free from any restriction on the period for  which  he  may  remain  as
    defined in Rule 6.  I therefore find  there  is  an  error  of  law  in
    relation to paragraph 9 of the decision.

 9. It was agreed by both representatives that Rule 316 was not  applicable
    but that Appendix FM (ECC) should have been considered.  There were  no
    findings in respect of the correct rule in the first instance.

10. Bearing in mind the very different provisions which would apply  I  set
    aside the decision of Judge Lewis and refer the matter  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal for consideration under the appropriate Rule and in  line
    with CP (Section  86(3)  and  (5)  ;  wrong  Immigration  Rule)  [2006]
    Dominica UKAIT 40.

         "Where the Secretary of State (or Entry Clearance Officer)  applies
         the wrong immigration rule, the resulting immigration  decision  is
         technically unlawful.  However,  subject  to  the  requirements  of
         fairness, an Immigration Judge should apply the correct  rule  when
         deciding an appeal. If the appellant satisfies the requirements  of
         the correct rule, the appeal will be allowed in full under s  86(3)
         of the 2002 Act. If any  (or  all)  of  the  requirements  are  not
         satisfied, the appeal will be dismissed in substance under s 86(5).
         However, the appeal will be allowed in part under s  86(3)  to  the
         limited (and inconsequential) extent that the decision was 'not  in
         accordance with the law'. See also RM (Kwok  On  Tong:  HC395  para
         320) India [2006] UKAIT 00039."

Notice of Decision

11. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified.  I set aside the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings (a different rule applies) to be made the matter should
    be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b)  (i)  of
    the TCE 2007 and further  to  7.2  (b)  of  the  Presidential  Practice
    Statement

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed        Date 31st January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

