
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/17630/2013
                                                               OA/17631/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |                Decision & Reasons   |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 12 June 2015                       |                On 20 July 2015      |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ZUCKER

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   MISS B
                                  MASTER E
                               (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Fijiwalla, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Coleman, Counsel instructed by Rolli Solicitors
London

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication  of  any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify either  of  the
    Respondents. Breach of this order can be  punished  as  a  contempt  of
    court. I make this order because the Respondents are minors.

 2. The Respondents Miss B and Master E  are  citizens  of  the  Democratic
    Republic of Congo born on 3 March 2008 and 8  July  2005  respectively.
    On or about 26 July 2013 applications were made on their behalf, by the
    Sponsor, Mr PM pursuant to paragraph 301 of the  Immigration  Rules  on
    the basis that he was the father of each  of  the  Respondents.   On  7
    August 2013 decisions were made in the case of each of the  Respondents
    to refuse the applications.  The issue of paternity was raised  on  the
    basis that when Mr PM was first issued with his student  visa  dated  2
    October 2007 he had stated in the application for that visa that he had
    no children. Because the credibility of Mr PM was put in doubt  by  his
    claim to have had no children, it was not accepted that Mr PM had  sole
    responsibility  or  that  the  children  were  living  in   exceptional
    circumstances. The Entry Clearance Officer went on in each case to make
    reference to Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights
    ("ECHR") and was satisfied that there  had  been  no  breach.   In  the
    alternative  any  interference   was   said   to   be   justified   and
    proportionate.

 3. By Notices dated 29 August  2013  the  Respondents  and  each  of  them
    appealed. On 18 July 2014 their appeals were  heard  by  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Griffith.  She had the  benefit  of  DNA  evidence.
    That evidence showed that Mr PM was the father of Miss B  but  not  the
    father of Master E, though Miss B and Master E had the same mother.

 4. The circumstances otherwise were that Mr PM  had  married  Mrs  STM,  a
    British citizen though at  the  time  of  the  decision,  and  for  the
    avoidance of doubt, Mr PM had limited leave to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 5. Judge Griffith made very positive findings.  She heard evidence from Mr
    PM and his wife. She accepted that Mr PM had only learnt that Master  E
    was not his biological child on 30 June 2014  upon  sight  of  the  DNA
    evidence.  She accepted that there would be no one in the Congo to look
    after these two children who were then in the care of Mr  PM's  brother
    who had been offered, and was to take up,  a  place  to  study  in  the
    United Kingdom, with a course due to begin in  September  2014.   Judge
    Griffith also accepted Mr PM's explanation as to why  he  had  answered
    "No" to the question "Do you have any dependants?"

 6. As to the Respondents birth mother she, it was accepted, was living  in
    South Africa and having all but abandoned these two children since June
    2010 when she left them with Mr PM's grandmother who since has died.

 7. There is no issue about paternity with respect to Miss B.  However,  at
    paragraph 34 of her Statement of Reasons Judge Griffith said:-

        "Although therefore the evidence strongly suggests that the  Second
         Appellant is not the Sponsor's natural child,  I  do  not  find  it
         would be in  his  best  interests  not  to  be  considered  as  the
         Sponsor's natural child for the purpose of this application.  I  am
         satisfied that he had been brought up as the Sponsor's son."

 8. Although Judge Griffith described the evidence as to the issue of "sole
    responsibility"  as,  "Rather  thin",  she  looked  to  the   available
    evidence, being payments of substantial sums of money from Mr PM's bank
    account at various dates in 2012 and 2013 to the same account and found
    that to be corroborative of Mr PM's evidence that he provided financial
    assistance to the children.  The evidence of Mr PM and his wife to  the
    effect that regular contact was maintained with the children  was  also
    accepted and in particular Judge Griffith accepted that, "it  was  more
    likely than not," that Mr PM had made the important decisions regarding
    the  upbringing  of  the  children  finding  that  he  maintained  sole
    responsibility since the disappearance of their  birth  mother.   Judge
    Griffith was guided by the  case  of  TD  (Paragraph  297)(i)(e):  Sole
    Responsibility) Yemen [2006] UK AIT00049.  In any event Judge  Griffith
    found in the alternative that there were serious and compelling  family
    or  other  considerations  which  made  exclusion  of  the  Respondents
    undesirable.

 9. Not content with the decision of Judge Griffith,  by  Notice  dated  10
    December 2014 the Secretary of State made application for permission to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal in respect of each of the children.

10. On 13 October 2014 Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Chambers  granted
    permission but only in respect of Master E. Judge  Chambers  overlooked
    the fact that the application by the Secretary of State was in  respect
    of both children.  When, on 28 November 2014, the  matter  came  before
    the Upper Tribunal, the matter proceeded only  until  it  was  realised
    that the application in respect of Miss B had not been considered.   In
    order to ensure consistency of approach it was then  decided  that  the
    matter would be remitted to Judge Chambers to consider the  application
    for permission in respect of Miss B.  On 8 December 2014 permission was
    granted, thus I am concerned with the appeals of both children.

11. The  grounds  erroneously  make  reference  to  paragraph  297  of  the
    immigration rules whereas the  matter  was  in  fact  decided  pursuant
    paragraph 301 because of  Mr  PM  not  having  settled  status  at  the
    relevant time.  However, issue is taken by the Secretary of State  with
    respect to the finding that Master E was to be treated as the child  of
    Mr PM despite  the  DNA  testing.   It  is  the  Secretary  of  State's
    submission that rule 6 of HC395 (as amended) which defines, inter alia,
    "parent" did not permit the interpretation  given  by  Judge  Griffith.
    The  second  ground  was  to  the  effect  that  there  was  inadequate
    reasoning; essentially  it  was  argued  that  there  was  insufficient
    evidence for the finding.  Further within ground two  it  is  submitted
    that the threshold for serious and compelling reasons, which test Judge
    Griffith found had been met, was a high one  and  so  she  should  have
    found it was not met: reference is made to the case of Mundeba (Section
    55 and Paragraph 297(i)(f) [2013] UK UT00088.

The Legal Framework

12. The relevant Immigration Rules are 301 and 6.

    "301 The requirements to be met by a person seeking  limited  leave  to
             enter  or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  with  a  view  to
             settlement as the child of a parent or parents  given  limited
             leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom with a view  to
             settlement are that he:

             i)   is seeking leave to enter to accompany or join or  remain
                  with  a  parent  or  parents  in  one  of  the   following
                  circumstances:

                  a)   one parent is  present  and  settled  in  the  United
                      Kingdom or being admitted on the  same  occasion  for
                      settlement and the other parent is being or has  been
                      given limited leave to enter or remain in the  United
                      Kingdom with a view to settlement; or

                  b)   one parent is being or has been given  limited  leave
                      to enter or   remain in the  United  Kingdom  with  a
                      view to settlement and has  had  sole  responsibility
                      for the child's upbringing; or

                  c)   one parent is being or has been given  limited  leave
                      to enter or remain in the United Kingdom with a  view
                      to settlement and there are  serious  and  compelling
                      family or other considerations which  make  exclusion
                      of the child undesirable  and  suitable  arrangements
                      have been made for the child's care; and

         ii) is under the age of 18; and

         iii)     is not leading an independent life, is unmarried  and  is
             not a civil   partner,  and  has  not  formed  an  independent
             family unit; and

             iv)   can,  and  will,  be  accommodated  adequately   without
                  recourse to   public funds,  in  accommodation  which  the
                  parent or parents own or occupy exclusively; and

         iv(a)    can, and will be maintained adequately by the  parent  or
             parents       without recourse to public funds, and

             iv(b)    does not qualify for limited  leave  to  enter  as  a
                  child of a parent or    parents  given  limited  leave  to
                  enter  or  remain  as  a   refugee   or   beneficiary   of
                  humanitarian protection under Paragraph 319R; and

             v)   (where an application is made for limited leave to remain
                  with a view to settlement) has limited leave to  enter  or
                  remain in the United Kingdom, and

             vi)  If seeking leave to enter, holds a valid  United  Kingdom
                  entry clearance for entry in this capacity."

    "6   In these rules the following interpretations apply....

         "a parent" includes

                  a)   the step-father of a child whose father is dead  and
                       the reference to step-father includes a  relationship
                       arising through civil partnership;

                  b)   the step-mother of a child whose mother is dead  and
                       the reference to step-mother includes a  relationship
                       arising through civil partnership and;

                 c)    the father as well as the mother of  an  illegitimate
                       child where he is proved to be the father;

                  d)   an adoptive parent, where a  child  was  adopted  in
                       accordance with a decision  taken  by  the  competent
                       administrative authority or court in a country  whose
                       adoption orders are recognised by the United  Kingdom
                       or where a  child  is  the  subject  of  a  de  facto
                       adoption  in  accordance  with  the  requirements  of
                       Paragraph 309A of these rules (except that an adopted
                       child or a child who is the subject  of  a  de  facto
                       adoption may not make an  application  for  leave  to
                       enter or remain in order to accompany, join or remain
                       with an adoptive parent under Paragraphs 297-303);

                  e)   in the case of a child born in  the  United  Kingdom
                       who is not a British citizen, a person to whom  there
                       has   been   a   genuine   transfer    of    parental
                       responsibility  on  the  ground   of   the   original
                       parent(s) inability to care for the child."

Submissions

13. Mr Coleman was not aware of the hearing of 28  November  2014.  It  was
    agreed that the matter would simply start  afresh.   Ms  Fijiwalla  was
    content to proceed in that way.

14. Mr Coleman began by addressing the second ground on the basis  that  it
    applied to both children. Given the provisions of paragraph 301, it was
    necessary for the issues of, sole responsibility  under  301(i)(b),  or
    there being "serious and  compelling  family  or  other  considerations
    which made exclusion of the children undesirable", to  be  resolved  in
    the children's favour.  Mr Coleman's submission was that  it  was  only
    the documentary evidence that was being  described  by  Judge  Griffith
    as,"rather thin."  She had heard evidence from Mr PM and  his  wife  so
    that the finding that Mr PM had sole responsibility was a finding  open
    to her. The finding was clear  and  unequivocal.   The  judge,  it  was
    submitted, had rightly been guided by the case of TD in saying that,

         "As matter of common sense some responsibility must rest  with  the
         carer and the test is, not whether  anyone  else  has  day  to  day
         responsibility, but whether the parent has continuing  control  and
         direction of  the  child's  upbringing  including  making  all  the
         important decisions in the child's life.  If not, responsibility is
         shared and so not "sole"."

    Judge Griffith then went on to say that she was satisfied on balance of
    probability that Mr P M had, "maintained  control  of  the  Appellants'
    upbringing".

15. Ms Fijiwalla for the Secretary of  State  relied  on  the  grounds  and
    referred to paragraph 16 of the guidance in TD:

        "Financial support, particularly sole financial support, of a child
         is relevant since it may be an indicator  of  obligations  stemming
         from an exercise of responsibility by a parent  but  it  cannot  be
         conclusive."

     The absence of any school  reports,  Ms  Fijiwalla's  submitted  should
    have led the judge to a finding that there was insufficient evidence.

16. On this issue I have no hesitation in finding that Judge  Griffith  was
    entitled to  conclude  that  Mr  PM  had  sole  responsibility.   Judge
    Griffith clearly found Mr PM  and  his  wife  credible  witnesses;  she
    expressly says so at paragraph 33. At paragraph 14 of the Statement  of
    Reasons she noted that Mr PM's evidence  was  that  he  instructed  his
    brother how to deal with the children.  Financial support therefore was
    not, contrary to what is submitted in the grounds, being treated as the
    determining factor.   The  judge  looked  at  all  the  other  evidence
    available.  She was entitled to conclude that it was sufficient in  the
    circumstances. Given the burden and standard of proof the  finding  was
    open to her.

17.  On  the  issue  of   "serious   and   compelling   family   or   other
    considerations", both Mr  Coleman  and  Ms  Fijiwalla  pointed  to  the
    guidance in the case of Mundeba (Section  55  and  Paragraph  297(i)(f)
    [2013] UK UT00088.  That was a case concerned more  generally  with  an
    assessment of the best interests of a child, but with  respect  to  the
    issue of whether or not there were serious and compelling  reasons,  it
    was said in the headnote at iv:

         "Family considerations require an evaluation of the child's welfare
         including emotional needs.  "Other considerations" come  into  play
         where there are other aspects of a child's life  that  are  serious
         and compelling for example where  an  applicant  is  living  in  an
         unacceptable social and economic environment.  The focus  needs  to
         be on the circumstances of the child in the light  of  his  or  her
         age, social backgrounds and developmental history and will  involve
         enquiry as to whether:

         a)   There is evidence of neglect or abuse;

         b)   There are unmet needs that should be catered for;

         c)   There are stable arrangements for the child's physical care.

         The assessment involves consideration as to whether the combination
         of circumstances are sufficiently serious and compelling to require
         permission."

18. As to Miss  B,  the  issue  whether  or  not  there  were  serious  and
    compelling reasons is  not  material  because  having  found  that  the
    finding of social responsibility was one  open  to  Judge  Griffith  in
    circumstances in  which  the  issue  of  paternity  is  not  at  large,
    necessarily the finding that Miss B's appeal should be allowed was  one
    open to Judge Griffith.

19. The difficulty with respect to Master E however is that  the  issue  of
    serious and compelling circumstances may be a matter to  be  considered
    in the context of any article 8 ECHR considerations applicable  in  the
    case of Master E.  The question which has not been addressed at all  is
    whether Mr PM and his wife could return to the Congo to look after  the
    children even if on a temporary basis whilst Mr PM's brother is in  the
    United Kingdom for studies.  As this is an  entry  clearance  case  the
    relevant date is the date of the decision  and  not  the  date  of  the
    hearing and that is true also with respect to any human rights  issues.



20. I turn to the issue concerning the meaning of the term "parent."

21. Despite the valiant attempts by Mr Coleman  to  persuade  me  that  the
    finding of Judge Griffith was one open to her I  disagree.   There  are
    clearly public policy considerations which  apply  where  children  are
    concerned.  Mr Coleman sought to  persuade  me  that  the  category  of
    persons who might be included within the term "parent" was not  closed.
    He pointed to other terms which were  defined  such  as,  for  example,
    "sponsor" which, "means the person in relation to whom..." or  "working
    illegally means working in breach of conditions of  leave...".  Whereas
    the term "a parent" is followed by the word "includes".

22. Reliance was placed on the fact that  there  was  a  birth  certificate
    which was accepted as genuine.  The difficulty for Mr Coleman  is  that
    whereas a child born to married parents gives  rise  to  a  presumption
    that a child is the child of the "father" a child born to a couple  who
    are not married even where there is a birth certificate gives  rise  to
    circumstances only that there is a prime facie case of paternity  based
    upon the certificate.   In this case the presumption and/or prima facie
    evidence is rebutted by DNA evidence.  Mr Coleman sought to persuade me
    that the DNA evidence only rebutted the biological presumption but  did
    not affect the legal status.  I cannot accept that submission not least
    because even if it  were  the  case  that  Mr  PM  maintained  parental
    responsibility, persons with parental responsibility  are  catered  for
    within the definition of parent under category (e).  As  Master  E  was
    not born in the United Kingdom it  seems  to  me  that  the  rules  are
    intended to provide safeguards and it is not possible  in  my  view  to
    stretch the meaning of "parent" to include the  relationship  contended
    for by Mr Coleman as between Mr PM and Master E.

23. That however is not the end of the matter.

24. Mr Coleman sought to persuade me that I should nevertheless  allow  the
    appeal of Master E  on  human  rights  grounds.   I  mentioned  to  the
    representatives that there had been no cross-appeal so that  the  issue
    was not before me but on reflection having regard to  section  117A  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 I realise that have no
    discretion but to have regard to Article 8.  The same was true of Judge
    Griffith.  The Entry Clearance Officer was quite right to  have  regard
    to Article 8 in the refusal. Judge Griffith erred and  her  failure  to
    deal with Article 8 is in fact "Robinson obvious": see R v Secretary of
    State for the Home Department Ex Partae Robinson [1997] 3 WLR 1162.  It
    may be that the facts of this case are so  exceptional  that  Master  E
    should nevertheless be permitted entry clearance but  such  a  decision
    can only be made after clear findings having regard to Section 117B and
    an investigation by the judge as to why it would not be possible (if it
    is so contended) for Mr PM himself not to be  able  to  return  to  the
    Congo or otherwise make other provision with respect to  Master  E  and
    that will necessarily also involve consideration  of  the  guidance  in
    cases such as EV (Philippines and others) v Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874 and Zoumbas v  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2013] UK SC74.

25. I am mindful of the fact that the issue of human rights was  not  fully
    canvassed  before  me  and  I  have  considered  whether  it  would  be
    appropriate to bring the matter back for further submission  but  there
    is, in my judgment no real prejudice of the Secretary of State if  this
    matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal because she will be  able
    to make all of the submissions  that  she  feels  appropriate  at  that
    stage.

26. In all the circumstances I remit the matter to the First-tier  Tribunal
    in respect only of Master E given that the issue of  human  rights  was
    not adequately addressed; that findings of fact are for the  First-tier
    Tribunal; and having regard to paragraph 7(2) of the Senior President's
    Practice Statement of 25 September 2012 - clearly evidence will have to
    be received.

Directions re Master E

   1. The appeal in respect of  Master  E  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal (Taylor House)

   2. The findings of fact by Judge Griffith shall be preserved.

   3. The hearing in the First-tier Tribunal with respect to Master E  shall
      be confined to human rights issues.

   4. The hearing shall not be before Judge Griffith.

   5. The Secretary of State shall consider whether  a  report  from  Social
      Services should be  obtained  in  order  to  assist  the  Tribunal  in
      determining whether appropriate arrangements would  be  in  place  for
      Master E in the United Kingdom given that the matter concerns a child,
      who is not the biological child of the Sponsor or the Sponsor's wife.

   6. Time estimate of two hours.

   7. No interpreter is required.

Notice of Decision

The appeal by the Secretary of  State  in  respect  of  Miss  B,  the  First
Respondent is dismissed. The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  her
appeal is affirmed.

The appeal by the Secretary of State in respect  of  Master  E,  the  Second
Respondent is allowed.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  a
material error of law and, subject to  the  directions  which  are  set  out
above, is set aside to be remade in the First-tier Tribunal.

Signed                              Date




Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Zucker





