
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/17016/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 January 2015                            |On 5 February 2015            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                Nazma Parveen
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISLAMABAD

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Ahmed
For the Respondent:    Mr Smart


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant Nazma Parveen, was born on 21 June 1988 and is  a  female
    citizen of Pakistan.  The appellant had applied for entry clearance  to
    the United Kingdom as the spouse of Mr Zafaran Ali (hereafter  referred
    to as the sponsor).  By a  decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    Islamabad dated  24  July  2013,  the  application  was  refused.   The
    appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Andrew) which,  in
    a determination promulgated on 7 August  2014,  dismissed  the  appeal.
    The appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The ECO refused the appellant's application because he/she had not been
    satisfied  that  the  appellant  was  in  a  genuine   and   subsisting
    relationship with the sponsor.  Judge Andrew  disagreed  with  the  ECO
    [15] finding that she was satisfied that the couple  were  married  and
    that they intended to live together  as  husband  and  wife.   However,
    Judge Andrew did not allow the appeal for the following reason:

         However, I am not able  to  be  satisfied  as  to  the  maintenance
         requirements of the Rules.  The reason for this is that Appendix FM-
         SE states at paragraph A1 2(a)(i) that payslips must cover the  six
         months prior to the date of application.  The date  of  application
         is 23 March 2013.  Even now I do not  have  payslips  for  the  six
         months prior to this date, as required by the Rules.  The appellant
         and the sponsor have been professionally  advised  in  relation  to
         this matter and thus should have been aware of the requirements  of
         the Rules.

 3. In the notice of refusal, the ECO says this regarding  the  appellant's
    application for entry clearance:

         In refusing the application no determination has been  made  as  to
         whether the applicant meets the minimum  income  and  accommodation
         requirements under Appendices FM and FM-SE of the Rules.   However,
         we have assessed that, regardless of whether the minimum income and
         accommodation requirements  are  met,  the  application  falls  for
         refusal under the Rules.

 4. Matters are further complicated by  the  fact  that  there  was  not  a
    complete respondent's bundle on  the  files  of  the  Tribunal  or  the
    parties.  It is unclear, as a consequence, exactly what information and
    documents had been before the  ECO.   The  ECM  review  indicates  that
    he/she had seen eight pages of financial  information  but  it  is  not
    clear whether those pages were wage slips or bank statements  or  other
    evidence.  Mr Smart, for the ECO, submitted that the only documents  in
    the files related to 2012 and not to the six month period prior to  the
    making of the  application  for  entry  clearance  on  23  March  2013.
    However, the sponsor told me that he had now  duplicates  of  the  bank
    statements and wage slips for the relevant six month  period  prior  to
    the making of the application; he had sent the originals to the ECO.  I
    am aware that that evidence (which the sponsor had  brought  to  court)
    had not been before the First-tier Tribunal Judge;  had  it  been,  she
    would no doubt have said so in her determination.  It is also  somewhat
    puzzling that the sponsor has been able to produce this evidence before
    the Upper Tribunal but did not make  it  available  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  I am, however,  satisfied  that  the  wage  slips  and  bank
    statements the sponsor has now produced are genuine documents; Mr Smart
    did not suggest otherwise.  The question that remains  is  whether  the
    sponsor sent, as he claims, all the relevant bank statements  and  wage
    slips to the ECO with the application.  The First-tier Tribunal did not
    make a finding on that specific issue, noting only that copies had  not
    been produced to it.  After careful consideration, I am satisfied  that
    the appellant  did  send  the  required  financial  documents  for  the
    relevant period to the Entry Clearance Officer  with  the  application.
    The fact that the sponsor has been able to obtain copies  of  the  same
    documents, that  the  documents  pre-date  the  application  for  entry
    clearance and that they satisfy the requirements of Appendix FM-SE  is,
    in my opinion, a  strong  indicator  that  the  sponsor's  evidence  is
    truthful. I find that the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  law.   I  set
    aside the First-tier  Tribunal's  determination  and  have  remade  the
    decision.  I admit the duplicate bank statements  and  wage  slips  now
    produced by the sponsor. I find that, had the ECO proceeded to  examine
    the financial evidence, he/she would have concluded that the  appellant
    was able to meet the financial requirements of the Immigration Rules on
    the basis of the documents sent in support of the  application.   Given
    that  the  only  issue  on  which  entry  clearance  was  refused  (the
    subsistence of the relationship) is now subject to a  positive  finding
    in the appellant's favour in the First-tier Tribunal (although  I  have
    set aside the determination, I preserve that finding) it  follows  that
    the appellant's appeal against the ECO's decision should be allowed.

DECISION

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal which was promulgated 7  August
2014 is set aside.  I have remade  the  decision.   The  appellant's  appeal
against the  ECO's  decision  dated  24  July  2013  is  allowed  under  the
Immigration Rules.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 2 February 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

