
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/17984/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 3 June 2015                                |On 19 June 2015              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM


                                   Between

                          bardia vali shariatpanahi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ISTANBUL
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A E D Ruano
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Iran born on 30 January 1997.  He was  16
    years of age at the date of the application on 14 June 2013  for  entry
    clearance to settle in the UK as the child of a recognised refugee, his
    father, Mr Nader Vali Shariatpanahi.  His father had arrived in the  UK
    on 9 June 2009 and was recognised as  a  refugee  and  issued  with  an
    identity document on 25 November 2011.

2.   The appellant appeals with  permission  against  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Nichols dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision refusing him entry clearance on  30  August  2013
    under paragraph 352D(iv) of the Immigration Rules and under  Article  8
    of the ECHR.  The Entry Clearance Officer was not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant  had shown that he was part of the "family unit of the person
    granted asylum at the time the person granted asylum left  the  country
    of his habitual residence in order to seek asylum".

3.   The judge took the appellant's case as set out in the  letter  sent  on
    his behalf by his UK solicitors.  It said that the appellant  had  been
    part of his father's family unit before his father  left  Iran.   Since
    that time he had been living with his grandfather but due  to  age  and
    infirmity his grandfather was no longer able to continue to look  after
    him.  Accompanying the application was a  document  dated  23  December
    2012 and described in the translation  as  a  "letter  of  confession",
    which stated that Mr Alimohammad Vali Shariatpanahi had  deposed  to  a
    notary republic that  he  is  the  appellant's  grandfather,  that  for
    fourteen years he had looked after the appellant but that due  to  age,
    financial problems and sickness he was not able to continue to  do  so.
    There was a further document dated 24 December 2012 which  stated  that
    Miss Sadaf Vasai had deposed to a notary public that she was the mother
    of the appellant. The appellant had gone to live with her  but  because
    of illness, she had had to give up her job and she requested  that  her
    son be returned to his grandfather's home as his grandfather  continued
    to be his guardian.

4.   The sponsor confirmed in oral evidence that he  left  Iran  on  9  June
    2009.  He said that at the time he had been living  with  his  son  and
    also with his own father.  He referred to his  own  flat  that  he  had
    nearby, which he said was the one he had rented for the lady with  whom
    he had formed a relationship and with whom he had left Iran.   When  he
    was asked about the finding by the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  in  an
    appeal heard on 22 February 2010, where  at  paragraph  7.3  the  judge
    recorded evidence that the sponsor had lived with the lady concerned in
    a flat that he had rented, the sponsor confirmed that this was true and
    accurate but he maintained that he was dividing his time  between  that
    flat and his father's property.

5.   The sponsor had said in his statement dated 1 October 2014 that  before
    his divorce in 2002, he and his ex-wife had lived in a flat  above  his
    father's flat.  Although the formal divorce certificate gave custody of
    the appellant to his ex-wife, she had not taken the appellant  to  live
    with her, something the sponsor said he had not  expected  her  to  do.
    Now his father is 81 years  of  age,  and  suffering  from  Parkinson's
    disease and heart problems, it is difficult for him to look  after  the
    appellant.  The sponsor was worried that the appellant's  health  would
    be at risk if he  stayed  in  Iran,  although  he  confirmed  that  the
    appellant does not  suffer  from  any  diseases  or  disabilities.  The
    sponsor  also  confirmed  that  in  addition  to  his  father  and  the
    appellant, the property in Iran  is  also  occupied  by  the  sponsor's
    mother and his sister.  His mother is 75 years  old,  although  not  in
    good health with back problems, thyroid problems and a nervous disorder
    like epilepsy.  His sister is a single woman without  any  children  of
    her own and she does not have any responsibility for the appellant.

6.   The judge correctly  identified  at  paragraph  11  that  the  question
    before him was whether the appellant has shown that he was  a  part  of
    his father's family unit at the time his father left  Iran  on  9  June
    2009.

7.   The judge  at  paragraph  13  said  it  was  clear  from  the  previous
    determination that the sponsor came to the UK in the company of a  lady
    and her son, that they made a joint claim for  asylum  and  that  their
    appeal against an  initial  refusal  was  heard  together.   The  judge
    assessed the case on the basis that  they  constituted  a  family  unit
    together. The previous judge recorded evidence that the two adults  had
    been living together in a flat rented by  the  sponsor  prior  to  them
    leaving Iran.  There was no mention in that determination  nor  in  the
    evidence given by the sponsor in the appeal  before  him  which  showed
    that the appellant in this appeal had been a part of that arrangement.

8.   The judge asked the sponsor where it was that the appellant  kept   his
    clothes and his personal possessions and the sponsor informed him  that
    these were at the sponsor's father's property, as well as some kept  in
    the rented flat.  The document which was deposed out the notary  public
    by the appellant's grandfather dated 23 December 2012, and referred  to
    by the ECO,  states  that  the  appellant  had  been  living  with  the
    grandfather for fourteen years up to that date,  which  would  be  from
    1998.  The sponsor said that he and his ex-wife had lived in  the  flat
    above his father's  property.   The  judge  found  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities  that  the  evidence  showed  it  was  likely  that   the
    appellant's permanent base  was  at  all  times  in  his  grandfather's
    property and that it could not be realistically said that he was a part
    of his father's family unit up to the point where his farther left Iran
    because that unit consisted of the father, the lady with  whom  he  was
    having a relationship and her child.

9.   The judge said as follows at paragraph 15:

         "The purpose of the family reunion provisions for  refuges  as  set
         out in the Immigration Rules is to allow for the  family  that  had
         lived together prior to the flight for asylum  to be  reunited.   I
         find that in this appeal is it not shown to the  required  standard
         of probability that the appellant had formed part of  his  father's
         family unit up to the date his father left  Iran.   Accordingly,  I
         agree with the ECO that the application does  not  show  compliance
         with paragraph 352D(iv)."

10.   This  led  Mr  Ruano  to  submit  in  his  grounds  that  a  purposive
    interpretation of the  Immigration  Rules  should  be  applied  by  the
    Tribunal, in view of the fact that the purpose of the Immigration Rules
    is to facilitate family unity, than otherwise rightly reflected by  the
    Tribunal at paragraph 15.  He  submitted  that  an  unduly  restrictive
    interpretation of what amounts to being in  the  same  family  unit  is
    inconsistent with the purpose of the Immigration  Rules  and  therefore
    wrong and amounting to an error of law.  There was no dispute as to the
    sponsor's and the appellant's living arrangements  where  the  Tribunal
    interpreted the fact that amounting to not living in  the  same  family
    unit.  He said that the sponsor and appellant had effectively two homes
    in which they both lived at the same time before the sponsor left Iran.
     Living in two homes, especially when they were so near to each  other,
    was capable of being considered the same home, and was not inconsistent
    with being part of the same family unit.

11.  In granting permission  UTJ  Lindsley  said  that  the  only  issue  in
    determining the appeal under paragraph 352D of  the  Immigration  Rules
    was whether the appellant could show that he was part of  his  father's
    family unit at the time his father left for the UK.  The FtT  concluded
    that this was not the case at paragraphs 13 and  14  of  the  decision.
    She stated that this ground was the  weaker  of  the  two  grounds.  We
    agree.

12.  We learned from Mr Ruano, who  had  represented  the  appellant  below,
    that the leading case on this issue  which  is  BM  and  AL  (352D(iv);
    meaning of "family unit") Colombia [2007]  UKAIT   00055  was  not  put
    before the judge.  The head note in BM and AL (Colombia) states:

         "What is  a  'family  unit'  for  the  purposes  of  para  352D(iv)
         Immigration Rules is a question of fact.   It  is  not  limited  to
         children who lived in the same household as the  refugee.   But  if
         the child belonged to another family unit in  the  country  of  the
         refugee's habitual residence it will be hard to establish that that
         child was then part of two  different  'family  units'  and  should
         properly be separated from the 'family unit' that  remains  in  the
         country of origin."

13.  In light of BM and AL we find the judge's finding  that  the  applicant
    and the sponsor needed to live in the same household  in  order  to  be
    part of a family unit was an error.  The error however is not material.
     We find that Mr Ruano's argument that the sponsor had effectively  two
    homes in which he and the  appellant  lived  at  the  time  before  the
    sponsor left Iran was not supported by the evidence.  The deposition by
    his grandfather,  which  was  accepted  by  the  judge,  was  that  the
    appellant had lived with him for fourteen years, which the  judge  said
    would be from 1998.  The evidence was that the grandfather's  household
    included the  appellant's  grandmother  and  his  paternal  aunt.   The
    sponsor's statement contained no  information  about  his  relationship
    with his son prior to his departure from Iran in June  2009  and  since
    his departure.  It does not appear  from  the  determination  that  the
    sponsor was asked by his legal representative, in the absence of a Home
    Office Presenting Officer, about his relationship with his  son  before
    he left Iran and since. In his statement he said that he picked up  his
    son from school because his mother was looking after his son  after  he
    divorced in 2002. There was no evidence of the appellant's relationship
    with his father's new family and whether he became part of that  family
    unit.  In the light of the evidence that was before him, we  find  that
    the judge's conclusions at paragraphs 13 and 14 disclose  no  error  of
    law.

14.  We now turn to the judge's  consideration  of  the  appellant's  appeal
    under Article 8 at paragraphs 16 and 17 of the determination.

15.  The judge held as follows:

         "16.  In his submissions the appellant's representative went on  to
         argue that it would be an unlawful interference with the Article  8
         rights of the appellant and the sponsor if  he  was  refused  entry
         clearance to come to the UK.  He pointed out that  the  appellant's
         mother was unwilling to provide care for him and he referred to the
         generally accepted principle that it is in the  best  interests  of
         the child to be brought up by the parent.  The judge found  on  the
         evidence that when the sponsor left Iran  he  chose  to  leave  the
         appellant in the care of his  grandfather,  grandmother  and  aunt,
         which remains the situation ever since.  It is now  said  that  the
         sponsor's father is unable to continue to look after the  appellant
         because of age and increasing  infirmity.   Notably,  in  the  Visa
         Application Form no mention was made of  the  sponsor's  mother  or
         sister, who are also not included in the witness statement he filed
         for the hearing of the appeal but only emerged  in  the  course  of
         questions.  The sponsor said his  mother  also  suffers  from  poor
         health but no evidence has been produced to confirm that claim.

         17.  I am not satisfied that there is any evidence which shows that
         the appellant is at any risk if  he  continues  to  live  with  his
         grandparents in Iran.  He was 16  years  of  age  at  the  date  of
         application but was confirmed by the sponsor to be in good  health.
         The sponsor said that he feared for his son's continuing health but
         gave no concrete reason why that should be at risk, or,  certainly,
         any more risk than had been the case between 2009  and  2013.   The
         sponsor did not give any evidence to suggest that the  taking  into
         account the generally accepted  principle  that  a  child  is  best
         brought up by the parents, that the appellant's mother has  made  a
         deposition that she does not wish to continue to care for him, thus
         negating the principle of a child being brought  by  both  parents,
         and  noting the equal benefits of stability  in  a  young  person's
         life, I am not satisfied that the decision of  the  ECO  to  refuse
         entry clearance on good grounds under the Immigration Rules creates
         an interference with Article 8 rights that would be unjustified and
         disproportionate  having regard to the weight must be given to  the
         control of immigration to the UK.  In  this  respect  I  take  into
         considerations the provisions of Section 117A and 117B Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  which gives statutory confirmation
         to the public interest in controlling  immigration  to  the  UK.  I
         balance all those factors and conclude that the appellant  has  not
         shown that the weight which should given to his best  interests  to
         be brought up by his father outweighs the public  interest  in  the
         control of him. I find  that  the  decision  of  the  ECO  was  not
         unjustified  and  disproportionate  interference  with  Article   8
         rights."

16.  The grant of permission said that it was arguable that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in law in its consideration of the best interests of the
    child.  This has arguably been interpreted by the FtT as requiring  the
    sponsor to show "risk" to the child at paragraph  17  of  the  decision
    rather than as a positive enquiry into the holistic best  interests  of
    this child.  Further it is arguable that the FtT did not make  findings
    on  material  matters  concerning  the  health   of   the   appellant's
    grandparents (despite there being substantial evidence of the  paternal
    grandfather's ill-health) and their ability to care for the  appellant;
    and the willingness to provide care on the part of  his  paternal  aunt
    and mother which would then have enabled a decision to be made  on  the
    best interests for the appellant given the option of his being  granted
    permission to stay with his father in the UK.

17.  We agree with Mr Duffy that the question of risk does not arise in  the
    consideration of Article 8 appeals.  Consequently the judge  was  wrong
    to  use  the  word  "risk".   The   "substantial"   evidence   of   the
    grandfather's ill-health consisted of three documents at  pages  16  to
    18.  The document at page 16 is dated 23 July 2014 when he was 81 years
    old and states "Who  bone  density  classification:  Osteopenia".   The
    document at page 17, which said he was 78  years  old,  concludes  "LLL
    bronciectasis with probably superimposed infection."  The  document  at
    page 18 is dated "85/07/29" and states "there is cystic  bronchiectasia
    in left lower lobe.  The air fluid levels in  the  cysts  is  [sic]  in
    favour of superimposed infection."  We accept that the  judge  did  not
    specifically mention  these  documents  or  make  a  finding  on  them.
    However, the judge did consider the submission that it  was  now  being
    said that the sponsor's father was unable to continue to look after the
    appellant because of age and increasing infirmity. The judge  made  the
    point that it emerged in the course of  questions  that  the  appellant
    also lived with the sponsor's mother and sister  in  Iran.   The  judge
    noted that although it was said that the appellant's own mother suffers
    from poor health, no evidence was produced to confirm that  claim.   We
    also note that although the sponsor said that his mother,  who  was  75
    years old, was not in good health, he did not produce any  evidence  to
    confirm this claim.

18.  Mr. Ruano said that in his statement the sponsor said he  had  his  own
    flat nearby and spent several nights each week in both.  He also picked
    up his son from school. This evidence was  before  the  judge  and  not
    rejected by him.  Mr. Ruano argued that there was some sort  of  family
    life between the sponsor and the appellant. There probably  was  whilst
    the sponsor was in Iran but there was no  evidence  of  the  nature  of
    their relationship since the sponsor left Iran. On the limited evidence
    that was before the judge, we find that his conclusions at paragraph 17
    disclose no error of law.

19.  The judge's decision dismissing the appellant's appeal shall stand.

Notice of Decision

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.



Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

