
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW/SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/17094/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 21st January 2016                 |On 19th February 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                Mr Sultan Ali
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ISLAMABAD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Mahmood (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge H Narayan, promulgated on 14th January 2015, following a  hearing
    at Stoke-on-Trent on 5th January 2015.  In the determination, the judge
    allowed the appeal of Mr Sultan Ali,  whereupon  the  Respondent  Entry
    Clearance  Officer,  subsequently  applied  for,   and   was   granted,
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the  matter  comes
    before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Pakistan, who  was  born  on  1st
    January 1938.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated
    30th July 2013, refusing his application  for  entry  clearance  as  an
    adult dependent relative under Appendix FM of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that  he  is  unable  currently  to  care  for
    himself because of his age.  His previous application  was  refused  on
    13th October 2004.  His current Sponsors  are  Sadia  Khan,  who  is  a
    British citizen, and his niece.  He has  his  own  house  in  Pakistan.
    However, he has no close relatives left in Pakistan.  He has a brother,
    who is the Sponsor's father, and the Sponsor supported him on a regular
    basis.  His neighbours also helped him with food and washing, but  have
    now refused to do so.  The Sponsor has permanent employment in  the  UK
    and full details are given of this and the family is financially sound.



The Judge's Findings

 4. At the hearing before  Judge  Narayan,  evidence  was  heard  that  the
    Appellant was not married and he was the  Sponsor's  father's  brother.
    The only relatives he had were his brother, the Sponsor's  father,  and
    the Appellant had a sister who lived in the UK.  The Sponsor said  that
    she last visited the Appellant in 2011 on a six week visit.  She speaks
    to the  Appellant  on  a  regular  basis,  however.   Her  father,  the
    Appellant's brother, visited for three to six months and  a  neighbour,
    Mr Younas, would care  for  the  Appellant  in  his  father's  absence.
    However, in December 2013, Mr Younas said he could  not  care  for  the
    Appellant anymore as he had other family commitments.  In February 2014
    also, the Sponsor's father, having returned from Pakistan to the United
    Kingdom, suffered a heart attack, and he could not now return  back  to
    Pakistan in his current condition.

 5. In these circumstances the judge heard submissions that  there  was  no
    specialist care for the Appellant in Pakistan  and  a  Union  Council's
    letter dated 8th  April  2013  from  Dhangri  Bala  confirms  that  the
    Appellant cannot live alone and needs looking after.

 6. The judge found as a fact that the Appellant did  have  a  family  life
    with his brother, Mr M Khan,  "as  there  is  undoubtedly  evidence  of
    dependency between the two brothers" and this is demonstrated  by  "the
    number of times and the  duration  of  times  the  Appellant's  brother
    visits and stays with him in Pakistan to care for him" (paragraph  26).
    The judge went on to hold that the decision of the Respondent was  "not
    proportionate in all the circumstances of this case" (paragraph 29).

 7. However, the judge then dealt with  the  Section  117  public  interest
    consideration by observing that,

         "I come to the conclusion that because although I accept as set out
         in Section 117 of the new Act, that is relevant to  Article  8  and
         the right to family life, I find that in this particular case, this
         Appellant's circumstances are such that there  is  no-one  who  can
         support him in terms of his physical  and  mental  frailties  apart
         from his family who are all British citizens ..." (paragraph 29).

    The appeal was dismissed under  the  Immigration  Rules.   However  the
    appeal was allowed under human rights grounds.

Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of application state that the judge failed to  give  proper
    consideration to the Section 117A(2) consideration that in any analysis
    of Article 8 rights, the  public  interest  in  favour  of  immigration
    control must be fully evaluated.  This is because  the  maintenance  of
    effective immigration  controls  is  a  weighty  factor  even  where  a
    person's  presence  in  the  United  Kingdom  causes   no   immediately
    ascertainable "micro" detriment, for example where a person is unlikely
    to claim upon  public  funds.   The  judge  had  only  made  a  cursory
    reference to the Section 117 consideration.  Second, the judge also did
    not refer to the five step approach in Razgar.

 9. On 23rd February 2015,  permission  to  appeal  was  granted.   It  was
    observed that although  the  judge  did  not  consider  the  five  step
    approach in Razgar, it was clear that the considerations  therein  were
    applied here.  However, the judge did not consider the  possibility  of
    care of the Appellant to be undertaken by paid carers within a clinical
    environment in Pakistan.  The judge also failed to consider the  public
    interest in the nature and cost in relation to care provided by the NHS
    if the Appellant were to come to this country.

The Hearing

10. At the  hearing  before  me  Mr  Mills,  appearing  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent Entry  Clearance  Officer,  submitted  that  the  judge  had
    dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules (see paragraphs 24  to
    25) because the Appellant had a relative looking after  him.   However,
    the judge then went on to allow the appeal under Article 8 and this was
    wrong for the following three reasons.

11. First, the judge did not  consider  the  human  rights  position  under
    Article 8 as at the date of the decision, but went on to consider it as
    at the date of the hearing, by which time the relative, Mr M Khan,  who
    had been looking  after  the  Appellant  in  Pakistan,  had  left,  and
    returned to England, and was unlikely to  return  because  of  a  heart
    attack that he suffered here.  However, the case law now made it  clear
    that  as  with  the  Immigration  Rules,  so  also  with  human  rights
    agreements, both need to be considered as at the date of the  decision,
    rather than at the date of the hearing.  This was therefore an error of
    law.

12. Second, under Article 8, the judge was bound to consider Section  117B,
    the full structure of the public interest consideration and  the  judge
    here has simply made a passing  reference  to  that  provision  without
    having done so.  This is clear from what the judge  said  at  paragraph
    29.  The reality is that the case of FK and OK (Botswana)  [2013]  EWCA
    328 makes it quite clear that proper consideration is required.

13. Third, it is a feature of this appeal that the Appellant is  indeed  of
    medical care.  In fact, the judge observes that the  evidence  is  that
    there is no specialist medical care in Pakistan (see paragraph 14).  If
    that is the case, then  the  question  is  bound  to  arise  about  the
    Appellant's recourse to medical health facilities in the UK.  The judge
    has not engaged with this question.  The case of FK and  OK  (Botswana)
    [2013] EWCA 328 directly addresses this point.  As a matter of a public
    interest consideration this feature has to be considered by the  judge.
    Mr Mills submitted that I should set aside the decision and  reconsider
    either remaking it or remitting it back to the First-tier Tribunal.

14. For his part, Mr Mahmood submitted that there was no material error  of
    law.  The judge had not allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules.
     He had done so under Article 8.  He had referred at  paragraph  29  to
    the Section 117 provision of the new Act.  It  is  not  as  if  he  was
    oblivious to it.  He was fully aware of it and took  it  into  account.
    The Appellant's brother, M Khan, was now no longer providing  care  for
    the Appellant.  In these circumstances, the judge  was  right  to  hold
    that the claim was made out under Article 8.  The  Appellant's  brother
    was now in the UK.  That is where their family life would  be  enjoyed.
    The judge was clear that, "I find that in all the circumstances of this
    case, that this Appellant does have a family  life  with  at  the  very
    least his brother" (paragraph 26).

15. In reply, Mr  Mills  submitted  that  the  Section  117B  consideration
    requires the judge to have regard to the recourse to  public  funds  by
    way of seeking medical treatment on the NHS in this country.  The judge
    had not done so.

Error of Law

16. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.

17.  First,  and  most  importantly,  Section  117A(2)  requires  that   in
    considering the public interest question the  court  or  Tribunal  must
    have regard to what is set  out  in  Section  117B.   This  principally
    includes, not just the maintenance of effective  immigration  controls,
    but also the burden on taxpayers, the ability to integrate into society
    in circumstances where this Appellant does not speak English,  and  the
    interests of the economic wellbeing of the  United  Kingdom.   In  Dube
    [2015] UKUT 90, the  Tribunal  made  it  clear  that  this  required  a
    structured approach to the question,  whereas  it  was  unnecessary  to
    expressly draw  attention  to  Section  117  itself,  nevertheless  the
    substance of the considerations must be addressed.  The judge  has  not
    done so here.  There is, for example, evidence that the Appellant,  who
    states that there is no specialist care for him in  Pakistan,  has  the
    support of his brother, M Khan, and his Sponsor,  Sadia  Khan  and  his
    niece.  They, however, have given no evidence,  and  have  provided  no
    proof, of their ability to provide paid for care for the  Appellant  on
    the National Health Service.

18. Second, the judge has indeed considered the human rights  situation  as
    at the date of the hearing, rather than date of  the  decision.   This,
    too, needs revisiting.

Remaking the Decision

19. I remake the decision on the basis of  the  findings  of  the  original
    judge, the evidence before him, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  Under Practice Statement 7.2(b), the nature or  extent  of  any
    judicial fact-finding may be such that it is necessary,  having  regard
    to the overriding objective,  to  remit  the  case  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  I so hold in this case.

Notice of Decision

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the
    decision of the original judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as  follows.
    This appeal is allowed to the extent that it is remitted  back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal, to be heard by a judge other than Judge H Narayan,
    under Practice Statement 7.2(b) so that proper findings can be made, on
    the evidence brought before the Tribunal, in relation to the extent  to
    which the Appellant needs medical treatment, and the extent to which he
    is likely to be a burden on the state were that to be the  case.   This
    will enable a decision to be made under Section 117B in the manner that
    it presently cannot be.

21. No anonymity order is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    13th February 2016

