

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/17176/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Decided on the papers                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 27 July 2016                        |On 19 August 2016                   |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH



                                   Between

                                    A U J
                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, KINGSTON

                                                                  Respondent




                                  DECISION

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Although an anonymity order was not made by the  First-tier  Tribunal,  this
appeal concerns the adoption of a child from Jamaica.  On the facts of  this
case, it is appropriate to make an anonymity direction.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Background

   1. In a decision promulgated on 29 June 2016,  I  found  there  to  be  a
      material error of law in the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Kaler promulgated on 29 August 2014 and I set that decision aside.  My
      error of law decision ("the Decision") is included as an  appendix  at
      the end of this decision for ease of reference.

   2. In directions given within the Decision, I invited written submissions
      from the parties as to the appropriate course for this appeal to be re-
      determined.  By submissions dated 7 July 2016 received from Mr Jarvis,
      Senior Home Office Presenting Officer, the Respondent  indicated  that
      she had no objection to the remittal of this appeal in  light  of  the
      Decision as the Appellant has not had any findings made by the  First-
      tier Tribunal in relation to the issues which I identified at [55]  of
      the Decision.  However, in a written statement  from  the  Appellant's
      sponsor, Mrs M J ("the  Sponsor"),  received  on  11  July  2016,  the
      Sponsor has indicated that, in light of the delays that have  occurred
      already in relation to the determination of this appeal, the Appellant
      wishes to have the matter re-determined by the  Upper  Tribunal.   She
      also wishes the remaining issues  to  be  determined  on  the  papers,
      taking into account the Appellant's submissions on those issues as set
      out in her Counsel's skeleton argument along with the  evidence  filed
      in this appeal including the  Sponsor's  various  statements  and  the
      further written statement dated 7 July 2016.

   3. Although this appeal is that of the Appellant, she continues to reside
      in Jamaica and is  a  minor  child.   As  a  matter  of  practicality,
      therefore any oral evidence would come from the  Sponsor  who  is  the
      Appellant's aunt and adoptive mother.   In light of her  request  that
      the appeal be re-determined by me on the papers, and in spite  of  the
      fact that she is thereby deprived of  the  opportunity  to  give  oral
      evidence and of  having  findings  of  fact  made  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal, I accede to her request.

   The legal framework

   4. The factual background to this appeal is set out in my  error  of  law
      decision at [2] to [9] of the Decision.  The  relevant  provisions  of
      the Immigration Rules ("the  Rules")  are  set  out  at  [10]  of  the
      Decision and I do not need to repeat those.  I also draw attention  to
      sections 85 and 85A Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 which
      are reproduced so far as relevant at [42] of the Decision.

   5. By virtue of section  85A,  I  may  only  consider  the  circumstances
      appertaining at the date  of  the  decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance
      Officer.  In this case, that  comprises  the  decision  of  the  Entry
      Clearance Officer ("the ECO") dated 7 August  2013  and  the  decision
      following review of the Entry Clearance Manager ("the  ECM")  dated  3
      February 2014.  I am able to  take  account  of  evidence  post-dating
      those decisions but only insofar as that is evidence of  circumstances
      which existed at those dates.

   6. The issues to be determined are set out at [55] of  the  Decision.   I
      have already found that the Appellant needed to satisfy paragraph 309B
      of the Rules and was unable to  do  so  at  the  date  of  either  the
      decision of the ECO or the ECM.  That is because the  sponsor  adopted
      the Appellant by an order dated 2 May 2013 and the  decisions  of  the
      ECO and ECM were within twelve months of that date.  However, in  case
      I am wrong about the application of paragraph  309B  (if  this  matter
      goes further and to avoid further delays should  that  occur),  it  is
      necessary for me to consider the relevant sub-paragraphs of  paragraph
      310 which were put at issue by the ECO and the  ECM.   In  any  event,
      there is some overlap with the other paragraph on which the  Appellant
      relies being  paragraph  297(i)(f).   The  Appellant  also  relies  on
      Article 8 ECHR in the event that she cannot succeed under the Rules.

   7. The sub-paragraphs of paragraph 310 put at issue by the  ECO  and  ECM
      are as follows:-

          .  paragraph  310(i)(e):  whether  the  Sponsor   has   had   sole
            responsibility for the Appellant;

          . paragraph 310(i)(f): whether there are  serious  and  compelling
            family or other  considerations  which  make  exclusion  of  the
            Appellant undesirable and suitable arrangements have  been  made
            for the Appellant's care;

          . paragraph 310(ix): whether the Appellant was adopted due to  the
            inability of the Appellant's father to care for  her  and  there
            has been a genuine transfer of parental responsibility from  the
            Appellant's father to the Sponsor;

          . paragraph 310(x): whether the Appellant has lost or broken  ties
            with her family of origin; and

          . paragraph 310(xi): whether the adoption is  one  of  convenience
            designed to facilitate admission to the UK.

   8.  There  is  an  overlap  between  paragraph  310(i)(f)  and  paragraph
      297(i)(f) which the Appellant relies on in the alternative.  I do  not
      understand the Appellant to be relying on paragraph 297(i)(e)  but  in
      any event there  is  the  same  overlap  between  that  paragraph  and
      paragraph 310(i)(e) so I need to consider that issue in any event.   I
      consider whether the Appellant can meet the requirements of the  Rules
      before moving on to consider whether the Appellant can  succeed  under
      Article 8 ECHR.

      The evidence

   9. I begin my consideration of the Appellant's  evidence  by  looking  at
      what was before the ECO when he made his decision.  As I have  already
      observed, I am constrained in my  consideration  to  evidence  of  the
      circumstances as they were at that time and it therefore  makes  sense
      to consider that evidence first.

  10. In her statement dated 27 May 2013, the Sponsor sets out the basis  of
      the Appellant's case and the reason why the Sponsor (the sister of the
      Appellant's  father)  has  taken  the  step  of  adopting  her.    The
      Appellant's mother left in 2008.  Her father suffered a  road  traffic
      accident.  He has impaired vision as a result.  He  also  had  surgery
      more recently to repair a hernia.

  11. The  Sponsor  states  that  she  has  been  supporting  the  Appellant
      financially and emotionally "where possible" since the Appellant was a
      toddler and that the Appellant stays with the Sponsor and her  husband
      when they are in Jamaica which has been on average once and  sometimes
      twice each year.  At the date of the adoption and the application  for
      entry clearance, the Sponsor was on a career break and  the  Appellant
      had lived with her since November 2012 (the application was made on 21
      May 2013 following the making of the adoption order on  2  May  2013).
      The Sponsor's husband had travelled to Jamaica prior to the  Sponsor's
      visit and would be returning to  Jamaica  when  the  Sponsor  left  to
      return to the UK.

  12. The Appellant was aged  ten  at  the  date  of  the  application  (now
      thirteen) and the Sponsor opines that she  is  in  need  of  a  mother
      figure in her life.  She states that it would be  in  the  Appellant's
      best interest if she were  permitted  to  grow  up  in  a  stable  and
      supported environment.   The  Sponsor  says  that  during  the  period
      leading up to the application,  she  enjoyed  being  involved  in  the
      Appellant's educational development and  there  had  been  a  dramatic
      improvement in her schoolwork.  The Sponsor noted  that  she  and  her
      husband had considered moving to Jamaica and residing there  with  the
      Appellant but considered it to be in their best interests as  well  as
      those of the Appellant for them to all live together in  the  UK.  The
      Sponsor is a dual national Jamaican and British citizen.  She works in
      the UK.  The Sponsor's husband is retired.

  13. The Sponsor notes that no arrangements were in place for the Appellant
      to remain  in  Jamaica  if  she  and  her  husband  were  not  present
      permanently.  She states that the Appellant's father is unable to care
      for the Appellant. However, there is no mention in the covering letter
      as to his whereabouts.  There is a lack of  evidence  before  the  ECO
      (and before me) as to whether the Appellant's father continues to care
      for the Appellant and/or have access to her and, if not, why not.  The
      Appellant has another aunt in Jamaica but she has her own family.  The
      Sponsor says that she has since made temporary  arrangements  for  the
      Appellant's care while she and her husband remain in  the  UK.   Those
      arrangements appear from later evidence to be that  the  Appellant  is
      now living with one of the Sponsor's friends  but  that  was  not  the
      position as at the date of the ECO or ECM decisions and I cannot  take
      it into account.  Further, there is very limited  evidence  about  the
      circumstances in which the  Appellant  is  currently  living  in  that
      family and no supporting evidence from, for example, the  friend  with
      whom the Appellant is apparently  now  residing  or  indeed  from  the
      Appellant herself.

  14. I turn then to consider the additional evidence which was  before  the
      ECO and ECM and which is  relevant  to  the  issues  that  I  need  to
      determine.  There are a number of account statements.  Those appear to
      show a number of remittances by the Sponsor to a  savings  account  in
      Jamaica.  The Sponsor says this account was for  the  benefit  of  the
      Appellant.  Those remittances date  from  2004  (the  year  after  the
      Appellant was born) to  2011.   They  show  an  irregular  pattern  of
      credits of generally quite small amounts to the account.  The  Sponsor
      says that on average she and her husband have remitted about  �60  per
      year.  Taken as an average, that is  probably  broadly  accurate.  The
      statements show that most of the money deposited was  withdrawn  quite
      soon thereafter.  However, there is no indication as to how that money
      was spent or how that money contributed to the Appellant's upbringing.
       I accept that there has been some financial support  by  the  Sponsor
      and that this was clearly intended  to  be  used  for  the  Appellant.
      However, it is difficult (absent evidence of how this money was spent)
      to make a finding that it was spent on the Appellant or  in  what  way
      and to what extent this contributed to the cost of her upbringing.   I
      note that the Appellant's father is still alive and whilst he may  not
      wish to care for the Appellant, evidence from  him  which  could  have
      included evidence as to the financial contributions made is notable by
      its absence.

  15. I note also that, over the years, the Appellant has been supported  by
      other family members who reside or resided in Jamaica.  Her great-aunt
      appears to have been her main carer until early 2012 (according to the
      Sponsor's own evidence) but has now moved to Trinidad.  The  Appellant
      has another aunt who accommodated her (and still  appears  to  do  so)
      periodically and who as far as I can see from the evidence still lives
      in Jamaica.  The Sponsor says that  this  aunt  cannot  care  for  the
      Appellant permanently as she has her own family and  works.   However,
      geographically, she is in much closer proximity to the  Appellant  and
      it appears that, certainly in 2013, she was still providing some  care
      to the Appellant.

  16. The Sponsor has also submitted a copy of her passport, which  includes
      stamps for the years from 2004 to 2012.  Those stamps paint a  picture
      that is broadly consistent with the Sponsor's evidence  that  she  has
      visited Jamaica once or twice per year.  There is no visit  shown  for
      2007 and, in  most  years,  the  visits  are  on  only  one  occasion,
      generally for a maximum of three months.  I am prepared to accept  the
      Sponsor's evidence that she would have seen  the  Appellant  on  those
      occasions and that, in recent years, the Appellant has stayed with the
      Sponsor and her husband during  her  visits.   However,  it  is  quite
      impossible to derive assistance from this very limited evidence as  to
      the nature of the relationship and the sort of emotional support  that
      the Sponsor has given to the Appellant.  I note that, at least on some
      of the earlier occasions, the Appellant's mother would still have been
      in her life.

  17. I note the letter from the Jamaican Adoption Coordinator dated 15  May
      2014 (after the ECO/ECM decision) that the Sponsor has  supported  the
      Appellant emotionally and financially and that she and  the  Appellant
      share a close bond.  However, I can give that evidence limited  weight
      since it does not state the source of that opinion or give any  detail
      about the nature of the relationship.   I  assume  that  the  Jamaican
      authorities would have carried out a report on  the  circumstances  of
      the Appellant and the Sponsor before allowing the adoption to proceed.
       Again, evidence in that regard is notable by its absence.

  18. The Sponsor's statement dated August  2014  contains  more  detail  in
      relation to the support that the Sponsor provides. She says  that  the
      money she sends "goes towards" the Appellant's schooling, clothing and
      food.  She also says that she ships food and  clothes  to  her,  makes
      arrangements for the Appellant to visit the  paediatrician  and  funds
      medical expenses.  She also says that she takes the Appellant  to  the
      clinic for immunisation, attends parents meetings at  the  school  and
      communicates with the head teacher.  She says that  she  supports  the
      Appellant's school trips and assists the Appellant with her schoolwork
      via Skype.  There is however a notable  absence  of  any  evidence  in
      support of those assertions (many of which in any event post-date  the
      ECO and ECM  decisions).   In  a  case  such  as  this,  it  would  be
      relatively  easy  to  evidence  the  Sponsor's  involvement   in   the
      Appellant's education by letters from teachers,  school  reports  etc.
      However, no evidence is produced.  The Sponsor says that the Appellant
      has suffered medical problems (although those appear to post-date  the
      ECO and ECM decisions).  However, there is no medical  evidence  other
      than a pharmacist prescription  which  is  handwritten  and  therefore
      illegible.  There is no  evidence  as  to  what  drug  the  pharmacist
      prescribed or for what condition.  If the Appellant was referred to  a
      paediatrician in 2011, it is surprising that evidence was not produced
      about that. The Sponsor also says in her  later  statements  that  the
      Appellant is bullied at school.  Again, that circumstance  appears  to
      post-date the application but in any  event,  there  is  a  dearth  of
      detail or any evidence including from the Appellant herself.

  19. I am prepared to accept that the Appellant's mother is  no  longer  in
      her life and that she has, in  all  probability,  disappeared  without
      trace.  There are three separate advertisements placed  prior  to  the
      adoption which the Sponsor says received no reply.  That is  confirmed
      by the Adoption Coordinator.  That letter is also  broadly  consistent
      with the Sponsor's evidence about the mother.  It refers though to the
      Appellant's mother abandoning her as a baby which is not the  complete
      picture as other of the Sponsor's evidence is that the mother  had  in
      fact returned with her partner some years later and attempted to  take
      the Appellant away from her father.  However, I  do  accept  that  the
      Appellant's mother is, for whatever reason,  no  longer  part  of  the
      Appellant's life.

  20. The implicit assertion that  the  Appellant's  relationship  with  her
      father no longer survives is not however borne out  on  the  evidence.
      The Sponsor says in her statement that  the  Appellant's  father  (her
      brother) suffered a road traffic accident and was unable thereafter to
      care for the Appellant.  According to the  medical  evidence,  though,
      the road traffic accident occurred in July 2003,  a  number  of  years
      before the  adoption  and  application  under  consideration  in  this
      appeal.  The report from Dr Lee confirms the injuries.  However,  that
      evidence is of very limited utility since it dates back to  May  2004.
      Furthermore, although it confirms a marked reduction in sight  at  the
      date of the accident (20/30 in right eye and 20/50 in  left  eye),  it
      records that after an operation in March 2004, sight had  returned  to
      20/20 in the right eye and 20/30 in the left  eye.   The  report  does
      note that the Appellant's father  will  require  regular  reviews  and
      possible changes in prescription and that those  may  be  costly.   It
      also notes that he may develop cataracts and glaucoma.   There  is  no
      later evidence though which suggests that his sight  has  deteriorated
      further.  That  evidence  does  not  support  a  contention  that  the
      Appellant's father is unable to care for  the  Appellant  due  to  his
      medical condition.

  21. The more recent medical evidence in relation to the Appellant's father
      is dated 2013 but records surgery for a hernia  repair  in  2011.   It
      appears from the letter that the Appellant's father was  admitted  for
      surgery and that both surgery and recovery were uncomplicated.  He was
      discharged without further review in August 2011. That  evidence  does
      not disclose any ongoing medical problems.

  22. In light of that limited and largely historic medical evidence,  I  am
      unable to accept that the Appellant's father is unable to  look  after
      the Appellant due to any medical condition.  He is aged only forty-two
      years and there is no reason to  infer  a  likelihood  of  ill  health
      arising from his age.  I  note  that  the  letter  from  the  Adoption
      Coordinator appears simply to accept  without  enquiry  the  statement
      that the Appellant's father had difficulties caring for the  Appellant
      since the accident.  Another reason  given  in  that  letter  for  the
      father's inability to care for the Appellant is that he is unemployed.
       That may well be nearer the truth.  However,  firstly  the  statement
      that this is due to the accident is difficult to  reconcile  with  the
      medical evidence and secondly that letter post-dates the ECO  and  ECM
      decisions and does not relate to circumstances as were stated  by  the
      Sponsor at that time. Furthermore, I have no evidence either as to the
      assertion that the inability of the Appellant's father to care for her
      arises because of his financial circumstances  (such  as  a  statement
      from the Appellant's father himself).  I note also that  the  adoption
      order, which was with the evidence at the date  of  the  ECO  and  ECM
      decision makes no mention of the Appellants' parents being  unable  to
      look after her.

  23. There is very little evidence as to the Appellant's  circumstances  in
      Jamaica.  She was at the date of application, aged ten  years.   There
      is no statement from her.  Even at that young age, it  ought  to  have
      been possible to take a statement from her as to her own wishes.  As I
      have already observed, in order to obtain  an  adoption  order,  there
      must  have  been  a  report  carried  out  as   to   the   Appellant's
      circumstances, her relationship with her family in  Jamaica  and  with
      the Sponsor. The Sponsor says in her statement  of  August  2014,  for
      example, that the Appellant freely exercised her rights in  expressing
      to the Child Development Agency and the Jamaica Family Court that  she
      would like the Sponsor to adopt her.  There  must  therefore  be  some
      reports  of  interviews  by  the  relevant  professionals   with   the
      Appellant.  However, no evidence was submitted  with  the  application
      nor has any been submitted since.

   Discussion and conclusions

  24. I turn then to consider the issues that I have  to  decide  under  the
      Rules against the background of the factual evidence.   I  start  with
      the  provisions  of  paragraphs  310  and  297.   Paragraph  310(i)(e)
      requires that the adoptive  parent  can  show  that  he/she  has  sole
      responsibility for the child.  Paragraph 297(i)(e) is to  like  effect
      in relation to parents.  I accept that the position is not  determined
      by the fact that the Sponsor who lives in the UK must rely  on  others
      in Jamaica to look after the Appellant  on  a  day-to-day  basis.   As
      cases regarding  paragraph  297  show,  however,  the  issue  of  sole
      responsibility is a matter of fact that must be  decided  on  all  the
      evidence.   As   is   said   in   TD   (Paragraph   297(i)(e):   "sole
      responsibility") Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049:-

           ""Sole responsibility" is a factual matter to be decided on  all
           the evidence.  Where one parent is not involved in  the  child's
           upbringing because  he  (or  she)  had  abandoned  or  abdicated
           responsibility, the issue may arise between the remaining parent
           and others who have day-to-day care of the  child  abroad.   The
           test is whether the parent has continuing control and  direction
           over the child's upbringing, including making all the  important
           decisions in the child's life.  However, where both parents  are
           involved in a child's upbringing, it will  be  exceptional  that
           one of them will have "sole responsibility""

  25. As I have noted above, there is  very  limited  evidence  showing  the
      degree  of  control  that  the  Sponsor  has  over   the   Appellant's
      upbringing; evidence which could quite easily have  been  produced  to
      support the Appellant's case has not been adduced.  Furthermore, there
      is no evidence from the Appellant's father who is  alive  and  remains
      living in Jamaica.  I have already explained why I am unable to accept
      the Sponsor's evidence that the Appellant's father is unable  to  care
      for her based on the medical evidence.  It may be  the  case  that  he
      does not wish to care for  the  Appellant  because  he  is  struggling
      financially (as the letter from the Adoption Coordinator may indicate)
      but unwillingness is not the same as inability  (see  Sharma  v  Entry
      Clearance Officer (New Delhi)  [2005] EWCA Civ 89).  That is  relevant
      also to paragraph 310(ix).

  26. Based on the evidence as a whole  and  as  it  currently  stands,  the
      Appellant cannot meet paragraphs 310(i)(e) or 310(ix). That is because
      of the existence of the Appellant's father and the  lack  of  evidence
      from him as to the control which he currently has over the Appellant's
      upbringing compared with that of the Sponsor and his ability  to  look
      after the Appellant.  For the same reasons, I cannot accept  that  the
      Appellant has broken or lost her  ties  with  her  family  of  origin.
      Whilst I accept that her biological mother has disappeared, I  do  not
      accept that her biological father does not retain contact and that  he
      has ceased to exercise control over the Appellant.  The Appellant also
      has other family in Jamaica such as her aunt.  There  is  no  evidence
      that the Appellant has lost ties with that family.

  27. I have noted above the Sponsor's evidence to the effect that  she  and
      her husband had considered the option  of  permanently  relocating  to
      Jamaica.  The Sponsor is a dual Jamaican and  British  national.   The
      evidence suggests that they have accommodation available  to  them  in
      Jamaica where the Appellant has lived with them in the past.  That may
      indicate that the Sponsor has arranged the  Appellant's  adoption  and
      application for entry clearance simply to allow the Appellant to enter
      the UK.  I am though inclined not  to  make  such  a  finding.   I  am
      impressed by the frankness of the Sponsor's statement in  this  regard
      and that she and her husband considered carefully whether it would  be
      better for the Appellant to come to the UK with them or for them to go
      to Jamaica so she can live with them there.   I  note  also  that  the
      desire is to provide the Appellant with a stable and  supportive  home
      life in which to grow up and I accept that might  be  reason  for  the
      Sponsor and her husband to favour a home life in the UK where they are
      permanently based.

  28. I turn finally in the case under  the  Rules  to  consider  paragraphs
      310(i)(f) and 297(i)(f).  I have no problem  in  accepting  the  legal
      submissions made on behalf of the  Appellant  as  to  what  this  test
      requires.  The headnote in Mundeba (s55 and para 297(i)(f) [2013] UKUT
      00088 (IAC) helpfully encapsulates the relevant principles:-

           "(i)  The exercise of the duty by the Entry Clearance Officer to
           assess an application under the Immigration Rules as to  whether
           there are family or  other  considerations  making  the  child's
           exclusion undesirable inevitably involves an assessment of  what
           the child's welfare and best interests require.

           (ii)  Where an immigration decision engages  Article  8  rights,
           due regard must be had to the UN Convention on the Rights of the
           Child.  An entry clearance decision for the admission of a child
           under 18  is  "an  action  concerning  children...undertaken  by
           ...administrative authorities" and so by  Article  3  "the  best
           interests of the child shall be a primary consideration"

           (iii) Although the statutory duty under s55 UK Borders Act  2009
           only applies  to  children  within  the  UK,  the  broader  duty
           doubtless explains why the  Secretary  of  State's  IDI  invites
           Entry Clearance Officers  to  consider  the  statutory  guidance
           issued under s55.

           (iv)  Family considerations require an evaluation of the child's
           welfare including emotional needs. 'Other  considerations'  come
           in to play where there are other aspects of a child's life  that
           are serious and compelling for example  where  an  applicant  is
           living in an unacceptable social and economic environment.   The
           focus needs to be on the circumstances of the child in the light
           of his or her age, social backgrounds and developmental  history
           and will involve inquiry as to whether:-

                 a.    there is evidence of neglect or abuse;

                 b.    there are unmet needs that should be catered for;

                 c.     there  are  stable  arrangements  for  the  child's
           physical care;

           The  assessment  involves  consideration  as  to   whether   the
           combination  of  circumstances  are  sufficiently  serious   and
           compelling to require admission.

           (v)   As a starting point the best  interests  of  a  child  are
           usually served by being with both  or  at  least  one  of  their
           parents.  Continuity of residence is another factor;  change  in
           the place of residence where a child has grown up for  a  number
           of years when socially aware is important: see also SG (child of
           a polygamous marriage) Nepal [2012] UKUT 265 (IAC) [2012] Imm AR
           939.

  29. The difficulty I have in this particular case is applying those  legal
      principles to the facts given the lack of evidence.   There  are  some
      matters raised in statements from the Sponsor (although not  with  the
      original application)  concerning  the  Appellant's  circumstances  in
      Jamaica.  Those statements do not  however  contain  much  detail  and
      there is no or very little corroborating evidence.  This makes it very
      difficult to assess  the  nature  of  the  Appellant's  circumstances.
      There is recent evidence from the  Sponsor  to  the  effect  that  the
      Appellant is living in very difficult  environmental  conditions  with
      the Sponsor's friend.  However, that post-dates what the Sponsor  said
      about the circumstances at the  date  of  decision.  Furthermore,  the
      Sponsor has no first-hand knowledge of those circumstances  since  she
      says in her most recent statement that she has  not  been  to  Jamaica
      since November 2014.  It ought to be possible to obtain evidence  from
      the Sponsor's friend or the Appellant herself.

  30. I have already  noted  the  lack  of  any  reports  prepared  for  the
      adoption.  I assume those will have taken into account the  wishes  of
      the Appellant.  I assume also that such reports would have  considered
      the Appellant's best interests.  It might be  assumed  that  her  best
      interests would inevitably be served by coming to the UK  to  be  with
      the Sponsor and her husband.   However,  I  also  need  to  take  into
      account the impact on the Appellant of removing her from a country and
      culture in which she has grown up for the first thirteen years of  her
      life and of bringing her to a country which  she  does  not  know  and
      where she would continue to be educated in a system which is  entirely
      foreign to her.  As I have already noted, she would also  be  deprived
      of day-to-day  contact  with  her  family  in  Jamaica  including  her
      biological father. I do not doubt the  genuineness  of  the  Sponsor's
      intentions towards the Appellant.  However, on the evidence  currently
      to hand, I am unable to make  a  finding  that  the  Appellant's  best
      interests are served by allowing her  to  come  to  the  UK.   I  have
      nothing from the Appellant herself nor any reports from  professionals
      who will no doubt  have  interviewed  her  for  the  purposes  of  the
      adoption proceedings.

  31. Based on the evidence, therefore, I find that the  Appellant  has  not
      shown  that  there  are  serious  and  compelling  family   or   other
      considerations which make her exclusion undesirable.

  32. I turn finally to consider Article 8 ECHR.  I am  prepared  to  accept
      that there exists some family  life  between  the  Appellant  and  the
      Sponsor in light of the adoption.  There is however  limited  evidence
      as I have already noted as to the extent  of  that  family  life.   As
      such, it is difficult to find that there  is  a  sufficiently  serious
      interference with the Appellant's family life by the refusal of entry.
       I have already made a finding on the  evidence  that  there  are  not
      sufficiently serious and compelling  circumstances  that  require  the
      Appellant to be allowed to come to the UK.  I have noted the  lack  of
      evidence as to the involvement  of  the  Sponsor  in  the  Appellant's
      upbringing from which I have concluded that the Sponsor is  unable  to
      show that she has sole responsibility for the Appellant.  The  Sponsor
      has already indicated that she and her husband had  considered  moving
      to Jamaica so that the  Appellant  could  live  with  them  there.   I
      recognise that this would involve  disruption  to  the  lives  of  the
      Sponsor and her husband.  However, it  appears  that  they  have  been
      willing in the past to spend periods of some  months  in  Jamaica  and
      they appear to have  accommodation  there.   The  Sponsor  is  also  a
      Jamaican citizen. She also has family in Jamaica in  common  with  the
      Appellant. The Appellant has some support from  her  other  family  in
      Jamaica: there is no evidence that she has broken ties with her father
      and it is the Sponsor's evidence that the  Appellant's  aunt  has  and
      continues to provide some support albeit not permanent.  I  have  also
      found that there is  insufficient  evidence  to  show  that  the  best
      interests of the Appellant favour her coming to the UK, a  country  of
      which she has no experience rather than remaining in Jamaica with  the
      family which she does have and to which country the  Sponsor  and  her
      husband can relocate if they so choose.  For those reasons, even if  I
      accepted  that  there  was  evidence  that  refusal  of  entry   would
      constitute a sufficiently serious interference with the family life of
      the Appellant and the Sponsor, I would not find that the  decision  to
      refuse entry was disproportionate based on the  evidence  as  set  out
      above.

  33. For the foregoing reasons, the  Appellant's  appeal  fails  under  the
      Rules (paragraphs 310 and 297). The appeal also fails under Article  8
      ECHR.  I therefore dismiss the appeal.

  34. I add by way of postscript that I  recognise  this  decision  will  be
      unwelcome to the Appellant and  the  Sponsor.   I  emphasise  that  my
      decision is based on the evidence and that I am only able now to  take
      account of circumstances as were in  existence  at  the  date  of  the
      ECO/ECM decision.  If the Appellant and Sponsor are able  to  overcome
      the evidential difficulties that  I  have  identified,  it  of  course
      remains open to them to make a further application for entry clearance
      based on the up-to-date position.


      DECISION


      The Appellant's appeal is dismissed under the  Rules  (paragraphs  310
      and 297).
      The Appellant's appeal on human rights grounds is dismissed.
      Signed      [pic]Date   27 July 2016




      Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

















               APPENDIX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND DIRECTIONS
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/17176/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On Tuesday 24 May 2016                        |                             |
|                                              |.........29 June             |
|                                              |2016..................       |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH



                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, KINGSTON

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 MISS A U J
                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Canter, Counsel instructed by Terence Ray
solicitors


                    ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Although an anonymity order was not made by the  First-tier  Tribunal,  this
appeal concerns the adoption of a child from Jamaica.  On the facts of  this
case, it is appropriate to make an anonymity direction.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Background

   1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State.  For ease of  reference,
      I refer below to the parties as they were in the First-Tier  Tribunal
      albeit that the Secretary of State is technically  the  Appellant  in
      this particular appeal.

   2. The Appellant is a child born on 6 May  2003  who  is  a  citizen  of
      Jamaica and currently remains there.  She applies to enter the UK for
      settlement as the adopted child of a parent present in the  UK.   The
      appeal is brought by Mrs M J, her sponsor and adopted mother  who  is
      also  the  Appellant's  aunt  ("the  Sponsor").   The  adoption   was
      registered in Jamaica on 2 May 2013.  The application was made on  21
      May 2013.

   3. The Appellant is a child born on 6 May  2003  who  is  a  citizen  of
      Jamaica and currently remains there.  She applies to enter the UK for
      settlement as the adopted child of a parent present in the  UK.   The
      appeal is brought by Mrs M J, her sponsor and adopted mother  who  is
      also  the  Appellant's  aunt  ("the  Sponsor").   The  adoption   was
      registered in Jamaica on 2 May 2013.  The application was made on  21
      May 2013.

   4. The Appellant's application  was  refused  by  the  Respondent  under
      paragraph 310 of the  Immigration  Rules  on  7  August  2013.    The
      Respondent was not satisfied that this was a de  facto  adoption  for
      the purposes of paragraph 309A and the application  did  not  satisfy
      the requirements of  paragraph  309B  which  was  a  prerequisite  of
      paragraph 310 (specifically  because  there  was  no  certificate  of
      eligibility included with the application).  The Respondent  went  on
      to  consider  the  application  however  under  paragraph  310(i)(e),
      310(i)(f), 310(vi)(b), and  310(ix)  to  310(xi).   The  Respondent's
      decision was upheld by an  administrative  review  decision  dated  3
      February 2014. The Appellant was given a right of appeal against  the
      Respondent's decision(s).

   5. The appeal was originally  heard  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Kaler on 18 August 2014 and allowed by a decision promulgated  on  29
      August 2014 ("the Decision").  The Judge, having noted the  basis  of
      the Respondent's decision refusing entry  clearance  found  that  the
      Appellant met the requirements of paragraph 310(vi)(a) and  310(i)(a)
      and that she did not have to consider paragraph 309.

   6. The Respondent appealed.  Permission to appeal was granted by  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge De Haney on 7 October 2014 on the basis that  the
      Judge had failed to properly consider all the relevant criteria under
      paragraph 310 and in particular  had  omitted  subsections  (vii)  to
      (xiii).  The Judge granting permission noted that it  was  not  clear
      what of those matters were raised as  live  issues  but  the  Judge's
      decision did not show that they were conceded.

   7. The appeal came before Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Pickup  on  21
      November 2014.  The Sponsor was not present on  that  occasion.   She
      sought an adjournment because she had to return to Jamaica to  attend
      to the needs of the Appellant who had been the subject  of  a  sexual
      assault.  The Deputy Judge did not consider that to be good reason to
      adjourn and refused the adjournment request.  The Deputy  Judge  went
      on to conclude that there were errors of law in the Decision  on  the
      basis of a failure to consider paragraph  309B  and  certain  of  the
      requirements in paragraph 310.  He therefore set aside  the  Decision
      and went on to re-make it, finding that the Appellant  did  not  meet
      paragraph 310 or 309B (and could not meet paragraph  297).   He  also
      considered the appeal under Article 8 ECHR and the  Appellant's  best
      interests but concluded that  those  were  served  by  the  Appellant
      remaining with  her  father  who  lives  in  Jamaica.   He  therefore
      substituted a decision dismissing the appeal.

   8. The Appellant sought permission to appeal  to  the  Court  of  Appeal
      which was initially refused by the Upper Tribunal but granted by Lord
      Justice Jackson by an order dated 4 June 2015 in the following terms:-


            "1.   The UT judge appears to have misunderstood  the  basis  of
      the application for    an adjournment.
            2.    The UT judge appears not to have investigated  whether  at
      the FTT hearing  the HOPO  made  the  concessions  which  the  sponsor
      alleges in her letter dated 24th  October 2014.
           3.    The significance of such concessions  (if  made)  and  the
           fact that there was no application  to  withdraw  them  (in  the
           context of a hearing at which the applicant was not  present  or
           represented) does raise an important point  of  practice,  which
           satisfies the requirements of CPR52.13(2)(a)"

   9.  The grant of permission led to the Respondent agreeing to remit  the
      appeal to the Upper Tribunal which consent  was  concluded  by  order
      from the Court of Appeal sealed on 19 January  2016.   The  terms  of
      that order are that Deputy Judge Pickup's decision finding  an  error
      of law (wrongly stated as finding no error  of  law)  should  be  set
      aside and the appeal  remitted  for  rehearing.   The  terms  of  the
      accompanying statement of reasons refer to the  allegations  made  by
      the Appellant that she had not had a  fair  hearing  because  of  the
      refusal to adjourn the hearing and because the Judge  had  failed  to
      have regard to  her  written  submissions  to  the  effect  that  the
      Respondent had previously conceded that the  Immigration  Rules  were
      met (a point to which I return  below);  also  by  finding  that  the
      failure to obtain a certificate of eligibility meant that the  appeal
      could not succeed under the Rules.  The  statement  of  reasons  also
      agrees that the Decision  contained  an  arguable  error  of  law  by
      failing to engage fully with documentary evidence and application  of
      the Immigration Rules.

  10. The effect of the Court  of  Appeal's  order  and  the  statement  of
      reasons is that the appeal comes before  me  to  decide  whether  the
      Decision contains an error of law and if  so  to  either  remake  the
      decision  or  remit  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal   for
      redetermination.   The parties agreed that this is the correct  legal
      position.

The Applicable Immigration Rules

  11. The sections of the Rules relevant or  potentially  relevant  to  the
      Appellant's case are as follows (so far as material to  the  Decision
      and the parties' arguments):-

           "Paragraph 297

           Requirements for indefinite leave to enter the United Kingdom as
           the child of a parent, parents or a relative present and settled
           or being admitted for settlement in the United Kingdom

           297. The requirements to be met by a person seeking indefinite
           leave to enter the United Kingdom as the child of a parent,
           parents or a relative present and settled or being admitted for
           settlement in the United Kingdom are that he:
           (i) is seeking leave to enter to accompany or join a parent,
           parents or a relative in one of the following circumstances:
           (a)both parents are present and settled in the United Kingdom;
      or
           (b)...; or
           (c)...; or
           (d)...; or
           (e) one parent is present and settled in the United Kingdom or
           being admitted on the same occasion for settlement and has had
           sole responsibility for the child's upbringing; or
           (f) one parent or a relative is present and settled in the
           United Kingdom or being admitted on the same occasion for
           settlement and there are serious and compelling family or other
           considerations which make exclusion of the child undesirable and
           suitable arrangements have been made for the child's care; and
           (ii) is under the age of 18; and
           (iii) is not leading an independent life, is unmarried and is
           not a civil partner, and has not formed an independent family
           unit; and
           (iv) can, and will, be accommodated adequately by the parent,
           parents or relative the child is seeking to join without
           recourse to public funds in accommodation which the parent,
           parents or relative the child is seeking to join, own or occupy
           exclusively; and
           (v) can, and will, be maintained adequately by the parent,
           parents, or relative the child is seeking to join, without
           recourse to public funds; and
           (vi) holds a valid United Kingdom entry clearance for entry in
      this capacity; and
           (vii) does not fall for refusal under the general grounds for
      refusal.

           Paragraph 309
           309A  For the purposes of adoption under paragraphs  310-316C  a
           de facto adoption shall be regarded as having taken place if:
           a)  at  the  time  immediately  preceding  the  making  of   the
              application  for  entry  clearance  under  these  Rules   the
              adoptive parent  or  parents  have  been  living  abroad  (in
              applications involving  two  parents  both  must  have  lived
              abroad together) for at least a period of time equal  to  the
              first period mentioned in sub-paragraph (b)(i) and must  have
              cared for the child for at least a period of  time  equal  to
              the second period material in that sub-paragraph; and
           b) during their time abroad,  the  adoptive  parent  or  parents
              have:
                 i)  lived together for a minimum period of  18  months,  of
                    which  the   12   months   immediately   preceding   the
                    application for entry clearance  must  have  been  spent
                    living together with the child; and
                ii) have assumed the role of the child's parents, since  the
                    beginning of the 18 month period, so that there has been
                    a genuine transfer of parental responsibility.
           309B   Inter-country adoptions which are not a de facto adoption
           under paragraph 309A are subject to the  Adoption  and  Children
           Act 2002 and the Adoptions with a  Foreign  Element  Regulations
           2005.  As such all prospective  adopters  must  be  assessed  as
           suitable to adopt by a competent authority in the UK, and obtain
           a Certificate of Eligibility from the Department  of  Education,
           before travelling abroad to identify a child for adoption.  This
           Certificate of Eligibility  must  be  provided  with  all  entry
           clearance adoption applications under paragraphs 310-316F.


           Paragraph 310
           Requirements for indefinite leave to enter the United Kingdom as
           the adopted child of a parent or parents present and settled or
           being admitted for settlement in the United Kingdom
           310. The requirements to be met in the case of a child seeking
           indefinite leave to enter the United Kingdom as the adopted
           child of a parent or parents present and settled or being
           admitted for settlement in the United Kingdom are that he:
           (i) is seeking leave to enter to accompany or join an adoptive
           parent or parents in one of the following circumstances;
                 (a) both parents are present and settled in the United
                 Kingdom; or
                 (b) ...; or
                 (c) ...; or
                 (d) ...; or
                 (e) one parent is present and settled in the United Kingdom
                 or being admitted on the same occasion for settlement and
                 has had sole responsibility for the child's upbringing; or
                 (f) one parent is present and settled in the United Kingdom
                 or being admitted on the same occasion for settlement and
                 there are serious and compelling family or other
                 considerations which make exclusion of the child
                 undesirable and suitable arrangements have been made for
                 the child's care; or
                 (g) in the case of a de facto adoption one parent has a
                 right of abode in the United Kingdom or indefinite leave to
                 enter or remain in the United Kingdom and is seeking
                 admission to the United Kingdom on the same occasion for
                 the purposes of settlement; and
           (ii) is under the age of 18; and
           (iii) is not leading an independent life, is unmarried and is
           not a civil partner, and has not formed an independent family
           unit; and
           (iv) can, and will, be accommodated and maintained adequately
           without recourse to public funds in accommodation which the
           adoptive parent or parents own or occupy exclusively; and
           (v) DELETED
           (vi) (a) was adopted in accordance with a decision taken by the
           competent administrative authority or court in his country of
           origin or the country in which he is resident, being a country
           whose adoption orders are recognised by the United Kingdom; or
                 (b) is the subject of a de facto adoption; and
           (vii) was adopted at a time when:
                 (a) both adoptive parents were resident together abroad; or


                 (b) either or both adoptive parents were settled in the
                 United Kingdom; and
           (viii) has the same rights and obligations as any other child of
           the adoptive parent's or parents' family; and
           (ix) was adopted due to the inability of the original parent(s)
           or current carer(s) to care for him and there has been a genuine
           transfer of parental responsibility to the adoptive parents; and


           (x) has lost or broken his ties with his family of origin; and
           (xi) was adopted, but the adoption is not one of convenience
           arranged to facilitate his admission to or remaining in the
           United Kingdom; and
           (xii) holds a valid United Kingdom entry clearance for entry in
           this capacity; and
           (xiii) does not fall for refusal under the general grounds for
           refusal."

 "The Concession"

  12. Before turning to consider the applicable legal provisions, I need to
      consider the factual and legal position surrounding the  main  reason
      why permission to appeal was granted by the Court of  Appeal  and  on
      the basis of which the  previous  Upper  Tribunal  decision  was  set
      aside, namely that the Respondent had conceded the central issues  in
      the appeal.  This  is  the  starting  position  for  the  Appellant's
      contention that there is no material error of law  in  the  Decision.
      The Appellant says that the concession was  one  of  fact,  that  the
      Respondent conceded  that  the  Appellant  met  the  Rule  which  the
      Appellant says was  the  only  relevant  one  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal (Rule 310) and whilst it is accepted that the concession  is
      not recorded in the Decision, the Appellant says that the  Judge  was
      bound to and did accept that concession and allow the appeal.

  13. The Appellant's evidence in this regard is contained in the Sponsor's
      response dated 24 October 2014 to the  Respondent's  application  and
      her application for permission to appeal.  The latter refers back  to
      the former and I therefore set out below what was said in the  letter
      of 24 October 2014 about the concession as follows:-

           "...
           3.    The Judge informed my  husband  and  I  that  if  we  both
           remained, there could be matters which required  our  individual
           responses, however, that wouldn't be possible if my husband  was
           present when I answered questions.  My  husband  and  I  decided
           that he would wait outside  the  courtroom  door  until  he  was
           required.
           4.    The Judge and Mr Bartlett  [Counsel  for  the  Respondent]
           entered into dialogue while scrutinising their documents  and  I
           remained poised to respond to any questioning from the Judge  or
           Mr Bartlett.  During the  hearing  the  Judge  and  Mr  Bartlett
           carefully went through paragraph 310 and all the  points  raised
           in the 2nd ECO refusal letter as it contained  the  most  recent
           areas of concern.  As each point was raised  the  Judge  checked
           whether or not Mr Bartlett agreed that the particular point  had
           been satisfactorily met.  At one stage of  the  proceedings  the
           Judge realised Mr Bartlett didn't have his copy of  the  Witness
           Statement so she arranged a photocopy from  hers  for  him.   Mr
           Bartlett didn't ask me or  my  husband  a  single  question.  Mr
           Bartlett's agreement was so strong that the Judge  asked  me  to
           call in my husband so he could hear her decision.  The Judge and
           Mr Bartlett discussed a few more points  from  their  documents,
           then she informed us she had decided to allow my appeal and went
           on to explain what would happen next.
           5.    I was happy but somewhat surprised that Mr Bartlett didn't
           ask us any questions and I attributed the absence  of  questions
           or objections to the fact that I  had  meticulously  researched,
           addressed issues and presented my case clearly.

           I am opposing the Secretary  of  State's  appeal  to  the  Upper
           Tribunal on the following grounds:
           6.    The presenting officer, Mr  Bartlett,  had  discussed  the
           entirety of Paragraph 310 and agreed  they  were  satisfactorily
           met.  However, now there is the matter that the Judge simply did
           not print subsections (vii) to (xiii) of Paragraph 310 or showed
           that all matters raised were conceded.
           7.    The presenting officer did not use effectively  the  court
           hearing process to examine and question any  ambiguous,  unclear
           or outstanding issues regarding any aspect of  the  case.   This
           amounts to an outright failure  by  the  presenting  officer  to
           afford me an opportunity to explain or clarify the  issues  they
           have now raised.
           8.    At [3] the Home Office refers to 310(ix) to  (xi).   These
           issues were covered in  detail  in  the  witness  statement  and
           supporting documents.  The  witness  statement  shows  that  the
           child's biological mother abandoned her  and  newspaper  adverts
           (see appendix 5) were released to contact the mother. The mother
           wasn't found as confirmed in a letter from the Child Development
           Agency, dated May  15,  2014  (see  appendix  6).   The  child's
           biological father met in a road traffic accident and as a result
           hasn't been able to meet his parental obligations.  There are  4
           medical reports (see appendices 1a, 1b, 2 and 3) concerning  the
           father's health that were supplied as evidence.
           These circumstances demonstrate the inability of parents to care
           for the child 310(ix) and as a  result  a  legal  adoption  took
           place which by itself constitutes a genuine transfer of parental
           responsibility hence the child has broken ties  with  family  of
           origin 310(x).
           Given that the child  has  been  undergoing  a  long  period  of
           turmoil, it would be unfair to conclude this adoption as one  of
           convenience 310(xi).  Again, the presenting officer agreed  that
           these rules were sufficiently met!"

  14.    When this case came before me on the first occasion on 26 February
      2016, the Respondent was represented by Ms Everett, Senior Presenting
      Officer and the Appellant by Mr Canter.  Ms  Everett  indicated  that
      there was no  record  of  concession  in  the  notes  on  file.   The
      concession was not recorded in the record of proceedings (which I set
      out below).  Nor as I have already  noted  was  it  recorded  in  the
      Decision.  As noted at [3] of my decision of that date, therefore,  I
      considered that I could not determine what was essentially  an  issue
      of fact without giving the  Respondent  the  opportunity  to  provide
      evidence as to what happened at the hearing before  Judge  Kaler  and
      for the Appellant to respond.  I therefore gave  directions  to  that
      effect.

  15. On 13 April 2016, the Home Office Specialist Appeals Team lodged  and
      served a statement from Mr Bartlett.  It was explained to me that the
      statement was filed nearly a month late because Ms Everett  had  been
      ill and the directions had been noticed late.  It was not due to  any
      failure by Mr Bartlett.  The Appellant had the opportunity to respond
      to the statement and I therefore admitted it without  objection  from
      Mr Canter.

  16. Mr Bartlett is a practising barrister.  Mr Jarvis confirmed  that  Mr
      Bartlett is at the  independent  bar  and  is  not  employed  by  the
      Secretary of State in house.  His statement dated 13  April  2016  is
      made some nineteen months after the  events  of  the  hearing  before
      Judge Kaler and it is unsurprising therefore that he recalls  nothing
      of the hearing and had to rely on his notes  for  recollection.   His
      statement so far as relevant states the following:-
           "5.   I must make it clear that I have no  recollection  of  the
           hearing.  I did provide an attendance note to the  Home  Office,
           which I exhibit at DB1.  That note speaks for itself and is  the
           best record that I have of the hearing and what happened.
           6.    I appeared on behalf of the Home Office in only a  limited
           number of appeals.  I would also make it clear that  immigration
           is not my first area of expertise.
           7.    I cannot say with certainty that I did not speak  with  my
           instructing solicitor on the day  but  it  would  be  my  normal
           practice  to  record  any  conversations  with  my   instructing
           solicitor in my notebook.  There is nothing in  my  notebook  to
           indicate that  I  did  talk  to  my  instructing  solicitor  and
           therefore I think it unlikely that I would have  made  a  formal
           concession on any matter without seeking formal instructions."

  17.   Mr Bartlett's note which is annexed to his statement is as follows:-


           "18/8/14
           Sponsor only [M J]
           [A U J]
           Adopted child of [M J]
           -ID of parents - Birth cert? Sponsor not named there
           F [I assume meant to refer to  father]  20%  reduction  in  eye.
           Minor hernia.
           Sponsor now aunt
           Gleaner 13/6/12
           Adoption 2/5/13
           Appeal allowed Rules 310(i)(e)
           Sole adoptive parent with sole responsibility
           AN [attendance note] e mailed 19/8/14 @ 1756"

  18. I was also given a copy of the  attendance  note  which  Mr  Bartlett
      completed for the hearing which (so far  as  material)  indicates  in
      terms that no concession or undertaking had been given for  the  Home
      Office, that the hearing had proceeded  smoothly  and  that  no  oral
      evidence was required.  Under the heading of "other comments  on  the
      proceedings", Mr Bartlett said this:-

           "On coming into court the judge indicated that  as  the  sponsor
           was the  sole  adoptive  parent  with  sole  responsibility  the
           decision had been founded on  an  incorrect  premise  and  under
           Rules 310(i)(e) the appeal would be allowed.  I could not  argue
           this point given the documentation  before  the  court  and  the
           Rules."

  19. The Appellant's sponsor responded to Mr  Bartlett's  statement  by  a
      statement dated 18 April 2016.  That statement (so far  as  relevant)
      is as follows:-

           "Having  read  and  considered  Mr  Bartlett's   statement   and
           handwritten note in line with my letter (dated October 24, 2014)
           and my  vivid  personal  recollection  of  events,  I  can  with
           absolute certainty say that Mr Bartlett conceded to  all  points
           raised in  the  Entry  Clearance  Manager  review  (2nd  refusal
           letter) and the entirety of Paragraph 310..."

           [the Appellant then sets out the content of the  note  and  goes
           on]


           "These are some of  the  points  Mr  Bartlett  conceded  to  and
           concluded they were sufficiently met.  As my letter  stated  the
           supporting documents were scrutinised and discussed  thoroughly.
           I can say with certainty that Mr Bartlett  did  not  familiarise
           himself with the case before attending court.  If  he  had  done
           so, he would have quickly realised that 3 birth certificates,  4
           medical reports, an adoption  certificate/order  and  a  witness
           statement were sitting in the file he had.  Judge Kaler assisted
           by indicating to him  where  to  find  the  relevant  supporting
           documents and also provided him  with  a  copy  of  the  witness
           statement.
           Most importantly, Mr Bartlett was unaware that ALL the issues in
           ECO refusal letter and ECM review were addressed  at  length  by
           the provision of a  witness  statement  and  several  supporting
           documents as per the directions of the First Tier Tribunal..."

           [the sponsor then goes on to complain further about the lack  of
           preparedness of Mr  Bartlett  and  notes  that  he  has  limited
           immigration expertise and then continues as follows]


           "Mr Bartlett said it would be unlikely  that  he  would  make  a
           formal concession without seeking formal  instruction  from  his
           instructing solicitor.   But  why  would  he  consult  with  his
           solicitor when he didn't even ask me  or  my  husband  a  single
           question or make any objections?  Instead  he  acknowledged  all
           the supporting documents,  admitted  they  were  sufficient  and
           conceded that all requirements were met.
           Mr Bartlett's clear concession on August 18, 2014  helped  Judge
           Kaler to make an  immediate  determination  in  the  appellant's
           favour."

  20. I turn then to what was recorded by Judge  Kaler  in  her  record  of
      proceedings.  Of course,  the  Decision  itself  should  reflect  the
      relevant parts of the hearing, particularly any  concession(s)  made.
      However, where there is a dispute of fact about whether a  concession
      was  made  and  particularly  where  the  Sponsor  was  not   legally
      represented and appeared in person, it is relevant to  look  at  what
      the  Judge  considered  had  occurred.   Having  taken  note  of  the
      Sponsor's date of birth and that her husband  was  to  wait  outside,
      there is then reference to the Sponsor's statement in the bundle  and
      the fact that Mr Bartlett  did  not  have  the  statement  which  was
      presumably then provided to him as the Sponsor says.  The record goes
      on:-
           "Mr Bartlett - there has been a de facto adoption - there is  an
           order - 2/5/13 - adoption order made.  So  there  is  a  genuine
           adoption order.
           EV [?] - In favour of aunt - sponsor
           Consequence: there is a proper adoption.
           Whether natural parents are or are not in existence.
           310(i) applies - bona fide adoption. Just one  adoptive  parent.
           She has sole responsibility. She is  the  only  adopter  -  only
           applicant on the order.  Appeal allowed"

  21. The Appellant's submissions relating  to  the  concession  are  as  I
      record above at [11] - that the concession was one of  fact  and  the
      concession made was that the Appellant met the relevant  Rules.   The
      Appellant says that the concession being one of fact, the  Judge  was
      bound to accept it (Carcabuk  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department  [2002]  UKIAT  00976).   The  Appellant's   supplementary
      skeleton  says  that  it  "inevitably  follows"  from  Mr  Bartlett's
      statement and the fact that no questions were asked that  concessions
      must have been made.  Although Mr Bartlett is independent Counsel and
      Mr Canter accepted that in  order  to  have  authority  to  make  the
      concession, he ought to have sought instructions, he submitted that a
      concession could still have been made inadvertently  by  Mr  Bartlett
      and would still bind the Respondent.  Mr Canter also  accepted  that,
      if I were to find an error of law in the Decision, it would  be  open
      to the Respondent to withdraw the concession  before  this  Tribunal.
      However, he submitted that at  the  stage  of  deciding  whether  the
      Decision does contain an  error  of  law,  it  is  not  open  to  the
      Respondent to withdraw the concession if made.

  22. The Respondent's position is that neither Mr Bartlett's note nor  the
      Decision refer to any concession; if there had been a concession, the
      Judge would not  have  had  to  give  reasons  by  reference  to  the
      documents for allowing the appeal.  The  Respondent  further  submits
      that if the concession was not correctly made in law or fact, she  is
      entitled  to  argue  that  and  is  entitled  to  withdraw  it.   The
      Respondent refers in particular to  my  observation  in  my  decision
      dated 26 February 2016 that since the Judge appears to have  recorded
      in the record of proceedings that Mr Bartlett said that  this  was  a
      case of a de  facto  adoption  which  it  clearly  is  not  (and  the
      Appellant does not contend it is) the  concession  would  be  wrongly
      made in any event.

  23. I should say at once that I do not disbelieve the Sponsor's evidence.
      She has given a clear and detailed account.

  24. The Sponsor says that the Judge went through  paragraph  310  against
      the second refusal letter of  the  Respondent  (ie  the  decision  on
      administrative review). It is fair to note that some of  the  content
      of that refusal letter does appear in  note  form  in  Mr  Bartlett's
      handwritten note (although not the Judge's  record  of  proceedings).
      That  supports  the  Sponsor's  evidence  that  those  matters   were
      canvassed with him in the course of the hearing.

  25. A problem arises though, even  if  I  were  to  accept  there  was  a
      concession, in that the second  decision  refers  only  to  paragraph
      310(i)(f) of the Rules.  The other objections taken in  the  original
      decision (in relation to paragraph 310(ix) (that  there  has  been  a
      genuine transfer of parental responsibility), 310(x) (that the  child
      has lost or broken her ties with her family of  origin)  and  310(xi)
      (that the adoption is not one of convenience to facilitate  admission
      to the UK) are matters which are all canvassed in the second decision
      and maintained but there is no cross-reference to the  relevant  part
      of the Rule.

  26. Insofar as the Sponsor says therefore that the Judge took Mr Bartlett
      through the second decision against the relevant rule, it is far from
      apparent that the Judge understood that there was more at issue  than
      simply paragraph 310(i)f).  In order for a concession  to  be  relied
      upon, it ought to be clear on the evidence  to  what  the  concession
      relates.  Mr Bartlett might not have disagreed with the Judge's  view
      that the evidence  overcame  the  objections  raised  in  the  second
      decision letter but, unless he (and the Judge) understood that he was
      thereby  conceding  expressly  that  the  Appellant  could  meet  the
      relevant parts of the relevant immigration rule, that is  not  in  my
      view sufficient to show that a concession was made.

  27. This leads me on to a further difficulty with the Sponsor's evidence.
       The Sponsor is not a lawyer and it would be relatively easy in those
      circumstances for her to misunderstand the nature of  what  occurred.
      It is said, for example, on  her  behalf,  that  the  failure  of  Mr
      Bartlett to ask any  questions  or  make  submissions  amounts  to  a
      concession.  I disagree.  There may be a narrow distinction between a
      failure to dispute and a concession that a  requirement  is  met  but
      nonetheless there is a distinction.  As Elias put it  in  the  recent
      case of Koori v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department   [2016]
      EWCA Civ 552 "... a failure by the  representative  to  appreciate  a
      matter in his client's favour does not amount to a concession".  That
      point is also made in Carcabuk  [11]:-

           "It is in our judgment important to identify the precise  nature
           of  any  so-called  concession.   If  it  is  of   fact...   the
           adjudicator should not go behind it.  Accordingly, if facts  are
           agreed,  the  adjudicator  should  accept  whatever  is  agreed.
           Equally, if a concession is clearly  made  by  a  HOPO  that  an
           appellant is telling the truth either generally or  on  specific
           matters, the adjudicator may raise  with  the  HOPO  his  doubts
           whether the concession is appropriate but, if it is  maintained,
           he should accept it.  But there is all  the  difference  in  the
           world between a concession and  a  failure  to  challenge.   The
           former will bind an adjudicator, the latter will not...."

  28. I also agree with the point made by the Respondent that if there  had
      been a concession which the Judge had  understood  to  be  such,  she
      would have recorded it but in any event  would  not  have  considered
      that she needed to give reasons for  allowing  the  appeal.   If  she
      considered  that  Mr  Bartlett  had  conceded  that  the   individual
      objections in the second refusal letter were met on the evidence  and
      (importantly) that by so conceding  those  aspects,  he  was  thereby
      conceding that the individual requirements of paragraph 310 were met,
      she would have said so.   At the very least, she would have indicated
      that she found that they were  met  and  that  Mr  Bartlett  had  not
      submitted that they were not.

  29. For those reasons, I do not accept that a concession  was  made.   At
      most, if  one  was  made,  I  would  only  accept  that  Mr  Bartlett
      (inadvertently) conceded that paragraph 310(i) was met.  Even if that
      did amount to a concession, it is far from clear  what  sub-paragraph
      of 310(i) the Judge thought was met.  Her  reasoning  that  paragraph
      310(i)(a) is met on the facts here is a clear  error.   That  applies
      only where both parents are to be in the UK with the  adopted  child.
      Here, the Appellant's natural father lives in  Jamaica.   It  appears
      from Mr Bartlett's attendance note that the Judge referred during the
      hearing to paragraph 310(i)(e) which would require evidence that  the
      Sponsor has had  sole  responsibility  for  the  child's  upbringing.
      There is no finding to that effect in the Decision.

  30. Even if I  accepted  that  a  concession  was  made  in  relation  to
      paragraph 310 (which I do not), there remains an issue which  is  not
      dealt with in the Decision.  I have already noted  that  the  Judge's
      record of proceedings suggests that Mr Bartlett submitted that  there
      was a de facto adoption.  That is clearly not legally correct and the
      Appellant does not say it is.  So already there is an undermining  of
      any concession which might have been  made  because  it  was  legally
      wrong.  There remains a dispute between the parties as to whether and
      how paragraph 309B applies to this case which I turn to below.  It is
      clear though that paragraph 309A is of no application.


   Paragraph 309B

  31. At the hearing, Mr Jarvis asked for further time to take advice  from
      his policy colleagues about the points being argued for the Appellant
      that paragraph 309B does not apply in this case and to  make  written
      submissions.  It is common ground that if the  paragraph  does  apply
      and the Sponsor was required to produce a certificate of  eligibility
      she did not do so and could not do so.  Accordingly, her appeal would
      be bound to fail.  Further, since the Judge  found  in  the  Decision
      that paragraph 309 was of no application, there would be an error  of
      law which is clearly material if in fact it is.

  32. Mr Canter did not object to the Respondent making written submissions
      after the hearing and I also directed  that  he  could  make  written
      submissions in reply.  I have received both sets of submissions which
      set out the competing arguments clearly and succinctly.

  33. It may assist if I indicate what is agreed between the parties.  As I
      have already noted, it is agreed that this case does not concern a de
      facto adoption.  It is also common  ground  that  Jamaica  is  not  a
      signatory to the Hague Convention and  so  it  is  not  a  Convention
      adoption.  I had thought at one point during the  hearing  that  this
      might be what is termed a "prospective adoption" on  the  basis  that
      certain formalities might be required to be completed as and when the
      Appellant is brought to the  UK  but  the  Respondent  has  helpfully
      indicated that this is  not  the  case.   The  Jamaican  adoption  is
      recognised in UK law as Jamaica was a country on the designated  list
      under the Adoption (Designation of Overseas  Adoptions)  Order  1973.
      That Order is now revoked by The Adoption  (Recognition  of  Overseas
      Adoptions) Order 2013.  Jamaica  does  not  appear  on  the  list  of
      countries in that Order. However, the  2013  Order  applies  only  to
      adoptions made on or after 3 January 2014 and there is a  saving  for
      adoptions (as here) made prior to that date which are  unaffected  by
      the changes.  The position is therefore that the Jamaican adoption in
      this case is recognised in UK law.

  34. The issue between the parties is whether there is  a  requirement  on
      the sponsor in this case to provide a certificate of eligibility with
      her entry clearance application by reason of paragraph 309B  which  I
      have set out above at [10].

  35. Mr Canter submits that there is no requirement to do so.  Firstly, he
      points to section 83(1) of the Adoptions and Children Act 2002  ("the
      ACA 2002") which reads as follows:-
           "This section applies where a person who is habitually  resident
           in the British Islands (the "British resident") -
           a) Brings, or causes another to bring, a child who is habitually
              resident outside the British Islands into the United  Kingdom
              for the purpose of adoption by the British resident, or
           b) At any time brings, or causes  another  to  bring,  into  the
              United Kingdom a child adopted by the British resident  under
              an external adoption effected within the period of six months
              ending with that time."

  36. Section 83(1)(a) relates to prospective adoptions and is therefore of
      no application.  Mr Canter points out  that  the  period  in  section
      83(1)(b) has been extended by the Children and Adoption Act  2006  to
      twelve months but he says in either event, the period is exceeded  in
      this case.  The adoption order in Jamaica is dated  2  May  2013.  He
      points also to the Adoptions with a Foreign Element Regulations  2005
      ("the 2005 Regulations") which impose a requirement for a certificate
      of eligibility to be obtained before bringing a child to whom section
      83 applies to the UK.

  37. Mr Canter's submission in relation to  paragraph  309B  is  that  the
      paragraph does not impose a requirement to  be  met  in  addition  to
      paragraph 310 but is simply a reflection of what the law in  the  ACA
      2002 and the 2005 Regulations requires.  He says that paragraph  309B
      also misstates the  law  as  contained  in  ACA  2002  and  the  2005
      Regulations as a certificate of eligibility does  not  apply  to  all
      inter-country adoptions but only those to which section 83 applies.

  38. I am unable to accept this submission.  As Mr Jarvis points out,  the
      issue for me is whether the Respondent's decision  is  in  accordance
      with the law or the Rules  but  if  the  Rules  impose  a  particular
      requirement then it is not a matter for  me  whether  the  Rules  are
      consistent with the particular statute which the  provision  purports
      to implement.  In any event, Mr Canter  accepts  that  a  prospective
      adopter would be required to obtain  a  certificate  of  eligibility.
      Paragraphs 316A-C of the Rules which clearly refer to  the  situation
      of a prospective adoption do not include a requirement  within  those
      paragraphs that a certificate of  eligibility  be  produced.   It  is
      apparent therefore that paragraph 309B is a catch all  provision  for
      the requirement to provide a certificate of eligibility.  Such  would
      be consistent with a scheme whereby the UK authorities seek to ensure
      that children who are brought to the UK for adoption or who have been
      adopted abroad are adopted by persons who are suitable to  carry  out
      that role.

  39. The Respondent's position as set out in  Mr  Jarvis'  submissions  is
      that paragraph 309B applies to all entry clearance applications.   He
      accepts that section 83 of ACA 2002 read with  the  2005  Regulations
      does not require a certificate of  eligibility  for  adoptions  other
      than for those who are prospective adopters or who seek  to  bring  a
      child into the UK within twelve months of the adoption order.  But he
      says that the way in which this would operate in practice is that the
      requirement  would  be  waived  for  those  who  do  not  require   a
      certificate  of  eligibility  under  the  ACA  2002  and   the   2005
      Regulations.

  40. Paragraph 309B  refers  in  terms  to  the  ACA  2002  and  the  2005
      Regulations.  It goes on to note the requirement under that  Act  and
      those Regulations for all prospective adopters to have a  certificate
      of eligibility.   It  then  refers  to  the  requirement  that  "This
      certificate of eligibility"(my emphasis) be produced with  all  entry
      clearance applications under paragraphs 310 to  316F.    On  the  one
      hand  this  might  suggest  that  the  requirement  relates  to  only
      prospective adopters as Mr Canter contends.  On the other, Mr  Jarvis
      says that the reference to "all entry clearance applications" in  the
      final sentence means what it says.

  41. I consider that a proper  reading  of  that  paragraph  is  somewhere
      between the two positions.  The requirement in the final sentence  is
      to provide a certificate of eligibility  in  all  applications  under
      paragraphs 310 to 316F.  That is not  altered  by  the  reference  to
      "This certificate" at the start of that sentence since that  must  be
      read in the context of what precedes it which is clearly referable to
      the  requirement  under  the  ACA  2002  and  the  2005  Regulations.
      Furthermore, only paragraphs 316A-C relate to prospective adopters so
      that if the drafter of the rule had intended it  to  relate  only  to
      prospective adopters, he would either have  referred  only  to  those
      paragraphs or would have included this as an  additional  requirement
      under those paragraphs.

  42. In my view,  what  rule  309B  requires  is  that  a  certificate  of
      eligibility be produced in all entry clearance applications but  that
      has to be  read  in  the  context  of  the  ACA  2002  and  the  2005
      Regulations as to the adoptions to which those provisions relate.

  43. That then gives rise to the issue whether section 83 of ACA 2002  and
      the 2005 Regulations do require that a  certificate  be  provided  in
      this particular case.   Mr  Canter  says  they  do  not  because  the
      adoption order was obtained over three years  ago.   Mr  Jarvis  says
      that they do because I have to consider the position at the  date  of
      the Respondent's decision.  The first of those decisions is  dated  7
      August 2013 and the second 3 February 2014.  Both  dates  are  within
      twelve months from the date of the adoption order.  Mr Jarvis  relies
      on section 85A  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  in
      support of his proposition that I cannot consider circumstances which
      arise after the date of the Respondent's  decision(s).   Sections  85
      and 85A read as follows:-
           " 85. Matters to be considered
           .............

           (4)On an appeal under section 82(1), 83(2) or 83A(2) against a
           decision the Tribunal may consider evidence about any matter
           which it thinks relevant to the substance of the decision,
           including evidence which concerns a matter arising after the
           date of the decision.

           (5)But subsection (4) is subject to the exceptions in section
           85A

           85A   Matters to be considered: new evidence: exceptions
           (1)This section sets out the exceptions mentioned in section
      85(5).

           (2)Exception 1 is that in relation to an appeal under section
           82(1) against an immigration decision of a kind specified in
           section 82(2)(b) or (c) the Tribunal may consider only the
           circumstances appertaining at the time of the decision."


  44. Mr Canter's only response to that in his further skeleton argument is
      that it is not clear how the Sponsor could reasonably be expected  to
      have obtained a certificate of eligibility given that,  at  the  time
      she made the adoption application (in Jamaica) in December 2011, rule
      309B was not in force.  However, that ignores that the ACA  2002  and
      the 2005 Regulations were in force.  Section 83 ACA 2002 makes  clear
      that a certificate of eligibility is required where a  person  brings
      the child to the UK within twelve months  of  the  external  adoption
      order.  The Sponsor could also have waited for the  requisite  period
      before seeking to bring the Appellant to the UK.

  45. Although the Sponsor was not physically bringing the child to the  UK
      within that period, she made the application for entry clearance only
      nineteen days after the adoption order was made.   In  fact,  if  the
      Entry Clearance Officer had  granted  the  application,  the  Sponsor
      could have brought the Appellant to the UK immediately in August 2013
      ie within a few months of the adoption order.  Not  only  would  that
      defeat the purpose of paragraph 309B of the Immigration Rules but  it
      would also have constituted an offence under section 83 ACA 2002  and
      the 2005 Regulations.  Mr Canter does not deal  with  the  effect  of
      sections 85 and 85A.  I  accept  Mr  Jarvis'  submissions  that  this
      precluded the Judge from considering the position at the date of  the
      hearing (if she had considered it at all; see below).

   The Decision

  46. I turn then to consider the impact of the above on  my  consideration
      of whether the Decision contains a material error of law.

  47. It is common ground that the Judge did not  record  in  the  Decision
      that there was any concession.  I have found at [28] that  there  was
      no such concession or, if there was,  it  was  limited  to  paragraph
      310(i).

  48. I turn to consider the way in which the  Judge  in  fact  dealt  with
      paragraph 310.  Having noted that the Respondent  was  not  satisfied
      that there was a de facto adoption and did not accept that paragraphs
      309B and 310 were met, she set out at [5] what she considered  to  be
      the relevant parts of  paragraph  310.   The  section  as  reproduced
      contains only paragraph  310(i)(a)  to  (g)  and  310(vi)(a).   Those
      sections relate to the status of the adoptive parent(s) in the UK and
      whether an adoption order had been made by a competent  authority  in
      the child's country of origin where the child is resident  and  which
      is a country whose adoption  orders  are  recognised  by  the  United
      Kingdom.

  49. Although the Entry Clearance Officer takes issue with  whether  there
      is a de facto adoption under paragraph 310(vi)(b) no issue  is  taken
      with  paragraph  310(vi)(a)  being  satisfied  (the  Entry  Clearance
      Officer's position evidently being that if that applied  there  would
      need to be a certificate of eligibility which there was not).   There
      is no error therefore in the finding that the  adoption  order  meets
      paragraph 310(vi)(a) subject to the paragraph 309B point.

  50. The Judge then considers paragraph 310(i) and  finds  that  paragraph
      310(i)(a) is met.  For the reasons I have explained at [28], there is
      an  error  in  the  Judge's  reasoning  for  finding  that  paragraph
      310(i)(a) is met in this case. Paragraph 310 is akin to paragraph 297
      which applies where natural parents are seeking to bring a  child  to
      the UK for settlement. The intention of  both  paragraph  310(i)  and
      297(i) are clear.  If there are two parents then either  both  should
      be accompanying the child or the child should be joining  them  both.
      That avoids the possibility that one parent could be taking the child
      away from the other.  Paragraphs 310(d), (e) and (f)  cater  for  the
      circumstances where there is only  one  parent,  either  because  the
      other parent is dead, or one parent has sole responsibility or  there
      are  compelling  considerations  making  exclusion   of   the   child
      undesirable.  It was incumbent on the Judge to make a finding whether
      she accepted that the Sponsor had sole responsibility (it  being  the
      case that the  Appellant's  father  is  still  alive  and  living  in
      Jamaica) or whether there were circumstances such that the  Appellant
      should be admitted anyway.  Since no reasons are given and the  Judge
      has in any event applied the wrong sub-paragraph, this is a  material
      error.

  51. Further, in any event, the Judge completely fails to  deal  with  the
      remainder of paragraph 310, in particular (ix), (x) and (xi)  all  of
      which were at issue in this case.   As  Mr  Jarvis  submitted  and  I
      accept, it appears that the Judge has  simply  failed  to  note  that
      there are further provisions after (a) and (b) to sub-paragraph (vii)
      which are in addition to what comes before that  sub-paragraph.   The
      format of this particular rule is somewhat confusing but Mr Jarvis is
      right that the Appellant is required to meet those  provisions  also.
      Of course, the Appellant's position is that those sub-paragraphs were
      conceded and that therefore the Judge did not have to set  them  out.
      I have explained at [25] above, why I cannot accept that  submission.
      Accordingly, there is a material error in the Judge's failure to make
      findings on those sub-paragraphs.

  52. Finally, for the reasons I give at [30] to [46] above, the Judge  has
      materially erred by failing to consider paragraph 309B which  I  have
      found applied in this case at the  relevant  time  and  continues  to
      apply.  I note in that regard Mr Jarvis'  acceptance  that  paragraph
      309B would not now apply (or would be waived) if the Sponsor were  to
      make another application as the twelve months has  passed  since  the
      date of the adoption order.   However,  since  sections  85  and  85A
      apply, the Judge erred in finding that paragraph 309 did not apply at
      the date of the Respondent's decision and therefore also at the  date
      of the hearing before her.

  53. Having found the above errors of law, I set aside  the  Decision.   I
      reserved  my  decision  in  this  case  in  order  that  the  further
      submissions could be made in relation to paragraph 309B.  I discussed
      with the representatives at the hearing how the appeal should proceed
      if I were to find an error of law in the Decision.  However, since it
      was not at that stage clear on what basis I would find an  error,  if
      at all, it was not possible to reach a concluded view.

  54. Having found that paragraph 309B applies and is  not  satisfied,  the
      appeal must fail under paragraph 310.  However, the Appellant  relies
      also on paragraph 297 and Article 8 which  were  not  dealt  with  by
      Judge Kaler.  There are also incomplete  findings  on  paragraph  310
      should the matter go  further.   For  those  reasons,  I  invite  the
      parties to make written submissions within 21 days from the date this
      decision is promulgated as to the further conduct of this appeal  and
      I have so directed below.




DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal Decision did involve the making of  an  error  on  a
point of law. I set aside the Decision

In relation  to  the  re-making  of  the  decision,  I  make  the  following
direction:-

Within 21 days from the date of promulgation of this decision,  the  parties
shall file and serve written submissions setting out  their  submissions  as
to how this appeal should proceed.  I will  then  consider  the  appropriate
course and issue a further decision/further  directions  as  appropriate  in
writing.





Signed      [pic]Date  28 June 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
