
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  OA/17029/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 17th November 2014                |On 18th November 2014                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                              mrs monira haider
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER not MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - DHAKA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J McLanachan (instructed by AK Solicitors LLP)

For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Appellant in relation to a Determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Wellesley-Cole) promulgated on 4th September 2014.

 2. The Appellant had sought entry clearance to the UK as the spouse of her
    husband in the UK who is present as a Tier 1 (Post Study Work) Migrant.
    The application was refused by the Respondent on 18th July 2013 on  the
    basis that a  non-genuine  document  in  the  form  of  a  forged  bank
    statement had been relied upon. The Appellant  appealed  and  when  the
    appeal came before Judge Wellesley-Cole on 30th July 2014 the Appellant
    was represented by Mr Hossain and the sponsoring husband attended.  The
    Entry Clearance Officer  was  not  on  that  day  represented.  In  her
    Determination the Judge noted that in support of  her  application  the
    Appellant had submitted a bank statement from South-East Bank Ltd  that
    was found subsequently to be false when  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    contacted the bank. There was a document verification report  completed
    by a visa support officer dated 16th July  2013  which  said  that  Sir
    Iqbal Road branch of the bank in question in Dhaka  had  confirmed  the
    bank statement and insolvency letter in relation to the account  number
    ending 276 were not genuine.  The  Appellant's  representatives  argued
    before Judge Wellesley-Cole that there was no such branch in Dhaka  and
    that the Sponsor's branch was located in  Khulna,  another  Bangladeshi
    city.

 3. The Appellant had produced a further bank statement dated  14th  August
    2013 and a letter from the bank dated 14th  August  of  the  same  year
    which confirmed that the account  existed  and  that  the  account  was
    valid. However, in the determination the Judge  referred  to  a  second
    document verification report contained in the Respondent's  bundle  and
    referred to in the Entry Clearance Manager Review  of  1st  June  2014,
    also contained in the bundle. At paragraph 6 of the  Determination  the
    Judge pointed out that the significance of that document was  that  the
    grounds of appeal had been taken into account by  the  Entry  Clearance
    Manager who carried out checks in relation to the new  bank  statement.
    As set out in the second document verification  report  that  was  also
    been found to be not genuine. The bank confirmed that  the  address  on
    the statement was different from the one  held  on  their  records  and
    transactions on the statement predated the date the account was opened.
    In reliance upon that the judge dismissed the appeal on the basis  that
    the Appellant had now submitted two non-genuine bank statements.

 4. The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  the
    basis that the second document verification report and the  ECM  review
    had not been provided to the Appellant's representatives and  they  did
    not know of their existence  until  they  received  the  Determination.
    Matters in connection with them could have been put to the  Sponsor  at
    the hearing.

 5. When permission was granted the Presenting Officer's Unit, on behalf of
    the Entry Clearance Officer filed a  response  pointing  out  that  the
    grounds were no more than  an  assertion  and  the  representative  who
    attended the hearing on behalf of the Appellant should make a statement
    as to what submissions were made. A copy of the Record  of  Proceedings
    was also requested.

 6. Before me Mr McClanahan indicated that there was no signed statement by
    Mr Hossain. He did have a statement which had been prepared, he said at
    the "11th hour" but it was not signed. Additionally, Mr Hossain was not
    present. Under the circumstances I  declined  to  accept  the  unsigned
    statement as it was of no evidential value.

 7. Mr McClanahan then indicated, surprisingly, that neither he  nor  those
    instructing him had yet had sight of the relevant  documents;  the  ECM
    review and the second document  verification  report.  This  is  rather
    astonishing given that they had known of its existence since the First-
    tier Tribunal's decision was promulgated. There had been no request for
    copies of those documents to the Presenting Officer's Unit  or  to  the
    Tribunal.

 8. I arranged for a copy of the  Home  Office  bundle  which  was  in  the
    Tribunal's file and which was on the Home Office file to be given to Mr
    McClanahan and allowed him time to take instructions thereon.

 9. He then indicated that he was making  application  for  an  adjournment
    because the Sponsor was adamant that the bank statements  were  genuine
    and that he wanted time to  resolve  matters  and  address  the  issues
    raised by the Entry Clearance Manager.

10. Somewhat reluctantly, in light of the poor show by the representatives,
    I am prepared to give the Appellant the benefit of the doubt and accept
    that the Respondent's bundle that both I and the Home Office Presenting
    Officer had were not provided to the  Appellant's  representative  such
    that neither he nor the Sponsor had seen the ECM review or  the  second
    document verification report. If they did not know they did not have it
    they could not have mentioned it at the hearing before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and I therefore accept that the first  they  became  aware  of
    this evidence is when they received the Determination. I therefore find
    that through no fault of hers the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  made  a
    procedural error in determining the appeal on  the  basis  of  evidence
    that was not available to the Appellant or her  representative  and  on
    that basis I set aside her Determination.

11. With regards to  re-deciding  the  appeal  I  refused  the  adjournment
    request. The sponsoring husband and the  solicitors  have  known  since
    early September of the existence of  this  evidence.  They  had  sought
    permission to appeal on the basis of it and yet had not thought fit  to
    request copies of that evidence until the hearing before me. They  have
    had ample opportunity to address the  issue  and  have  not  taken  it.
    Furthermore, the Entry Clearance  Officer's  bundle  contains  now  two
    document verification reports and the second one was addressed  to  the
    correct bank branch and confirms that the statements were both false. I
    see no reason to give the Appellant a third opportunity  to  produce  a
    third document which may be similarly dubious.  I  have  no  reason  to
    doubt  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  and  Entry  Clearance  Manager's
    conclusions. Proper enquiries were made of the bank  and  it  is  quite
    clear that whilst an  account  bearing  that  number  exists  with  the
    account holder named, the  address  given  on  the  statement  for  the
    account holder was different and the contents of  the  statements  were
    not genuine as it referred to transactions months  before  the  account
    had even been opened. Reliance on now two forged documents is fatal  to
    the application and the appeal falls to be dismissed.

12. If there is any truth in the claim that something has gone  very  wrong
    in Bangladesh because the Sponsor  does  genuinely  have  such  a  bank
    account then as and when that is resolved a fresh  application  can  be
    made.

13. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal  is dismissed



Signed        Date 17th November 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
