
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/17041/2013
                                                               OA/17044/2013
                                                               OA/17046/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:  Columbus House, Newport   |Determination Promulgated            |
|On: 19 October 2015                  |On: 06 November 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS

                                   Between

                            KANAGESWARY MAHENDRAN
                              THARSAN MAHENDRAN
                             VITHUSAN MAHENDRAN
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - CHENNAI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Benfield, Counsel instructed by Theva
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Diwnych, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal against the determination of a panel of the  First-
       tier Tribunal (Judges  Denson  and  Henderson)  in  which  the  panel
       dismissed the appeals of  the  Appellants,  citizens  of  Sri  Lanka,
       against the Entry Clearance Officer's decision  to  refuse  leave  to
       enter as the  wife  and  minor  children  of  the  Sponsor  Mahendran
       Selvarajah.

    2. The Appellants applied for entry clearance on 28 March 2013 and their
       applications were refused by  the  Respondent  on  26  June  2013  by
       reference to Appendix FM and Appendix FM-SE of the Immigration  Rules
       (HC395). The Appellants exercised their right of appeal  against  the
       decisions and this is the appeal that was heard before the  panel  on
       17 November 2014  and  dismissed.  The  Appellants'  application  for
       permission to appeal against the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision
       was refused on 26 January 2015 by Judge Fisher and on renewal to  the
       Upper Tribunal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb  on  22  May
       2015 in the following terms

           "The grounds to the UT identify two arguable errors  of  law  by
           the FtT: (1) in reaching its adverse finding in respect  of  the
           sponsor's employment by misunderstanding the effect of  the  tax
           coding on the P60s, and taking into account the explanations for
           discrepancies identified by the FtT; and (2) in relying  on  the
           DVR without having regard to the supporting  evidence  and  that
           the DVR was derived from an  on-line  source  which  was  itself
           unverifiable.

           Whilst these errors related to the decision under the Rules,  if
           established they would also impact upon the Art 8 of decision."

    3. At the hearing before me Mr Diwnych appeared for the Entry  Clearance
       Officer and Ms Benfield represented the  Appellants.   No  additional
       papers were submitted.

  Submissions

    4. For the Appellants Ms Benfield said that it  was  conceded  that  the
       Appellants could not meet the requirements of Appendix FM-SE  of  the
       Immigration Rules. As such the appeal  was  confined  to  Article  8.
       However the findings in respect of the  rules  are  relevant  to  the
       Article 8 decision. So far as the financial requirements of the rules
       were concerned the First-tier Tribunal  had  regard  to  a  range  of
       issues but made an error of fact when considering the  Sponsor's  tax
       codes. The Tribunal could not see why the  tax  codes  from  the  two
       employments were not the same and held  this  adversely  against  the
       Sponsor. However it was clear that there was no discrepancy with  the
       tax code  810L  attached  to  the  main  employment  being  the  code
       revealing the Sponsor's personal allowance whereas the tax code  "BR"
       attaching to the part-time employment was  the  standard  code  given
       where the personal allowance had already been taken up. The  Tribunal
       also found a discrepancy between the  method  of  payment,  cash  and
       BACS, given by the Appellant and that given by his employer.  However
       an explanation was given and no regard was had to  that  explanation.
       Consequently  even  though  the  Appellants  could   not   meet   the
       requirements of the rules the Tribunal fell into factual error.

    5. So far as the document verification report (DVR)  was  concerned  the
       First Appellant had produced a  TOEIC  English  language  certificate
       which the Respondent said was not genuine. The DVR gave  the  address
       of a website and stated that online  verification  was  done  and  no
       trace of candidate record was found. When the matter first  came  for
       hearing an adjournment was granted to enable the Respondent to submit
       further evidence since the website quoted in the DVR was  an  invalid
       web address. By the  time  the  matter  came  back  for  hearing  the
       Appellants had made further enquiries and submitted evidence to  show
       that the certificate was genuine. The Respondent did not  submit  any
       further evidence but the Tribunal nevertheless found the  DVR  to  be
       conclusive evidence of forgery. Clearly when the  source  was  quoted
       inaccurately and could not be checked it was wrong to find that  this
       was conclusive evidence.

    6. Ms Benfield submitted that these factors should have been taken  into
       account when considering Article 8. Contrary to  the  conclusions  of
       the panel the First Appellant had an English language certificate and
       the panel was wrong to suggest that there was no  evidence  that  she
       could speak English. The Sponsor held the two employments claimed and
       therefore earned sufficient to meet the financial requirements of the
       Immigration Rules even though he  could  not  provide  the  specified
       evidence to accord with Appendix FM-SE. I asked Ms  Benfield  whether
       any evidence had been submitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  show
       that the Sponsor was financially independent.  Ms  Benfield  accepted
       that no evidence of the Sponsor's financial position other  than  his
       income had been put forward.

    7. For the Respondent Mr Diwnych referred to the rule  24  response.  He
       accepted that the initial hearing of the appeal was adjourned for the
       Secretary of State to make further enquiries and there was nothing to
       suggest that this had been done. Mr Diwnych helpfully asked  for  the
       matter to be put back to enable him to make a further  enquiries  but
       on return said that TOEIC scores more than two years old could not be
       validated. He accepted that forgery should never  have  been  alleged
       and that there was no basis for the allegation of forgery. So far  as
       the Sponsor's employments were concerned Mr Diwnych accepted that the
       Revenue and Customs tax coding definitions are publicly available. He
       did not know what explanation of the tax codes had been  put  forward
       at the hearing but accepted that there may well have been an error of
       fact.

    8. I reserved my decision.

  Error of law - Immigration Rules

    9. The Appellants are citizens  of  Sri  Lanka  and  are  the  wife  and
       children of the Sponsor who holds indefinite leave to remain  in  the
       United Kingdom. Their applications to  join  him  were  made  shortly
       after he acquired settled status. At the time of the application  the
       children were aged 17 and 16, they are now  aged  20  and  18.  Their
       applications were refused because the First Appellant  did  not  meet
       the English language requirements of the Immigration  Rules  and  the
       Sponsor did not meet the financial requirements. Their appeal against
       the refusals was dismissed with the reasons for refusal being  upheld
       and the panel finding  that  the  were  no  compelling  circumstances
       justifying the grant of leave to enter outside the Immigration  Rules
       by reference to Article 8. In making the Article 8 decision the panel
       had reference to their findings in respect of the Immigration Rules.

   10. There can in my judgement be little doubt that the  panel  fell  into
       material factual error in making their decision under the Immigration
       Rules and, as their Article  8 decision was made 'through  the  lens'
       of the Immigration Rules those errors clearly had an effect on  their
       Article 8 decision.

   11. The first error relates to the English language certificate submitted
       by the First Appellant.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       records

           "... the Entry Clearance  Officer  in  a  Document  Verification
           Report has shown by virtue of an on-line verification  no  trace
           of the candidate record was found  with  searches  made  on  the
           TOEIC registration  number  as  regards  the  first  appellant's
           certificate in connection with speaking English ..."

       The panel goes onto conclude that the First Appellant

           "... is unable  to  show  that  she  has  the  English  language
           abilities ... and ... she has provided a  false  certificate  in
           order to attempt to circumvent the Immigration Rules"

   12. This finding is entirely unsustainable.  The  DVR  gives  an  invalid
       website address. Far from the First  Appellant's  registration  being
       unverifiable it is the Respondent's allegation that  is  unverifiable
       and, as Mr Diwnych conceded there was no basis for the allegation  of
       forgery.  The  First  Appellant   submitted   an   English   language
       certificate and confirmed the genuineness  of  that  certificate  (in
       response to the Respondent's allegation) by providing a  receipt  for
       course fees and examination fees and a  letter  confirming  that  she
       followed the course.

   13. The second error relates to the evidence of the Sponsor's employment.
       The panel took no issue with the Sponsor's full time  employment  but
       found that no  weight  could  be  given  to  his  claimed  part  time
       employment due to conflicts in evidence between the Sponsor  and  his
       part-time employer and to differences in tax coding between part time
       and full time employment.

   14. So far as the tax coding is concerned the  panel  clearly  fell  into
       factual error. There is no conflict between a tax coding of 810L  for
       full time employment reflecting as it does the personal allowance and
       a tax code of BR (basic rate) for subsidiary  employment.  Indeed  if
       the same tax code had been shown for both employments that would be a
       discrepancy indicating that the personal allowance had  been  claimed
       twice. Turning to the alleged  discrepancy  between  the  Appellant's
       evidence (that his part time employment was paid  in  cash)  and  the
       employer's evidence (that it was paid sometimes by BACS and sometimes
       in cash) the panel failed  to  have  regard  to  the  Sponsor's  bank
       statements which clearly showed that some payments were  indeed  made
       by BACS. This is an error of fact, there was no reason to  doubt  the
       genuineness of the second employment.

   15. The consequence of these errors, so far as the Immigration  Rules  is
       concerned, is that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss
       the appeal because the Appellants did not meet the  English  language
       and financial requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules  must  be  set
       aside. However as the Appellants concede that they do  not  meet  the
       requirements of Appendix FM-SE the decision must be remade dismissing
       the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

  Error of law - Article 8

   16. So far as the Article 8 decision is concerned the First-tier Tribunal
       took the findings of fact in respect of the Immigration Rules  appeal
       (at paragraph 45) as part of the reason for dismissing the appeal  by
       virtue of Article 8.  As  I  have  made  clear  above  those  factual
       findings cannot stand.

   17. However the primary finding (at paragraphs 40 to 44 of the  decision)
       is  that  there  are  no  exceptional  or  compelling   circumstances
       demanding a consideration outwith the Immigration Rules. Whereas  the
       panel nevertheless went on to consider proportionality  this  primary
       finding remains. The grounds for permission to  appeal  submitted  to
       the First-tier Tribunal and adopted in this appeal, refer  to  R  (on
       the application of Esther Ebun Oludoyi & Others v SSHD (Article  8  -
       MM (Lebanon) and Nagre) [2014] UKUT 00539. The jurisprudence in  this
       regard has developed and  is  probably  now  best  summarised  in  SS
       (Congo) and Others [2015] EWCA Civ 387 and Sunassee [2015] EWHC 1604.
         If the requirements of the rules cannot be met, and a  judge  finds
       that an Article 8 assessment outside them is required, there need  to
       be compelling circumstances although it will usually be necessary  to
       go through the Article 8 assessment to  identify  whether  compelling
       circumstances exist.   Paragraph 33 of the  judgment  in  SS  (Congo)
       provides guidance.

           "In our judgment, even though a test of exceptionality does  not
           apply in every case falling within the scope of Appendix FM,  it
           is accurate to say that the general position outside  the  sorts
           of  special  contexts  referred  to  above  is  that  compelling
           circumstances would need to be identified to support a claim for
           grant of LTR outside the new Rules in Appendix FM. In our  view,
           that is a formulation which is  not  as  strict  as  a  test  of
           exceptionality or a requirement of "very compelling reasons" (as
           referred to  in  MF  (Nigeria)  in  the  context  of  the  Rules
           applicable to foreign criminals), but  which  gives  appropriate
           weight to the focused consideration of public  interest  factors
           as finds expression in the Secretary of State's  formulation  of
           the new Rules in Appendix FM."

   18. As a result it is not  sufficient  to  simply  find  that  if,  in  a
       particular case, the requirements  of  the  rules  are  not  met,  an
       assessment outside them will be  required.  Compelling  circumstances
       need to  be  identified  taking  into  account  the  public  interest
       although that identification may need to undertaken by  carrying  out
       the Article 8 assessment.

   19.  In  this  instance  it  is  accepted  by  the  Appellants  that  the
       requirements of Appendix FM-SE of the rules were not met. This is, in
       effect,  a  remediable  matter.  The  Appellants  fail  to  meet  the
       requirements of the  Immigration  Rules.  They  fail  to  meet  those
       requirements  because  the  specified  evidence  of   the   Sponsor's
       financial  position  was  not  submitted  with  the  application.  No
       evidence has been called or submissions made as to why such  evidence
       was not submitted or available. It should be a simple matter for  the
       Appellants to submit a new application ensuring on this occasion that
       the application complies with the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
       Rules.

   20. There is only one factor put forward in the  grounds  that  could  be
       said to seek to identify compelling circumstances  such  that  a  new
       application is not the appropriate course to follow. This is that the
       eldest child is now over 18 and therefore that if a  new  application
       were to be made it would not be possible for the whole family  to  be
       reunited.

   21. To the extent that this could amount to compelling  circumstances  it
       does not enable the Appellants to succeed under Article 8 because the
       Appellants still need to show that the decision is a disproportionate
       interference in their family life.

   22. There are two fundamental difficulties for  the  Appellants  in  this
       respect. The first is  that  there  was  remarkably  little  evidence
       before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  about  the  circumstances  of  the
       Appellants, in particular the  children,  in  Sri  Lanka.  The  First
       Appellant's letter to the Entry Clearance Officer of  20  March  2013
       gives no detail of the family's living arrangements or  circumstances
       in Sri Lanka. As far as the children are concerned says no more  than
       that both children have been in  regular  Skype  contact  with  their
       father and both are very fond of him and  wish  the  family  to  live
       together. The children are now aged 20 and 18, if they have not moved
       away from the family home it can be anticipated that they will do  so
       in the relatively short term whether that be a  family  home  in  Sri
       Lanka or one that has relocated to the United Kingdom.

   23. The second is that no details of the financial circumstances  of  the
       Sponsor, other than his income,  were  submitted  to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal.  There  is  therefore  no  evidence  to  show  that  he  is
       financially independent or if he is that he would remain  so  if  the
       Appellants were to join him. Meeting the  financial  requirements  of
       the Immigration Rules is  not  the  same  as  financial  independence
       because it takes no account of the Sponsor liabilities. As the  panel
       rightly point out and taking into  account  section  117  Nationality
       Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  the  maintenance  of   effective
       immigration control is in the public interest and it is in the public
       interest that person who seek  to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United
       Kingdom are financially independent.

   24. In my judgement the finding of the panel at paragraphs 40-44  of  the
       decision contains no error of law and whereas the panel  goes  on  to
       consider proportionality and in doing so to take into account  errors
       of fact those errors were not material to the decision to dismiss the
       appeal by virtue of Article 8 ECHR.  Where there  are  no  compelling
       circumstances justifying a consideration of  Article  8  outside  the
       rules it must be inconceivable that on such consideration the  appeal
       could properly be allowed.

  Conclusion

  Immigration Rules

   25. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of errors
       of law for the reasons set out above. I set aside the decision of the
       First-tier Tribunal.

   26. I remake the decision and I dismiss the appeal.

  The Human Rights Convention

   27. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of
       an error of law material to the decision to dismiss the  appeal.  The
       decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


Signed:     Date:

J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
