

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/17722/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London                  |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 22 July 2013                               |On 15 August 2013            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
                    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McCarthy

                                   Between


                                DEEPA GURUNG
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, NEW DELHI
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Howells, Counsel instructed by N C Brothers &
Co Solicitor,
     Reading
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. On 17 June 2013, the appellant was granted permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal against the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge R
    J N B Morris, promulgated on 7 May 2013.  Judge  Morris  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal against the  refusal  of  entry  clearance  dated  8
    November 2012.

 2. The appellant was born on 19 May 1982 and is a citizen of  Nepal.   She
    applied for entry clearance to join her father, who is settled  in  the
    United Kingdom because he was a former Gurkha soldier, on whom  she  is
    dependent.  The entry  clearance  officer  decided  that  she  was  not
    dependent on him and therefore she did not benefit from the immigration
    rules, immigration policies or article 8 ECHR.

Error on a point of law

 3. Mr Howells conceded that Judge Morris did not make a legal  error  when
    determining the appeal in relation to para 317 of the Immigration Rules
    or  when  considering  the  immigration  policies  that  applied.   His
    arguments were that Judge  Morris  erred  in  a  number  of  ways  when
    determining the appeal  in  relation  to  article  8  ECHR.   Mr  Avery
    confirmed that the Entry Clearance Officer opposed the appeal.

 4. Having heard from both Mr Howells and Mr Avery, and  having  considered
    the various arguments and documents, we are satisfied that Judge Morris
    made an error on a point of law when determining the appeal in relation
    to article 8.  Our reasons are as follow.

 5. In paragraph 27 of her determination, Judge Morris concludes  that  the
    appellant had failed to establish that she enjoyed family life with her
    parents in the sense of article 8(1).  In reaching that conclusion  she
    relied on the judgment  in  Konstatinov  v  the  Netherlands  (appl  no
    16351/03, [2007] ECHR 336), citing the following principle at  the  end
    of paragraph 25 of her determination:

         "... according to its well-established case-law  under  Article  8,
         relationships between adult relatives do  not  necessarily  attract
         the protection of Article 8 without further elements of  dependency
         involving more than the normal emotional ties."

 6. Mr Howells rightly pointed us to more recent  case  law  that  suggests
    that the jurisprudence on this issue has  developed.   He  took  us  to
    Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha policy) [2012] UKUT 00160  (IAC)
    and reminded us that paragraphs 50 to 62,  which  examined  the  proper
    approach to article 8(1), received approval from the Court of Appeal in
    Gurung and others v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ  8.   It  is  clear  that  the
    approach has moved on from that expressed in Konstantinov to  recognise
    that the issue under article 8(1) is "highly fact-sensitive"  and  each
    case must be analysed on its own facts.

 7. We have considered  whether  Judge  Morris's  finding  in  relation  to
    article 8(1) can stand.  It would appear that in paragraph  26  of  her
    determination that she found that  there  was  no  evidence  suggesting
    further elements  of  dependency  beyond  the  normal  emotional  ties.
    Nevertheless, in paragraph 27 she described that the appellant enjoys a
    private life with her family.  The fact that Judge  Morris  looked  for
    elements of dependency beyond the normal emotional ties and  sought  to
    separate out  private  life  elements  from  family  life  ones  is  an
    indication that she was not examining the case on its own facts.  It is
    artificial to try to separate out family life and private  life  issues
    when those issues are all part of the assessment of the nature  of  the
    relationships between family members.

 8. The failure to follow the correct approach to article 8(1)  is  clearly
    an error on a point of law.  However, because Judge Morris went  on  to
    make alternative findings in paragraphs 28 to 35 of her  determination,
    we would not have found  this  to  be  sufficient  reason  to  set  her
    determination aside.  However, we  have  found  one  other  significant
    error, which does mean we have to set aside the  determination  of  the
    article 8 aspects of the  appeal  and  we  will  have  to  re-make  the
    decision.

 9. The issue we have identified relates to whether  the  judge  failed  to
    make findings on relevant evidence.  The  appellant's  father  said  in
    paragraph 6 of his witness statement:

        "If I had been allowed to settle in the UK when I retired  from  the
        Army, I would have done so, and would have been able to have all  of
        my children settled here with me as they  were  all  under  eighteen
        years of age at that time.  Deepa in particular was only five  years
        old then."

    Judge Morris refers to that statement  in  paragraph  6(ii)(a)  of  her
    determination.

10. In paragraphs 32 to 34 of her determination, Judge Morris cites various
    sections of Gurung and others.  One of those extracts  (from  paragraph
    42) states:

        "... if a Gurkha can show that, but for the historic  injustice,  he
        would have settled in the UK at  a  time  when  his  dependant  (now
        adult) child would have been able to accompany him  as  a  dependant
        child under the age of 18, that is a strong reason for holding  that
        it is proportionate to permit the adult child  to  join  his  family
        now."

11. The evidence given by the appellant's father in his  witness  statement
    clearly goes to this issue.  Despite Judge Morris stating she was aware
    of  the  content  of  the  witness  statement,  at  no  point  in   her
    determination does she make a finding as to  the  reliability  of  this
    evidence or what weight to give it.

12. The failure to make a finding on relevant evidence is  an  error  on  a
    point of law.  As there is no finding on this material issue,  we  have
    no choice but to set the decision aside and remake it.

Remaking the decision

13. Although we did not give our reasons in detail, we informed the parties
    at the hearing that we had  found  that  Judge  Morris's  determination
    contained an error on a point of law and had to be set aside.  We  gave
    time to the representatives to prepare their cases, reminding them that
    the only issue before us relating to article 8(1).

14. The  parties  relied  on  the  evidence  submitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The appellant's father gave evidence through the  Tribunal's
    Nepalese interpreter.  He adopted his witness statement and answered  a
    number of questions put by each representative, after  which  we  heard
    their submissions.

15. We begin by assessing whether the appellant can  benefit  from  article
    8(1).  It is for the appellant to show that it is more likely than  not
    that at the date of decision she did  so  benefit.   The  evidence  and
    arguments we heard that relate to article 8(1) is as follows.

16. The Entry Clearance Officer argues that the appellant is independent of
    her father and therefore she has established her own life.   He  relies
    on the fact that he was given no evidence to show  that  the  appellant
    could not function as an adult without her parents.  He identified  the
    fact that the appellant had studied, had gained a nursing qualification
    and undertaken  voluntary  work.   In  addition,  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer was not satisfied the appellant was  financially  supported  by
    her father as the evidence of funding was weak.

17. Mr Avery reiterated these points, adding that it was relevant that  the
    appellant had been left behind in Nepal because her  father  could  not
    afford to bring her to the United Kingdom  at  the  same  time  as  her
    mother  and  younger  brother.   Mr  Avery  also  identified  that  the
    appellant had lived on her own for ten months by the date of  decision,
    which was a significant period.  His view was that the application  was
    based on nothing more than the undesirability of the  appellant  living
    alone.

18. Mr Avery also  challenged  the  evidence  insofar  as  he  thought  the
    strength of the  appellant's  relationship  to  her  mother  was  being
    exaggerated because there was no evidence from her directly, only  from
    the appellant's father.  In addition, he submitted that the appellant's
    access to her relatives in Nepal was being downplayed.  Mr Avery relied
    on inconsistencies between  the  appellant's  statement  and  the  oral
    evidence given by her father.  Whilst the appellant indicated that  her
    father provided intermittent financial support  to  her  older  brother
    whose shop was not doing very well, a situation that indicated a  level
    of contact, the appellant's father stated in evidence that  he  had  no
    contact with his eldest son and did not help him financially.

19. Mr Howells addressed the issue of inconsistency by asking us to compare
    paragraphs 2 and 13 of the appellant's statement.  In paragraph 2,  the
    appellant indicates that her father had provided some financial support
    to her father in the past and that this was evidence that  her  brother
    could not support her  financially.   In  paragraph  13  the  appellant
    indicates that her brother did not want to be unemployed and  dependent
    on their father and that he was trying to make a  living.   Mr  Howells
    argued that there was no inconsistency and in any event it was not fair
    to raise an  allegation  in  closing  submissions  without  giving  the
    appellant's father an opportunity to respond.

20. Mr  Howells  argued  that  the  appellant  and  her  father  had  given
    consistent evidence that there was a close bond between  the  appellant
    and her mother.  They had lived together from when  the  appellant  was
    born until 2011 when her mother came to the United Kingdom.  Mr Howells
    indicated that the case  law  indicated  that  a  ten-month  period  of
    separation was not necessarily significant, particular where there  was
    an intention to send for the relative.  The evidence was consistent  in
    showing that the appellant was financially reliant  on  her  father  as
    there was no other source of income.

21. Our attention was drawn by Mr Howells to the fact  that  the  appellant
    was a  young  woman  living  alone  in  Nepal  and  that  she  suffered
    culturally as a result as  she  was  regarded  as  being  part  of  her
    father's family since she was not married.  As indicated  in  paragraph
    112(f) of Ghising the allegation that the appellant's family could  re-
    migrate to Nepal was not reasonable given the historic injustice.

22. We have also had regard to the skeleton argument supplied to he  First-
    tier Tribunal and the various grounds of appeal.

23. Although not mentioned by the Entry Clearance Officer or by  Mr  Avery,
    we are aware the appellant obtained her  nursing  qualifications  after
    entry clearance was refused.  In the  documents  that  accompanied  her
    application she wrote that she was awaiting her results, something  she
    also confirmed in her interview.  In that interview she confirmed  that
    her course started  in  2010  and  it  was  a  two  year  course.   The
    educational certificates were all issued on 7  March  2013.   It  would
    appear that the appellant was continuing her studies after  her  mother
    and  younger  brother  left  Nepal.   We  also  take  account  of   the
    appellant's evidence in her statement that  indicates  that  after  her
    parents had both gone to the United Kingdom, she had to be able to  buy
    things for herself.  There is no evidence that she was unable to do so.

Article 8(1) ECHR

24. Having had regard to the evidence and the arguments  we  are  satisfied
    that article 8(1) is engaged.  We have reached this conclusion for  the
    following reasons.

25. There is no definition of family life and it is  necessary  to  examine
    the facts of a particular situation.  In the appellant's  case,  it  is
    not argued that the appellant has not  enjoyed  family  life  with  her
    parents in the past; she is related  as  claimed  and  lived  with  her
    parents and siblings as she grew up.  The question for  us  is  whether
    she still enjoys family life with them.  We remember that it is for the
    appellant to show that she enjoys family life with her parents.

26. There is nothing in law that says that a child ceases to  enjoy  family
    life with its parents simply on becoming an adult.  However, as a child
    becomes more independent, so its role in the family changes and at some
    point, often when the child leaves the family home or  starts  its  own
    family, the child can be regarded  as  no  longer  being  part  of  the
    parents' family.

27. The appellant and her father have given consistent evidence about their
    relationship.  They have both confirmed  that  the  appellant's  father
    throughout the period has provided financial support.   The  fact  that
    the appellant had been studying and not working  is  confirmed  by  the
    documentary evidence and is corroborative of the fact that she will  be
    receiving financial support from someone.  In  addition  the  appellant
    continues to live in the family home, which is  owned  by  her  father.
    She makes no contribution to its upkeep.  We reject the Entry Clearance
    Officer's allegation that the evidence was not sufficient to  establish
    that the appellant was  support  financially  by  her  father;  we  are
    satisfied that it shows that it is more likely than not  that  she  was
    supported by him.

28. The reasons why the appellant is living alone is simply  a  consequence
    of the appellant's parents  having  to  make  difficult  choices  about
    establishing  themselves  in  the  United  Kingdom,  where  they   have
    permission to live and work.  The evidence is equivocal about  why  the
    appellant was left behind.  She accepts  that  someone  had  to  remain
    because her father could not sponsor the whole  family  at  once.   The
    cost of migration from Nepal to the United Kingdom is high,  given  the
    visa application fees and the travel costs involved.  This supports the
    appellant's and her father's evidence that  she  was  not  left  behind
    because she was no longer regarded as part of the family.

29. However, we are aware that the appellant had  another  reason  to  stay
    behind, to finish her studies.  As  the  oldest  child,  she  was  also
    possibly better able to care for herself on a  day-to-day  basis.   But
    neither of these factors undermines the notion that the  appellant  and
    her parents regarded themselves to be part of the same family.

30. This is also  borne  out  by  the  fact  that  the  appellant  made  an
    application for entry clearance once her father could  afford  to  make
    that application.  The appellant's account of how she has been able  to
    organise her life on her own is not an indication that she is no longer
    part of her parents' family within the meaning of  article  8(1)  since
    all it shows is that she is able to look after herself.   Children  who
    are nearly 18 are likely to be able to look after themselves on  a  day
    to day basis but that does not mean they are  no  longer  part  of  the
    family group in terms that they remain dependent on their parents.

31. As to whether  the  appellant  and  her  father  have  told  the  truth
    regarding her interaction with other relatives in Nepal, we acknowledge
    that the evidence is muddled and therefore weak.  However,  we  do  not
    find that the extent to which the appellant  might  have  contact  with
    other relatives in Nepal is irrelevant to whether she is  part  of  the
    same family as her parents.  We have already found that  the  appellant
    is supported financially by her father and that she lives in a house he
    owns.  Although we accept that if there was evidence to show  that  the
    appellant was reliant on other relatives, then there might be doubts as
    to whether she is part of the same family of her parents, the fact that
    there is no such evidence and the evidence we have does  not  admit  of
    such a possibility being realistic, leads us to reject that part of  Mr
    Avery's argument.

32. The other issues raised by the Entry Clearance Officer and Mr Avery  do
    not impinge on whether there is family life between the  appellant  and
    her parents.  They are factors  that  will  be  relevant  to  assessing
    whether the effect of the refusal of entry clearance  is  proportionate
    since it will have the effect of  separating  the  appellant  from  her
    parents because of the distances involved.

33. We also recall that there is no high  threshold  for  establishing  the
    existence of family  life,  even  between  adults.   As  the  case  law
    indicates, the issue is what the evidence shows.  It is not an exercise
    in assessing proportionality; it is simply a question of how the family
    members interrelate.  For all these reasons we are  satisfied  that  at
    the date of decision  the  appellant  enjoys  family  life  within  the
    meaning of article 8(1) with her parents even though they live apart.

Article 8(2)

34. With regard to article 8(2), it is for the Entry Clearance  Officer  to
    show that the refusal of entry clearance  is  proportionate.   We  have
    reached the following conclusions.

35. There is no dispute that the Entry Clearance Officer had power  in  law
    to  refuse  entry  clearance.   However,  the  usual  necessity  in   a
    democratic society of controlling migration is weakened  in  this  case
    insofar as it is accepted that an historic  injustice  was  perpetrated
    against former Gurkha soldiers.

36. There has been no challenge to the evidence given  by  the  appellant's
    father that he would have settled in the United Kingdom when he retired
    from the British army had that been  allowed  or  that  he  would  have
    brought his family over at that time.  It  is  not  disputed  that  the
    appellant's father acquired skills when serving in the army that  would
    have given him good employment opportunities in an economy such as  the
    United Kingdom.  It is clear that the appellant's father is someone who
    seeks to work in order to support himself and his family; after he left
    the army he spent many years working abroad because he could  not  find
    work in Nepal.  The fact that the  appellant's  father  has  sought  to
    bring his wife and one son to the United Kingdom  is  evidence  of  his
    intention to enjoy family life here.

37. The fact that we find the appellant's father  credible  on  this  issue
    (even though the burden of proof is not  on  him),  means  there  is  a
    strong reason for finding  that  it  is  proportionate  to  permit  the
    appellant to join his family now.

38. We have indicated above that the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  sought  to
    justify that the immigration decision  was  proportionate  because  the
    appellant was an adult and was able to  care  for  herself.   In  other
    words, as she did not need her parents with her in order  to  live  her
    life, there was no need to admit her to  the  United  Kingdom  to  join
    them.  In  addition,  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  argued  that  the
    appellant was not financial dependent on her  father.   These  are  the
    only arguments presented by the Entry Clearance Officer for saying that
    the immigration decision is proportionate.

39. We  have  already  concluded  that  we  find  that  the  appellant  was
    financially dependent on her father and we do not need to rehearse  our
    reasons here.  As a result, that part of the Entry Clearance  Officer's
    arguments falls away.

40. Without the historic injustice argument  we  might  have  accepted  the
    Entry Clearance Officer's argument on this issue.  However, as we  have
    found that the appellant remains a member of her parents family for the
    purposes of article 8(1) for the reasons  we  have  given,  and  having
    accepted that the  parents  have  suffered  detriment  because  of  the
    historic injustice, we can only conclude that this is a situation where
    on balance the  refusal  of  entry  clearance  cannot  be  regarded  as
    proportionate.  If we  accepted  it  was  proportionate,  we  would  be
    accepting that past interference in family life rights  would  have  no
    relevance, which is clearly contrary to the law.

41. For these reasons we find  against  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  and
    conclude that the refusal of entry clearance is contrary to the  United
    Kingdom's obligations under article 8 of the human rights convention.

Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

The determination of Judge Morris contains an error on a point  of  law  and
we set it aside.

We remake the decision and allow the appeal against  the  refusal  of  entry
clearance.




                               Signed                     Date
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

To the respondent: fee award
As we have allowed the appeal we have to consider whether to make a fee
award.  No application was made for such an award and it is difficult to
justify making an award of our own initiative.  Therefore we make no award.


                               Signed                     Date
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
