
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/17788/2013
     OA/17790/2013
     OA/00939/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 April 2015                               |On 20 April 2015              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN

                                   Between

                                     tsm
                                     tm
                                     tpm
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms M Rhind, Legal Representative of IR Immigration
Law LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the Appellants who are brothers  and  citizens  of
    Zimbabwe respectively born on 17 July 1995, 30 July 2002  and  28  July
    1998 against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge A  M  Black  who
    sitting at Taylor House on 27 November  2014  and  in  a  determination
    subsequently promulgated on 8 December 2014 dismissed the appeal of the
    Appellants against the decisions of the Respondent to refuse them entry
    clearance to settle in the United Kingdom as the  dependants  of  their
    two aunts under paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules,  the  decisions
    in respect of the first and second named Appellants having been dated 6
    September 2013 and that in relation to the  third  Appellant  dated  27
    November 2013.  The parties had agreed before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge, that their appeals should be considered and determined together.

2.   In granting the Appellants permission to appeal that  decision,  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge  Lambert  considered  that  the  Appellants'  first
    ground (that argued  procedural  unfairness  in  that  the  judge  made
    findings on an issue concerning the address of the Appellants  and  who
    they were living with at the date of application, that had not been  in
    dispute between the  parties)  as  being  "both  arguable  and  in  the
    circumstances of this case material to the outcome".

3.   It was indeed apparent that as submitted by the Appellants, it  was  at
    no stage suggested in the refusal of entry clearance, cross-examination
    or submissions to either of the Sponsors, that the Appellants  did  not
    in fact live with their cousin and in that context no further  evidence
    was provided in relation to evidence that was  believed  to  have  been
    accepted.

4.   The Appellants' application for entry clearance was made on  the  basis
    that the first two named Appellants were residing  with  their  cousin,
    that there were no other family members who could assist in their  care
    and that the arrangement was temporary.  The appeal forms for the first
    and second named Appellants identified them as living in one room  with
    their cousin who was unable to look after them any longer.  The witness
    statements provided in support of their appeal further  confirmed  that
    the Appellant's were living with their cousin.

5.   Additionally the Sponsors gave oral evidence that after  the  death  of
    the Appellants' father they sought temporary care for the children  and
    it was their cousin with whom the children were left.  The  Appellants'
    father had died in March 2011.

6.   In their grounds of application, the Appellants submitted that  it  was
    not put as part of the Entry Clearance Officer's  case  either  in  the
    refusal letters, cross-examination  or  submissions  that  it  was  not
    accepted that the children lived with their cousin.  It  was  submitted
    that had that been raised as an issue, the Appellants would have sought
    to have addressed this point with  further  evidence  (such  as  school
    records) as well as oral evidence of the Sponsors  and  other  evidence
    which pointed towards the children living in Kadoma with  their  cousin
    and not in Harare as found by the First-tier Judge.

7.   Paragraph 10 of the grounds continued:

         "Given that this has become the key reason that the appeal  failed,
         fairness demands that the Tribunal ought to have had the benefit of
         evidence on this point before making its decision.   This  evidence
         had and has the potential to materially affect the outcome  of  the
         hearing."


8.   At the outset of the hearing before me on 7 April 2015 I  drew  to  the
    parties' attention relevant case law guidance.

9.   In HA and TD [2010] CSIH 28 it was held in  considering  the  issue  of
    fairness in the context of proceedings before the Tribunal  that  inter
    alia; the Tribunal might identify an issue which had not been raised by
    the parties to the proceedings, but it would be unfair  ordinarily  for
    it to base its decision upon its view of that issue, without giving the
    parties the opportunity  to  address  it  upon  the  matter.   Further,
    although the Tribunal were entitled to reject evidence  notwithstanding
    the evidence had not been challenged before it, fairness might  require
    it to disclose its concerns about the evidence.

10.  In ML (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 844 it was held  inter  alia  that  the
    essential question was, did the Appellant  have  the  fair  hearing  to
    which he/she was entitled, before adverse findings of credibility  were
    found as everyone, however poor their  case  was  entitled  to  a  fair
    hearing.  Singh & Others v Belgium (Application No:  3321/11)  applied.
    Further, in determining whether an Appellant had had  a  fair  hearing,
    the  Upper  Tribunal  or  the  Court  of  Appeal  should  look  at  the
    determination including the  cogency  of  the  reasons  given  and  the
    procedure by which the judge reached his adverse conclusion.   In  that
    case, the procedure was considered to be so flawed that it was  plainly
    in error of law because the claimant had no prospects of a fair hearing
    at all.

11.  I was also mindful that as held in MM (unfairness; E & R) Sudan  [2014]
    UKUT 00105 (IAC)  it  was  held  that  where  there  was  a  defect  or
    impropriety  of  a  procedural  nature  in  the  proceedings  at  first
    instance, this might amount to a material error of  law  requiring  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal to be set aside.

12.  With that in mind both parties' representatives  agreed  with  me  that
    for the reasons relied upon  in  the  Appellants'  grounds,  there  had
    clearly been procedural unfairness in that it was apparent that at  the
    very heart of the First-tier Judge's reasoning that led her to conclude
    that the Appellants' immigration appeal should be  dismissed,  was  her
    conclusion that she was unable to find that the first and second  named
    Appellants were living with their cousin at the date  of  decision  but
    rather they were living in the family home where  they  had  grown  up.
    She also found that the third name Appellant would have been living  in
    the family home.  At paragraph 43 of her determination the judge  found
    that the  Appellants  had  "contrived  to  change  their  accommodation
    arrangements in an effort to demonstrate  that  they  are  entitled  to
    entry clearance".

13.  It was accepted most helpfully and  realistically  by  Mr  Tufan,  that
    these were not matters raised in the refusal of entry clearance  or  in
    the parties' submissions or the subject of cross-examination to  either
    of the Sponsors that the children did  not  in  fact  live  with  their
    cousin and that in those circumstances there had indeed been procedural
    unfairness that amounted to a  material  error  of  law  requiring  the
    determination to be set aside. and that the appropriate course was that
    there should be a fresh hearing on all issues with none of  the  First-
    tier Judge's findings preserved.

14.  I further agreed with the parties that this was a case that  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal before  a  First-tier  Judge  other
    than First-tier Tribunal Judge A M Black to determine the appeal afresh
    at Taylor House Hearing Centre on the first available date.

15.  In that regard I was informed by Ms Rhind that the two  Sponsors  would
    give oral evidence  in  relation  to  which  no  interpreter  would  be
    required.  For this purpose anonymity was to be  preserved  given  that
    minors were involved in the appeal.

16.  I was satisfied that  there  were  highly  compelling  reasons  falling
    within paragraph 7.2(b) of the Senior President's Practice Statement as
    to why the decision should not be re-made by the  Upper  Tribunal.   It
    was clearly in  the  interests  of  justice  that  the  appeal  of  the
    Appellants be heard afresh in the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

17.  The First-tier Tribunal erred in law such that its decision  should  be
    set aside and none of their findings preserved.  I remit the making  of
    the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House before  a  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge other than the Judge to whom I have above referred.

Anonymity Direction

18.  Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269)  I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the original Appellant.  This direction  applies  to,  amongst
    others, all parties.  Any failure to comply with this  direction  could
    give rise to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date 15 April 2015



Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein
