

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)   Appeal Number OA/17642/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Sheldon Court               |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 20th November 2014                |On 26th November 2014                |
|Prepared 24th November 2014          |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                       Mdm HARMANMOHAN KAUR RAM SINGH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr A Burrett (Counsel)
For the Respondent: Mr D Mills (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. In this appeal I have retained the term Appellant for the appellant
    before the First-tier Tribunal and Respondent for the Secretary of
    State. It is the Respondent's appeal against the determination of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Mitchell promulgated on the 28th of March 2014 in
    which the Appellant's appeal was allowed.

 2. The Appellant is a Malaysian national who had applied to enter the UK
    to receive medical care. The application was refused as it was believed
    that the level of care required was available, the Appellant had her
    own house and pension and funds remitted from the UK as well as 2
    daughters who could perform basic tasks.

 3. The appeal was allowed with the Judge finding in paragraph 33 that he
    had not been provided with all the bank statements for the Sponsor's
    sister. In paragraph 34 the Judge noted the medical evidence that
    suggested that the Appellant was suffering from depression and missing
    her relatives, he expressed a degree of scepticism. In paragraph 35 he
    found that there was no person in Malaysia who could provide the care
    that the Appellant needed and that the cost of full-time care was
    unaffordable for the relatives.

 4. The Judge then addressed the issue of whether the care in Malaysia was
    affordable in paragraph 36. He noted that the Appellant had her own
    property and that if she moved into full-time care her home could be
    sold and the proceeds used "to pay for her care for at least a
    significant period of time." He went on to find that this would be in
    addition to the money remitted from the UK and that given the high cost
    of care the capital would be quickly reduced and would become
    unaffordable. The paragraph concluded that costs would be significantly
    less in the UK.

 5. It was submitted by Mr Burrett that the findings reflected the cultural
    position in Malaysia and that the basic finding was that the care
    required was not available. However I do not see how the determination
    can properly be read in that way. It is clear that for reasons given in
    the determination the Judge found that there were no family members or
    neighbours who could assist with her needs. The references to the "full
    cost of care" in paragraphs 33 and 35 and to "affordable" in paragraph
    36 can only be on the basis that institutional funded care is
    available, if the Judge was only considering family care the question
    of cost and funding would not arise.

 6. I find that the error in the determination is in paragraph 36. There it
    was found that the Appellant had her own property and that care would
    be affordable for a significant period of time, as noted in paragraph 4
    above. To find that the money could eventually run out without
    identifying a timescale is an error and it has not been explained why
    the Appellant should not be expected to fund her care until such time
    as her funds run out in Malaysia. She would be expected to fund her
    care until her finances were depleted in the UK. It is an error to find
    that the Appellant should be admitted to the UK to avoid that happening
    in her own country.

 7. The Sponsor being medically qualified would be able to provide some of
    the care that the Appellant needs but there would still be costs to be
    met by the NHS which raises the issue of the economic well-being of the
    UK. The analysis of costs and funds is non-existent and does not
    justify the conclusions reached.

 8. The Respondent raised an issue with regard to the evidence provided by
    the Sponsor's sister and the finding that the Judge had not been
    provided with the full details of her finances. Whilst ordinarily in
    matters of interpretation the singular includes the plural and vice
    versa Mr Burrett noted that there was only one sponsor named and the
    Immigration Rules relate to the Sponsor's ability to meet the costs of
    care in the Appellant's home country. That is not a matter that I have
    to decide but there is force in Mr Burrett's submission.

 9. Given the finding that there is an error in the Judge's findings on the
    ability of the Appellant to fund her care in Malaysia it is appropriate
    to set the determination aside. In the absence of appropriate findings
    I agree with the submissions made that it is appropriate to remit the
    determination to the First-tier Tribunal for a re-hearing on all
    matters.


CONCLUSIONS

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the
    making of an error on a point of law.


    I set aside the decision.


    The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing on all
    issues, directions are given separately.


Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I
    make no order.


Fee Award


    In allowing the Secretary of State's appeal I make no fee award.




Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 26th November 2014


