
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/17028/2013
                                                               OA/17032/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9th January 2015                           |On 19th January 2015          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                   SS (1)
                                   SS (2)
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   No legal representation


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I make an anonymity order.  Unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  court
    directs otherwise no  report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
    publication  thereof  shall  directly  or   indirectly   identify   the
    Respondents before the Upper Tribunal.  This direction applies  to  all
    parties.  Any failure to comply with this direction could give rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

 2. I make this order of  my  own  volition  because  the  Respondents  are
    children.

Introduction and Background

 3. The Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) appeals against the determination  of
    Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  K  Henderson  promulgated  on  10th
    October 2014.

 4. The Respondents before the Upper Tribunal were  the  Appellants  before
    the First-tier Tribunal and I will refer to them as the Claimants.

 5. The Claimants are Indian citizens and they are twins born 12th November
    2012.  An application for entry clearance was made on their  behalf  to
    enable them to join their mother SK (the  Sponsor)  who  is  a  Tier  4
    Student in the United Kingdom, and their father who is  in  the  United
    Kingdom with limited leave as the Sponsor's dependant.  In addition the
    Claimants have a sister residing in the United Kingdom who has  limited
    leave to reside with their parents, and who was born in 2010.

 6. The applications were refused on 1st August 2013 the ECO not  accepting
    that the requirements of paragraph 319H(i), (g), (j)(1),  (2)  and  (3)
    were satisfied.

 7. An  appeal  was  entered,  contending  that  the  refusal  was  not  in
    accordance with the law and breached Article 8  of  the  1950  European
    Convention on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention).  One of  the  reasons
    for refusal was that  the  Claimants  had  not  been  born  during  the
    Sponsor's most recent grant of entry clearance, leave to enter or leave
    to remain as a Tier 4 Student, nor were they born no  more  than  three
    months after the expiry of that most recent grant  of  leave.   It  was
    pointed out that the Sponsor had applied for leave to remain as a  Tier
    4 Student on 3rd April 2012  which  application  had  been  refused  in
    October  2012.   It  was  contended  that  the  refusal  was  wrong  in
    contending that a bank statement was missing, and as a  consequence  it
    was intended to issue judicial review proceedings.  Subsequently it was
    acknowledged that the refusal  in  October  2012  was  wrong,  and  the
    Sponsor was granted leave to remain on 19th April 2013.   By  then  the
    Claimants had been born in November 2012.  It was submitted that it was
    an error in refusing the application which led  to  the  Claimants  not
    being born while the Sponsor had leave to remain as a Tier 4 Student.

 8. The decision made on 1st August 2013 to  refuse  the  Claimants'  entry
    clearance was reviewed by an Entry Clearance Manager  on  6th  February
    2014.  The decision to refuse  was  maintained.   The  Entry  Clearance
    Manager noted the reference in the Grounds of Appeal to  Article  8  of
    the 1950 Convention and was satisfied that Article  8(1)  was  engaged,
    but considered that refusal of entry clearance  was  proportionate  and
    appropriate.

 9. The appeals were heard together by Judge Henderson (the judge) on  29th
    September 2014.  It was conceded on behalf of the Claimants  that  they
    could not satisfy paragraph 319H of the Immigration Rules.   The  judge
    considered it appropriate to consider Article 8 outside the Immigration
    Rules, having noted that there was no evidence that the welfare of  the
    children  had  been  taken  into  account  when  refusing  them   entry
    clearance.  The judge  dismissed  the  appeals  under  the  Immigration
    Rules, but allowed them under Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.

10. The ECO applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.   The
    grounds may be summarised as follows;

      1) The judge erred in considering Article 8 by giving no consideration
         to sections 117A-117B of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
         Act 2002.  (This is erroneously referred to in paragraph 3  of  the
         grounds as being paragraphs 117A-117B of the Immigration Act 2014.)

      2) Reliance was placed upon Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC) and  Nagre
         [2013]  EWHC  720  (Admin),  in  submitting  that  there  must   be
         compelling or  exceptional  circumstances  not  recognised  by  the
         Immigration Rules in order for Article 8 to be  considered  outside
         the rules.  The judge had failed to  identify  why  the  Claimants'
         circumstances amounted to compelling or exceptional  circumstances.
         It was submitted that exceptional circumstances meant circumstances
         whereby refusal would lead to an unjustifiably harsh outcome.

      3) It was contended that  the  judge  had  failed  to  make  a  proper
         assessment  as  to  whether  the  Claimants  could  be   adequately
         financially maintained without being a burden on the taxpayers.

11. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Cruthers on 24th November 2014.

12. Directions were issued that there should be a hearing before the  Upper
    Tribunal to ascertain whether the First-tier Tribunal had erred in  law
    such that the decision must be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

13. The Sponsor attended the hearing and explained that she had received  a
    message from her legal representatives to  state  that  the  Claimants'
    barrister would not be attending.  Subsequently a fax was received from
    the representatives confirming  this.   The  fax  stated  that  it  was
    understood  that  the  Sponsor  wished   to   proceed   without   legal
    representation.

14. The Sponsor confirmed that she did not wish the hearing to be adjourned
    and that she wished to make  some  representations  on  behalf  of  the
    Claimants.  I ensured that the Sponsor was provided with a copy of  the
    grounds seeking permission to appeal, and the grant of permission.  The
    Sponsor was given time to consider those  documents,  and  subsequently
    indicated that she was ready to proceed, and confirmed that she did not
    seek an adjournment.

15. I explained to the Sponsor the procedure that would be adopted  at  the
    hearing, and that the purpose of the hearing was  to  consider  whether
    the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law  in  allowing  the  Claimants'
    appeals under Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.  The  Sponsor  told  me
    that she understood the nature of the proceedings, and I was  satisfied
    that this was the case.  There was no  need  for  an  interpreter,  and
    proceedings were conducted in English.

16. I firstly heard submissions from Mr Kandola who relied upon the grounds
    contained in the application for permission to appeal.  In relation  to
    section 117B of the 2002 Act, Mr Kandola submitted that the immigration
    status of the Sponsor and her husband were  precarious,  in  that  they
    only had limited leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

17. Mr Kandola submitted that the Sponsor had chosen to leave the  children
    with grandparents in India and return to the United Kingdom  to  study,
    and submitted that this was a case of individuals attempting to  choose
    where they wish to carry on their family life.  It was  submitted  that
    there was no satisfactory evidence to prove that the grandmother  would
    be unable to care for the Claimants.  I was  asked  to  find  that  the
    parents had decided that it would  be  in  the  best  interest  of  the
    Claimants to remain with their grandmother, while the parents  returned
    to the United Kingdom.

18. Mr Kandola submitted that the  determination  did  not  reveal  that  a
    thorough assessment of the Sponsor's financial circumstances  had  been
    carried out.  Mr Kandola confirmed that no strong reliance  was  placed
    upon Gulshan and Nagre.

19. I then heard from the Sponsor who explained why her initial application
    for leave to remain as a Tier 4 Student had been  refused,  and  stated
    that it was acknowledged by the Home Office that  a  mistake  had  been
    made which is why the application was  subsequently  granted  in  April
    2013.  Both the children  had  been  born  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
    November 2012, and once she received her leave to remain as  a  Tier  4
    Student, she was able to return to India to  mourn  the  death  of  her
    father.  Her husband and her three children accompanied her,  and  when
    they wished to return to the United Kingdom, the Claimants were refused
    entry clearance.

20. The Sponsor wished to pursue  her  studies  in  accountancy  which  she
    described as her dream career, and therefore  returned  to  the  United
    Kingdom, believing that the separation from the Claimants would only be
    for a short duration before they were granted entry clearance.

21. The Sponsor confirmed that her daughter who resides  with  herself  and
    her husband in the United Kingdom misses the Claimants,  as  does  both
    the Sponsor and her husband,  and  she  believed  that  the  judge  was
    correct to allow the appeal with reference to Article  8  of  the  1950
    Convention.  The Sponsor confirmed that  she  did  not  work,  but  her
    husband was in employment and provided for  the  family  and  they  had
    never claimed public funds, and they had submitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal bank statements and evidence of her husband's employment,  and
    she believed the judge was correct to find that  adequate  finance  for
    the family was available.



My Conclusions and Reasons

22. I firstly consider whether the judge erred  in  considering  Article  8
    outside the Immigration Rules.  The judge referred to the relevant case
    law in paragraph 24 of the determination, and in paragraph 23  set  out
    the principle in Mundeba [2013] UKUT 88 (IAC) which indicated  that  in
    an entry clearance application involving children, the  best  interests
    of the child shall be a primary  consideration.   The  judge  correctly
    noted that the facts in that  appeal  related  to  an  entry  clearance
    application  for  settlement,  whereas  this  was  not   a   settlement
    application.

23. In paragraph 28 the judge found that the welfare of  the  children  had
    not been taken into account in refusing them entry clearance.  There is
    no reference in the refusal decisions to  the  best  interests  of  the
    children being considered, neither is there any such reference  in  the
    Entry  Clearance  Manager  review  dated  6th   February   2014.    The
    Immigration Rule considered in refusing entry  clearance  is  paragraph
    319H.

24. In my view the correct  approach  when  deciding  whether  to  consider
    Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules is set out in paragraph 135  of
    MM (Lebanon) [2014] EWCA Civ 985.  In this decision the Court of Appeal
    considered and made reference to both Nagre and Gulshan and I  set  out
    below paragraph 135;

    Where the relevant  group  of  IRs,  upon  their  proper  construction,
    provide a "complete code" for dealing with a person's Convention rights
    in the context of a particular IR or statutory provision,  such  as  in
    the case of "foreign criminals", then the balancing  exercise  and  the
    way the various factors are to be taken into account in  an  individual
    case must be done in accordance with that code, although references  to
    "exceptional circumstances" in  the  code  will  nonetheless  entail  a
    proportionality exercise.  But if the relevant group of IRs is not such
    a "complete code" then the proportionality test will be more at  large,
    albeit guided by the Huang tests and UK and Strasbourg case law.

25. In my view the judge in this  appeal  was  entitled  to  conclude  that
    paragraph 319H  was  not  a  complete  code,  and  there  had  been  no
    consideration of the best interests of the children, and therefore  was
    required  to  undertake  a  consideration   of   proportionality,   and
    consequently  did  not  err  in  considering  Article  8  outside   the
    Immigration Rules.

26. I turn next to the submission that the judge erred by  not  considering
    section 117 of the 2002 Act.  The  judge  made  reference  to  this  in
    paragraph 24 although there is an error in referring to Part 5A of  the
    Immigration Act 2014 and paragraphs 117A and 117B  of  that  Act.   The
    correct  position  is  that  on  28th  July  2014  section  19  of  the
    Immigration  Act  2014  was  brought  into  force  which  amended   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 by introducing a new  Part
    5A, which contains sections 117A, 117B, 117C, and 117D.   The  relevant
    section to be considered in this case is section 117B which in  summary
    states that when proportionality is considered  under  Article  8,  the
    maintenance  of  effective  immigration  controls  is  in  the   public
    interest, and it is in the public interest that individuals seeking  to
    enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able to  speak  English,  and
    are financially independent.

27. The judge at paragraph  30  made  reference  to  the  Sponsor  speaking
    excellent English although that is not directly in issue, as it is  the
    Claimants seeking entry clearance.  However ability to speak English is
    to be considered in the light of the fact that at the date of  refusal,
    the Claimants were only 9 months of age.

28. The judge did in fact consider the issue of financial  independence  in
    paragraphs 28 and 29.  In my view it is  clear  from  those  paragraphs
    that evidence relating to financial issues was placed before the judge.
     This is confirmed by the contents of  the  bundle  placed  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal on behalf of  the  Claimants,  which  contains  pay
    slips of the Sponsor's  husband,  together  with  P60  tax  forms,  and
    Barclays Bank statements and HSBC statements.

29. The judge has considered the financial evidence which included not only
    the earnings of the Sponsor's husband, but savings  held  in  the  bank
    accounts, and did not err  in  concluding  in  paragraph  29  that  the
    Claimants could be "adequately cared for in  terms  of  their  parents'
    finances".

30. There is reference in  section  117B(5)  to  a  precarious  immigration
    status to which reference was made by Mr Kandola.  I do not  find  this
    to be applicable in this case, as that relates to the fact that  little
    weight should be given to a private life established by a  person  when
    the person's immigration status is precarious,  but  this  case  relies
    upon family life, and not private life.

31. It is therefore my conclusion that the  judge  did  take  into  account
    section 117A of the 2002 Act which states that when considering whether
    an interference with a person's right to respect for private and family
    life is justified under Article 8(2) all the considerations  listed  in
    section 117B must be taken into account.  I therefore conclude that the
    judge did not err on this issue.

32. The third point raised in the  application  for  permission  to  appeal
    relates to the contention that inadequate consideration  was  given  to
    financial matters, but I  have  already  considered  this  point,  when
    considering section 117B and concluded that the judge did not err.

33. In summary,  the  grounds  indicate  a  strong  disagreement  with  the
    decision made by the judge, but for the reasons I have given above,  do
    not disclose a material error  of  law.   In  my  view  the  judge  was
    entitled to consider Article 8 outside the Immigration  Rules,  and  in
    considering Article 8, had to have regard to the best interests of  the
    children as a primary  consideration  (although  it  is  not  the  only
    consideration), and reached a decision that was  open  to  her  on  the
    evidence, and adequate and sustainable  reasons  were  given  for  that
    decision.

Notice of Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal does not  disclose  a  material
error of law.  I do not set aside  the  determination,  which  stands.   The
appeal of the Entry Clearance Officer is dismissed.

Anonymity

I remind the parties that an anonymity order has been made.






Signed                              Date       13th January 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  stands,  so  does  the
decision regarding a fee award.  There is no fee award.






Signed                              Date       13th January 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

