



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                Appeal
Number: OA/17983/2013

                                                       OA/17985/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London                    |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 5th August 2014                              |On 20th August 2014        |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts

                                   Between

                    mr reagan bizimungu (FIRST Appellant)
                   miss mbazazi phionah (SECOND Appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr G Khan
For the Respondent:    Mr G Jack, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are citizens of Uganda. They claim to have been born  on
    23rd September 1996 and 30th June 1999 respectively. They  applied  for
    entry clearance to join their mother Nyamata Nyakake "the Sponsor".  It
    is claimed that their Sponsor exercised sole  responsibility  for  both
    Appellants.  She entered the UK as far back as  2000.  She  claimed  at
    that time to be a refugee from Rwanda. This claim was  refused  but  in
    2007 she was granted indefinite leave to remain because a younger child
    of hers, had by 2007 spent his formative years in the UK.  The  Sponsor
    left the two Appellants in Uganda in 2000  and  visited  them  for  the
    first time only in 2012.

History of the Appeals

 2. The Appellants' first applications to join their Sponsor, were  refused
    on 16th March 2012. Their subsequent appeals to the First-tier Tribunal
    were dismissed. The Judge on that occasion made findings that he  could
    not be satisfied that the birth certificates provided by the Appellants
    were genuine, nor could he be satisfied that their passports  could  be
    relied upon as evidence of identity. The Judge further  commented  that
    he had doubts over the DNA test results.

 3. Both Appellants made a further application for entry on 31st May  2013.
    Those applications were also refused and their subsequent appeals  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Pedro.  Judge  Pedro  also  dismissed
    their appeals.

 4. The Appellants sought permission to appeal Judge Pedro's  determination
    on the grounds that they had been  deprived  of  a  fair  hearing.  The
    grounds amplified this by saying that the Judge failed to  have  regard
    to evidence which was put  before  him.  The  Appellants'  sponsor  had
    attended the hearing on their behalf and submitted a witness statement.
    In that statement she gave an explanation for  submitting  false  birth
    certificates on behalf of the Appellants and said that she had obtained
    new birth certificates from the proper issuing authorities.

 5. The Judge declined to hear  her  oral  evidence  and  referred  to  the
    Devaseelan principle. He took the  previous  Judge's  decision  as  his
    starting point and  informed  the  Appellants'  representative  why  he
    concluded that the position remained the same.

 6.  Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
    Nicholson. The relevant parts of the grant of permission are  contained
    in paragraph [4], [5] and [6] and are reproduced here.

         "At paragraph 3 Judge Pedro stated that at the commencement of  the
         hearing he had a preliminary discussion  with  the  representatives
         regarding the issues and, at the conclusion of that discussion,  he
         informed the representatives that he intended to dismiss the appeal
         of both appellants. The judge referred  to  Devaseelan  2002  UKIAT
         00702, took the previous decision as a starting point and explained
         why he concluded that the position remained the same.

         Grounds 3 and 4 contend that the appellants  did  not  get  a  fair
         hearing because the judge declined to  hear  the  evidence  of  the
         sponsor, who the appellants claim is their mother.

         Whilst the judge might well have reached the same conclusion,  even
         if the sponsor had given oral evidence, it was  arguably  incumbent
         upon the judge as a matter of of (sic) procedural fairness to allow
         the appellant's (sic) representative  to  call  as  a  witness  the
         person who the appellants claimed was their  mother  (See  comments
         generally on the calling of witnesses in  A  (Somalia)  2004  UKIAT
         00065). If that was not done then it is arguable the  judge  erred.
         In those circumstances permission is granted to argue grounds 3 and
         4. I do not refuse permission on the remaining grounds".

 7. Thus the matter comes before me to  determine  whether  the  Judge  has
    erred materially, such that his decision needs  to  be  set  aside  and
    remade.

 8. I heard brief submissions from both representatives; Mr Khan on  behalf
    of the Appellants and Mr Jack on behalf of the Respondent. At  the  end
    of those submissions I announced my decision that I was satisfied  that
    the First-tier Tribunal had materially erred and that its decision must
    be set aside. I now give my reasons for reaching that conclusion.

 9. It is a matter  of  procedural  fairness  that  if  there  is  evidence
    available which may be relevant to the decision being  litigated,  then
    that evidence should be heard.

10. Devaseelan should be the starting point only for a  Judge,  not  a  re-
    litigation of the facts found by the previous Judge.  The  approach  by
    Judge Pedro has led to a failure to properly consider and evaluate  the
    fresh evidence which was available to him. As First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Nicholson stated in the grant of permission, it is possible that having
    heard the evidence of the Sponsor the Judge may well have  reached  the
    same conclusions but that would only have been after a  full  and  fair
    hearing of the evidence available. Instead he has deprived  himself  of
    the  opportunity  of  evaluating  the  available  evidence   and   more
    importantly has deprived the Appellants of the opportunity  of  putting
    their best case forward. That is procedurally unfair and amounts  to  a
    legal error.

11. For those reasons I see no alternative but to remit this matter to  the
    First-tier Tribunal (not Judge Pedro) since it is clear there is a lack
    of judicial fact finding. I give a direction that  the  Sponsor  attend
    the new hearing before that Tribunal and be given  the  opportunity  to
    present her evidence on behalf of the Appellants.

Decision

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and it
    is set aside. The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.


No anonymity direction is made




Signature                                             Dated
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


