
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: oa/17765/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15th May 2015                             |On 22nd May 2015              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                       mr Mohamed Rinas Mohamed Rizvi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Walker, Counsel instructed by Jein Solicitors,
                    Lewisham, London


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Respondent, Mr Rivzi, is a citizen of Sri Lanka whose date of birth
    is recorded  as  18th  October  1995.   On  or  about  15th  June  2015
    application was made on behalf of the Respondent for him  to  join  his
    mother in the United Kingdom having regard  to  paragraph  197  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 2. On 21st August 2013 the Entry Clearance Officer refused the application
    on the basis that there was no sufficient evidence in  respect  of  the
    accommodation.  There then followed a supplementary refusal  letter  of
    9th January 2014 raising the issue of sole responsibility  followed  by
    an Entry Clearance Manager's review of 9th January 2014  in  which  the
    decisions were upheld.  The Entry  Clearance  Manager  recognised  that
    he/she was concerned with a  minor  and  properly  makes  reference  to
    Section 55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009
    although strictly speaking of course it would not  apply  in  an  entry
    clearance case though it is recognised that the same principles  should
    apply in respect of minors who are seeking entry clearance.

 3. Mr Rizvi appealed.  His appeal was heard on 7th September 2014 by Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal M P W Harris.  The judge dealt with  matters
    very briefly indeed.  Most of the determination is taken  up  with  the
    principles of law under the Immigration Rules.  The judge was satisfied
    on the basis of the evidence before him that Mr Rizvi had the option of
    sharing accommodation with his mother or use premises of friends of the
    Sponsor, his mother.  On the issue of  sole  responsibility  the  judge
    found there to be credible oral and documentary evidence  of  financial
    support  and  regular  contact  but   otherwise   says   very   little.
    Nevertheless the appeal was allowed.

 4. Not content with that decision, by Notice dated 4th December  2014  the
    Secretary of State made application for permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal. She relied on Section 325(1) of the  Housing  Act  1985
    contending that it was not open to the judge to find that accommodation
    was adequate were the Sponsor and Mr Rizvi to  share,  given  that  the
    statute provides:

         "The room standard  is  contravened  when  the  number  of  persons
         sleeping in a  dwelling  and  the  number  of  rooms  available  as
         sleeping accommodation is such that two persons of  opposite  sexes
         who are not living together as husband and wife must sleep  in  the
         same room."

 5. As to the sole  responsibility  issue  there  was,  it  was  contended,
    inadequate reasoning.

 6. Permission to appeal was initially refused but on a renewed application
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey granted permission, though he was  of
    the view that the ground in respect of sole responsibility  had  little
    prospect of success.

 7. Having looked at the declaration of the Sponsor  and  the  accompanying
    statement of Mr Rivzi, I agree with Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  Davey
    that the issue of sole responsibility was a matter that was open to the
    judge to resolve in the manner in  which  he  has  dealt  and  so  that
    finding will be preserved. In fairness  Mr  Wilding,  wisely,  did  not
    pursue the point with any degree of conviction.

 8. As to the accommodation issue, though Ms Walker did not seek, with  any
    degree of enthusiasm to meet the Section 325 point but she did seek  to
    persuade me that the judge had looked to the totality of  the  evidence
    and was satisfied that there was alternative accommodation which  would
    meet the requirements.

 9. The difficulty is that  there  was  more  than  one  address  to  which
    reference was being made and indeed one of those addresses, I am  told,
    was an address that only became available to the  applicant  after  the
    date of decision.  I remind myself that the focus is the  date  of  the
    decision; that goes both to the accommodation and to any  human  rights
    issue which may arise in the reconsideration of the appeal.

10. However, there is in my view  simply  no  sufficient  analysis  of  the
    evidence in relation to the accommodation. It is  not  possible  in  my
    judgment to say that the accommodation was adequate without identifying
    which, nor was it possible in law to find accommodation adequate if, at
    the date of decision, it was not going to be available.

11. The matter will be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal because,  though
    I was willing to look at the  possibility  of  remaking  the  decision,
    there was consensus that that is the appropriate course in  this  case.
    The matter will be a narrow one, confined, as I have indicated, to  the
    issue of the accommodation as at the date of the decision.

12. Provided therefore there is sufficient evidence before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal it may be that the First-tier Tribunal will  not  be  troubled
    for very long in  the  resolution  of  this  particular  matter.  I  am
    conscious that currently it is taking some time for cases to be listed.
    It may be that if the  Sponsor  is  willing,  this  matter  might  more
    speedily be listed at Stoke or North Shields. I  remit  the  matter  to
    Hatton Cross because that is where it was heard but I imagine that  any
    application to transfer would be met sympathetically. The Appellant  is
    at liberty to adduce any further evidence thought  appropriate  subject
    to the proviso that it must be evidence that goes to the  date  of  the
    decision and not post-decision evidence. I give that  latitude  because
    the appeal concerns a person is for the purpose of this appeal a minor.

Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is  allowed  to  the  limited  extent  that
there was an error of law with respect to the issue of  accommodation  only.
The finding in relation to sole responsibility shall stand.

Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker
