
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number OA/17156/2012
      OA/17157/2012
      OA/17158/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House   Decision & Reasons promulgated
On 4 September 2014    On 20 January 2015


                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis


                                   Between

                                  1) S A H
                                   2) N H
                                   3) S H
                           (Anonymity orders made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                          Entry Clearance Officer,
                                   Nairobi
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellants:    Ms. C. Robinson of Counsel  instructed  by  Wilson  &
Co.
For the Respondent:    Mr. I. Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decisions of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Walters promulgated on 5 June 2014, dismissing each of the  Appellants'
    linked appeal against the Respondent's decisions dated 6 August 2012 to
    refuse entry clearance as the children of Ms H H E ('the sponsor').

Background

 2. The Appellants are nationals of Somalia born on 4 February 2003, 17 May
    2004, and 19 March  2006.  Applications  for  entry  clearance  as  the
    children of the sponsor were made for each Appellant on 10 July 2012.

 3. The applications were each refused with reference to paragraph  297(i),
    (iii), (iv) and (v) of the Immigration  Rules.  The  Third  Appellant's
    application was also refused with reference  to  paragraph  320(7A).  A
    Notice of Immigration Decision dated 6 August 2012 was issued  to  each
    Appellant accordingly.

 4. The Appellants appealed to  the  IAC.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    dismissed  the  Appellants'  appeals  for  reasons  set  out   in   his
    determination.

 5. The Appellants sought permission to appeal which was granted by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Shimmin on 14 July 2014.

Consideration

 6. In dismissing the appeals the First-tier Tribunal Judge found that  the
    Appellants did not satisfy the requirements of  paragraph  297  of  the
    Immigration Rules. The Judge also considered paragraph 319R, but  found
    that this did not avail the Appellants (paragraphs 45-47). Further,  it
    was concluded that the appeals were  also  to  be  dismissed  on  human
    rights ground with reference to Article 8 of the ECHR (paragraphs 49-51
    and 53). The Judge did, however, reject  the  Respondent's  case  under
    paragraph 320(7A) in respect of the Third Appellant (paragraphs 42-44).

 7. In reaching the conclusion that it had not been "satisfactorily  proved
    that the  Sponsor  has  had  sole  responsibility  for  the  children's
    upbringing" (paragraph 40) the Judge had regard, amongst other  things,
    to a particular aspect of  the  birth  certificates  produced  for  the
    Second and Third Appellants. (I pause to note that it  is  unclear  why
    the Judge has confined his consideration on this issue to only  two  of
    the Appellants given that the particular feature  is  apparent  on  the
    face of the birth certificates in respect of each of the  Appellants  -
    see Appellants' bundle before the First-tier Tribunal at pages  168-170
    - and the matter is raised  in  each  of  the  Notices  of  Immigration
    Decision. Be that as it may, in my judgement,  nothing  turns  on  this
    unnecessarily restricted approach.)

 8. The issue is raised in this way in the Notice of  Immigration  Decision
    of the Second Appellant (and in similar terms, in the  Notices  of  the
    other Appellants):

    "I note that your birth was registered only  on  13/04/2011,  and  says
         that it was registered by and signed by a parent. Given  that  your
         claimed mother was in the UK at  that  time,  and  you  claim  your
         father went missing in  2005,  this  casts  great  doubt  over  who
         registered  your  birth  and  on  what  evidential  basis  it   was
         registered so long after the event....

   ...You have stated that your father has abandoned  you  but  provide  no
         further detail of this. I note that your  birth  purports  to  have
         been registered by a parent and as your mother has not returned  to
         Kenya since 2009 I consider it only reasonable to presume  that  it
         was your father who therefore registered the birth which  does  not
         suggest he is missing."

 9. I  pause  to  note  that  I  do  not  consider  it  of  any  particular
    significance that the word that appears on  the  birth  certificate  is
    "Parent"  rather  than  a  signature  or  a  specific  name.  A   birth
    certificate is no more than a certified copy of an entry in a register:
    it is the registration documents and/or the register that will  contain
    the actual signature of the informant. The birth certificate will  only
    contain transcriptions of that information and so will not duplicate an
    actual signature. It seems to me that it is appropriate to  infer  from
    the certificates that the  original  registration  documents  indicated
    that the informant held themselves out to be a parent.

10. The Appellants, via the sponsor, have not addressed the issue raised by
    the Respondent directly. They have not offered a  specific  explanation
    for the circumstances in which the registrations of their births appear
    to have been pursuant to information provided by a parent. It  is  said
    that a carer for the children was responsible for the  registration  of
    the births, but that the sponsor has now lost contact with  that  carer
    who  was  deported  from  Kenya.  Otherwise  the  assertion  that   the
    Appellants' father has had nothing to do with the children  since  2005
    is maintained.

11. The First-tier Tribunal Judge dealt with the issue in this way:

    "Obviously, if the contents of the birth certificate are true, then the
         carer also took along the Appellants' father, Mr A A H. Either  the
         carer did not tell the Sponsor of this fact, which I find unlikely,
         or the  Sponsor  has  deliberately  concealed  the  fact  that  the
         Appellants'  father  remains  in  contact  with  them.  No  witness
         statement has been taken from the carer concerning this matter."

12. On appeal the Appellants, through Ms Robinson,  place  very  particular
    emphasis on the latter sentence - "No witness statement has been  taken
    from the carer concerning this matter". It is  argued  that  the  Judge
    erred in not having regard to the fact that  it  was  not  possible  to
    obtain such a witness statement.

13. Mr Jarvis acknowledged at the outset of the appeal that the sponsor had
    stated in  her  witness  statement  dated  15  January  2014  that  the
    children's first carer had been deported back to  Somalia  sometime  in
    2011 (paragraph 23), although the Judge had made no express finding  in
    this regard. Indeed Mr Jarvis's initial position was that he was minded
    to concede the issue of error of law on this basis.

14. I indicated that I was not prepared to accept such a concession without
    a further exploration of the issues. It was not immediately apparent to
    me that the Judge's reference to the lack of  supporting  evidence  was
    anything other than an observation of the fact of the absence  of  such
    supporting evidence. It was not immediately apparent that the Judge was
    being "critical" (as pleaded at paragraph 15 of  the  Grounds)  in  the
    sense that he had drawn an adverse inference from the very fact of  the
    absence of such evidence.

15. Indeed, having heard submissions and having had regard to  all  matters
    in the case I am satisfied that  the  Judge  was  doing  no  more  than
    observing the absence of evidence from the carer which might have  been
    able to explain the circumstances surrounding the registration  of  the
    births and  the  contents  of  the  birth  certificates,  and  was  not
    according adverse weight to the fact of the absence of such evidence in
    itself.  In  my  judgement  the  matter  is  adequately  explained   at
    paragraphs 46 and 47 in the context  of  consideration  of  rule  319R,
    where the Judge states:

    "...The carer who supposedly arranged that the  birth  certificates  be
         issued has made no  witness  statement  and  so  the  circumstances
         surrounding the  Appellants'  father's  supposed  reappearance  are
         unclear.

   In view of the  general  lack  of  credibility  which  I  found  in  the
         Sponsor's evidence, I was unable to exclude the possibility that he
         may be playing a role in his children's  upbringing  and  making  a
         financial contribution to it."

16. In my judgement it is sufficiently clear from reading paragraphs 21 and
    46 together that the Judge was not treating the  failure  to  obtain  a
    witness statement as in itself a matter from which to draw  an  adverse
    inference; rather he was - appropriately and sustainably -  identifying
    that it rendered the position unclear as to how the certificates record
    on their face that  a  'parent'  signed  the  documents  informing  the
    registrar of the births, if - as the sponsor maintains  -  it  was  not
    what had happened.

17.  Whilst  the  sponsor's  inability  to  provide  clarification  is  not
    inevitably an indicator of a lack of credibility, it  does  not  follow
    that her assertion is to be accepted. The Judge was  entitled  to  take
    into account the absence  of  clarification  and/or  explanation  as  a
    significant factor when deciding if the Appellants  (via  the  sponsor)
    had discharged the burden of proof. In this context it is to  be  noted
    that it was not only  this  aspect  of  the  evidence  that  the  Judge
    considered adverse to the Appellants' cases,  but  he  also  identified
    other aspects that undermined the sponsor's credibility.

18. The Judge's concerns engendered by the birth certificates was  not  the
    only basis upon which he determined that he was not  satisfied  on  the
    issue of sole responsibility. The Judge also considered  the  sponsor's
    claims in respect of financial support -  "The  Sponsor's  evidence  is
    that she is the sole source of financial support  for  the  Appellants"
    (paragraph 22). Amongst other  things  in  this  regard  he  identified
    problems with the supporting evidence by way of  remittance  advices  -
    see paragraphs 23-25, and in particular at paragraph 24: "I  could  not
    comprehend how this could be genuine if the Sponsor did not  arrive  in
    the UK until 21.9.09. Even if one uses the American system and believes
    that date might be 1.4.09,  that  would  not  be  consistent  with  the
    Sponsor's date of arrival."

19. No challenge is raised against the analysis at paragraphs 23-25 in  the
    grounds in support of the application for permission to appeal, and  Ms
    Robinson had no answer to this analysis to advance before me.

20. Moreover, the Judge clearly, and in my judgement sustainably,  made  an
    adverse assessment  in  respect  of  the  availability  of  third-party
    support. The Judge considered that the evidence in  this  context  both
    undermined whether such support would be available  to  the  Appellants
    were they to enter the UK, and considered it undermined the  assertions
    as to the conditions in which the Appellants were said to be  living  -
    which in turn informed his  evaluation  of  the  extent  to  which  the
    Appellant was the sole financial provider and the  possible  continuing
    involvement of their father in their lives.

21. These matters together, sustainably in my judgement, informed the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge's conclusion stated at paragraph 40 on the issue of
    sole responsibility:

    "In conclusion, I did not find that it has been  satisfactorily  proved
         that the Sponsor has had sole  responsibility  for  the  children's
         upbringing. I did  not  accept  that  the  Appellants'  father  has
         deserted them. I found  the  evidence  of  the  remittance  advices
         highly dubious for the reasons previously stated. I find that it is
         probable that the Appellants' father continues to play  a  role  in
         their  life  and  make  a  financial  contribution  towards   them,
         otherwise they would not be able to survive."

22. In the alternative, the Appellants  argue  that  even  if  the  Judge's
    conclusion in respect of sole responsibility is sustainable, the  Judge
    in any event erred in his consideration of the issue  of  "serious  and
    compelling family or other considerations" under  paragraph  297(i)(f):
    see Grounds at paragraph 20.

23. I do not accept this submission. The Judge expressly addresses his mind
    to this issue at paragraph 41,  and  indicates  an  adverse  conclusion
    essentially for the same reasons that he rejected the case  in  respect
    of sole responsibility. In particular the Judge stated: "I did not find
    that I had been given  credible  evidence  as  to  the  conditions  the
    children were living in. If that evidence been true, then  third  party
    Sponsors would surely have been called on in order to ameliorate  those
    conditions". In  the  context  of  the  overall  consideration  of  the
    evidence and the Judge's analysis  and  findings,  I  consider  such  a
    conclusion sustainably open to the Judge, and I detect no error of law.

24. The Appellants also make criticism of the Judge's approach to Article 8
    of the ECHR. To some extent  the  arguments  relied  upon  depend  upon
    sustaining the criticisms in  respect  of  the  conclusions  under  the
    Rules: see, for example, paragraph 24 of the Grounds. Necessarily  this
    aspect of the challenge must fail in  light  of  my  conclusion  stated
    above.  Otherwise  it  is  pleaded  that  the  Judge  failed  to   give
    consideration to the best interests of the Appellants' half sibling who
    lives in the UK with the sponsor (and whom  the  Appellants  had  never
    met); failed to have regard to the best interests  of  the  Appellants;
    and failed to consider the current  situation  in  Nairobi  for  Somali
    immigrants.

25. In respect of the Appellants' half sibling (date of birth 10 May 2010),
    whilst his existence is noted at paragraph 34 of the sponsor's  witness
    statement of 15 January 2014, and the circumstances of his  conception,
    birth, and whereabouts of his father commented upon  in  the  following
    paragraphs, no particular evidence was advanced before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal as to how his best interests were advanced by  granting  entry
    clearance to the Appellants. Nor was any particular reference  made  to
    his best  interests  in  the  Appellants'  Skeleton  Argument  dated  8
    February 2014 that was  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  or  in  the
    Additional Submissions dated  12  May  2014.  Indeed  in  the  Skeleton
    Argument the Article 8 family life that  is  relied  upon  is  that  as
    between the Appellants and their mother: see paragraph 37.

26. In such circumstances - the absence of any evidence  or  submission  on
    point - and bearing in mind also that the Judge's sustainable  findings
    were to  the  effect  that  the  Appellants  would  not  be  adequately
    financially supported in  the  UK  -  and  therefore  implicitly  their
    addition to their half-siblings household would place a strain  on  the
    finances of the household inevitably to  the  detriment  of  the  half-
    sibling - I am not persuaded that the omission of any express reference
    to the half-sibling's best interests can found a submission of material
    error.

27. As regards the Appellants Article 8 rights,  the  Judge's  approach  at
    paragraph 50 does not deny the existence of family life  but  concludes
    adversely in respect of proportionality:

    "Ms Robinson  submitted,  in  her  skeleton  argument,  that  I  should
         consider a "freestanding" Article 8 appeal. I  did  not  find  that
         there  are  any  issues  that  I  would   have   considered   under
         "Proportionality" which have not been considered under the Rules."

28. The Judge went on to state at paragraph 51:

    "Following the case of Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640 I  do  not  find  that
         there were arguably  good  grounds  for  granting  leave  to  enter
         outside the Rules. Nor  did  I  find  that  there  were  compelling
         circumstances not sufficiently recognised under the Rules."

29. Whilst the Judge's reference to Gulshan and his finding that there were
    no 'arguably good grounds' for granting  leave  to  enter  outside  the
    Rules  could  be  seen  as  a  consideration  and  application  of  the
    unnecessary 'intermediate step' now disapproved in MM (Lebanon)  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 985 (paragraph 128), the wording - and more  particularly  the
    subsequent  wording  "Nor  did  I  find  that  there  were   compelling
    circumstances  not  sufficiently  recognised  under  the  Rules"  -  is
    consistent with the ultimate  test  which  requires  identification  of
    other non-standard and particular features of a  case  that  are  of  a
    compelling nature if an applicant or appellant failing under the  Rules
    is to succeed under Article 8. When this is coupled  with  the  Judge's
    findings to the effect that he had not been given a truthful account of
    the circumstances in which the children were living or  the  extent  of
    their father's involvement in their lives - in other words a  rejection
    of the premises of the Article 8 case advanced - I do not  consider  it
    is open to the Appellants to argue that the Judge materially  erred  in
    law.

30. Similarly I do not consider that there is anything of substance in  the
    submission as to the general situation for Somalis in Nairobi.  Article
    8 cases  are  highly  fact  sensitive:  the  general  situation  cannot
    override the specific; on the  facts  of  these  cases  the  Judge  was
    entitled to root his conclusions on  Article  8  in  his  case-specific
    findings.

31. Accordingly, whilst I recognise that the Judge's approach to Article  8
    was brief, and contained no express reference to 'best  interests',  in
    the overall context of the appeal I am satisfied that the Judge reached
    a conclusion that was open to him. In particular it  was  open  to  the
    Judge to conclude that there was nothing in the evidence advanced  that
    he accepted as credible that indicated a refusal under  the  Rules  was
    nonetheless a disproportionate decision.

32. Accordingly, in all of the circumstances I conclude that there  was  no
    material error of law in the decisions of the First-tier Tribunal.

33. For completeness I note the following. The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    declined to uphold the Respondent's decision in respect  of  the  Third
    Appellant pursuant to paragraph 320(7A). The Judge identified the basis
    of this decision at paragraph 42 of his determination, before going  on
    to state: "Unfortunately the ECO has neglected to  include  a  copy  of
    this birth certificate in the bundle". I am unclear as to the basis for
    this observation. The birth  certificate  of  the  Third  Appellant  is
    indeed in the bundle, and the Judge had regard to it in respect of  the
    issue  in  respect  of  the  signatory:  see  paragraph   18   of   the
    determination. It is indeed the case that in the  box  for  gender  the
    word "male" appears in contrast to the word "Male" which appears on the
    birth certificate of the Second Appellant - i.e. with a lower case 'm'.
    There  is  also  some  marking  immediately  before  the  word   "male"
    suggestive of  deletion  of  letters  -  by  inference  "Fe".  In  such
    circumstances the basis of the Respondent's decision is apparent in the
    relevant evidence was before the First-tier Tribunal. I note  that  the
    sponsor has not addressed this issue in her witness statement,  but  it
    is addressed in the Appellants' Skeleton Argument before the First-tier
    Tribunal at paragraphs 30-36 - wherein it is accepted  that  the  birth
    certificate was altered. The First-tier Tribunal Judge has not  engaged
    with those submissions because he  considered  (erroneously)  that  the
    relevant document was not before him. Because this was not a live issue
    before me, I did not hear submissions on it.  Accordingly,  I  make  no
    finding in respect of it. I merely raise it as an observation  that  in
    the event that this case were to go any further, it might in due course
    be a matter that requires consideration.

Notice of Decision

34. The decisions of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  contained  no  material
    error of law and stand.

35. The Appellants' appeals are each dismissed.



Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     17 January 2015


Anonymity Order

Unless the Upper Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report  of  these
      proceedings or any form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or
      indirectly identify the Appellants. This direction applies to, amongst
      others, all parties. Any failure to comply with this  direction  could
      give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

