
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/17308/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 15th July 2014                             |On 17th July 2014            |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                          MEHR UN NISA LUND BALOCH
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISLAMABAD
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Latif.
For the Respondent: Mrs Rackstraw - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge  NMK  Lawrence  promulgated  on  24th  April  2014  following
        consideration of the merits of the appeal on the papers  at  Hatton
        Cross.


     2. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan born in 1994 who is married
        to her UK-based sponsor. She applied for leave to enter the  United
        Kingdom to join  her  sponsor,  which  was  refused  as  the  Entry
        Clearance Officer was not satisfied  the  marriage  was  subsisting
        and/or that each of the parties to the marriage  intended  to  live
        with  each  other  as  spouses.  The  application  was  refused  by
        reference to paragraph  EC-P.1.1  of  Appendix  FM.   The  date  of
        decision is 22nd August 2013.
     3. Following the issue of the decision the Appellant appealed  and  in
        the notice of appeal asked that her appeal  be  determined  on  the
        papers.  Evidence was received  and  the  file  referred  to  Judge
        Lawrence as part of  his  allocated  caseload.   He  sets  out  his
        findings from paragraph 6 to 11 of the determination.


     4. In those findings the Judge complains on  more  then  one  occasion
        about the fact no oral hearing was sought and in paragraph 10 makes
        a specific finding that "it is not possible to discharge the burden
        of  proof  on  the  balance  of  probability  on  the  papers.   An
        Immigration Judge will have to see the witnesses and  assess  their
        veracity. This cannot be  done  on  the  papers,  as  the  sponsor,
        unfortunately, seems to think."


     5. The Judge did not find on the papers before him that  the  marriage
        is subsisting or that each of the parties intend to live  with  the
        other permanently, but fails to give any or  adequate  reasons  why
        this should be so; other  than  by  reference  to  his  generalised
        statement that such a matter  cannot  be  proved  without  an  oral
        hearing.


     6. The appeal form gives an appellant the option  of  having  an  oral
        hearing or for the appeal to be determined on the papers.  If  they
        elect to have the matter determined  on  the  documents  they  must
        accept that a judge may not have  all  the  evidence  available  to
        them.  That  does  not,  however,  absolve   a   judge   from   the
        responsibility of doing what the appellant  has  asked,  namely  of
        undertaking a proper  assessment  of  the  available  evidence  and
        concluding whether  the  material  that  has  been  made  available
        enables the appellant to discharge the burden of  proof  upon  him.
        If it is a case that having examined the documents a judge does not
        find that the appellant has proved their case  the  appeal  can  be
        dismissed, but adequate reasons  for  why  the  evidence  does  not
        satisfy this requirement must be given.


     7. If during the course of assessing the merits of an  appeal  on  the
        papers a judge considers that an  oral  hearing  is  required  that
        judge can exercise his or her powers of case management and  direct
        that such shall occur. In this case Judge Lawrence  complains  that
        he has been requested to determine the matter on the papers without
        going on  to  consider  whether  such  a  power  should  have  been
        exercised. If it had a direction could  have  been  given  for  the
        matter to be listed  for  an  oral  hearing  at  a  hearing  centre
        convenient to the sponsor.


     8. The challenge to the determination is based upon an assertion Judge
        Lawrence failed to adequately  consider  the  documentary  evidence
        submitted which the Appellant was  seeking  to  rely  upon.  It  is
        accepted before the Tribunal by Mrs Rackstraw that this ground  has
        merit and accordingly the determination shall  be  set  aside  with
        there being no preserved findings.


     9. In relation to the future management of the appeal,  a  bundle  was
        served upon the Upper Tribunal on the day of the  hearing  but  was
        not available to the Presenting Officer. In light of the  fact  the
        Appellant has not yet had a proper consideration of her  appeal  by
        the First-tier Tribunal it was considered appropriate  in  all  the
        circumstances for the appeal to be remitted. Mr Latif was contacted
        and confirmed  that  his  client  would  prefer  an  oral  hearing.
        Accordingly the following directions  shall  apply  to  the  future
        management of this appeal:


     i.   The determination shall be set aside with there being no preserved
          findings.


     ii.  The appeal shall be remitted for the purposes of an  oral  hearing
   before the First-tier Tribunal sitting at King's Court North  Shields  on
   27  July  2014   before   Resident   Judge   Conway   (as   agreed   with
   Designated Judge Zucker). Time estimate 2 hours.


     iii. The parties must file  and  serve  a  consolidated,  indexed,  and
   paginated bundle, containing all the evidence  they  seek  to  rely  upon
   no later than five days before the hearing.  Witness  statements  in  the
   bundle must be signed,  dated,  contain  a  statement  truth,  and  shall
   stand as the evidence in chief of  the  maker.   Evidence  not  filed  in
   compliance  with  this  direction  shall  not   be   admissible   without
   the specific  permission  of  Judge  Conway  which  shall  be  sought  on
   written application explaining the  reason  for  the  delay,  the  person
   responsible,  the  relevance  of  the  evidence,  whether  the   opposing
   party consents to the evidence being admitted  late,  and  any  prejudice
   to either party in granting or refusing the application.


      iv.   No  interpreter  shall  be  provided  unless   the   appellant's
   representative          specifically requests the same in which case they
   must confirm the        language, dialect, and reason why an  interpreter
   is required in light         of the fact the sponsor is  settled  in  the
   United Kingdom.


   Anonymity.


    10. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005. I make no such order pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
        Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 as there  is  no  application
        for anonymity which is not justified on the facts as known.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
Dated the 15th July 2014




