
G[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/17097/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 October 2015                    |On 25 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                      v

                                MR MOTLIB ALI
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S. Vidyadharan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A. Malik, counsel instructed by Westminster Law
Chambers


                             DECISION & REASONS

1.    The Respondent is a national  of  Bangladesh,  born  on  2nd  February
1986. On 16th April 2013, he applied for a  certificate  of  entitlement  to
the right of abode as the son of Mozid Ali, who was registered as a  British
citizen under section 6(1) of the BNA 1948 on 8th September 1972. His  three
siblings applied at the same time. The applications  were  refused  on  22nd
July 2013 and appeals were lodged against the decisions.

2.    The appeals  came  before  First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Sullivan  for
hearing on 15th April 2015. Both of the Respondent's parents  had  died  but
his brother,  Akbul  Ali,  attended  the  hearing  as  the  Sponsor  of  the
Respondent  and  his  other  siblings.  At  the  hearing,  the  Home  Office
Presenting Officer accepted that Mozid Ali could  pass  British  citizenship
on to his children and the  only  issue  in  the  appeals  was  whether  the
Respondent and his siblings were the sons and daughters of Mozid Ali.

3.    In a decision promulgated on 1st May 2015, First Tier  Tribunal  Judge
Sulllivan allowed the appeal of  the  Respondent  and  dismissed  the  other
three appeals, based on the DNA evidence.

4.    On 7th May 2015, the Home  Office  made  an  in-time  application  for
permission to appeal on  the  basis  that  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge
materially erred  in  law  in  failing  to  have  regard  to  the  mandatory
documents required by  the  Schedule  to  the  Immigration  (Certificate  of
Entitlement to Right of Abode  in  the  United  Kingdom)  Regulations  2006.
Specific reference was made to the failure by the Judge to  make  a  finding
on whether or not the Respondent's parents'  marriage  certificate  and  the
Respondent's birth certificate were genuine. It was submitted  that  it  was
not open to the Judge to allow the appeal on the basis of the  DNA  evidence
alone.

5.    Permission to appeal was granted by First Tier Tribunal  Judge  McDade
on 22nd June 2015 on the basis that the points  raised  in  the  grounds  of
appeal were arguable and there was an arguable error of law.

Hearing

6.    At the hearing before me, Ms S. Vidyadharan  sought  to  rely  on  the
grounds of appeal. She submitted that the Judge had failed to make  findings
on  the  genuineness  of  the  Respondent's  parents'  marriage,  the  birth
certificates and their genuineness and also failed to make findings  on  the
genuineness on  the  education  certification.  She  referred  me  to  [24],
[25](e), [26] and [29]  of  the  Judge's  decision  and  that  at  [31]  the
documents had been found in each case to be unreliable [31]  in  respect  of
the Respondent. She reminded me that  there  had  been  no  cross-appeal  in
respect of the other siblings. She submitted that there was  a  clear  error
of law by the First Tier Tribunal Judge.

7.    In response, Mr Malik submitted that if anyone had made  an  error  it
is the Home Office itself through their representative who  appeared  before
the Judge. At [23] he conceded clearly that the Respondent's  appeal  should
succeed. At [25](b) the Judge clearly made a finding that the  parents  were
married on or about 15 March 1956. Mr Malik accepted  that  there  are  some
errors but in view of the DNA evidence and there had been  no  challenge  to
that, once the Home Office Presenting Officer considered this there  was  no
need for further findings despite the shortcomings. I drew the terms of  the
schedule to the regulations to Mr Malik's attention in response to which  he
submitted that there was no need to  go  into  detail  and  the  Judge  must
consider all aspects of the matter. He relied on the  decision  in  Begum  v
Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWHC  2968  (Admin)  where
he submitted that HHJ David Cooke made findings in respect of  DNA  evidence
despite not having other mandatory  documents.  If  some  of  the  documents
cannot be obtained the Court still has to make a finding. He  accepted  that
there were some errors in the birth certificate but  the  Sponsor  had  been
found to be credible and the Respondent's parents'  marriage  was  accepted.
He accepted that there was a difference between the  siblings  in  terms  of
the DNA evidence and drew my attention to  page  16  of  the  bundle,  which
confirms the likelihood that all are full siblings but the Respondent has  a
closer relationship according to the DNA  test.  He  informed  me  that  the
other siblings were not pursuing further appeals  due  to  the  expense.  He
submitted that there was no need for this case to go any further and that  I
had the power to refer it back to a different Judge for re-examination.

8.    In response, Ms Vidyadharan submitted that it  was  not  possible  for
the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  to   have   waived   the   statutory
requirements which are set out in the schedule.

9.    I reserved my decision in order to properly consider the  decision  in
Begum (op cit).

Decision

10.   Having now had the opportunity to consider the judgment of  HHJ  Cooke
in Begum v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2014]  EWHC  2968
(Admin) I conclude that it is not materially relevant to the  matter  before
me as it concerned a judicial review of the standard of  proof  utilized  in
the refusal to issue that Claimant with a British passport and  the  failure
to accord any evidential weight to the DNA evidence. Begum did  not  involve
any consideration  of  the  Schedule  to  the  Immigration  (Certificate  of
Entitlement to Right of Abode in the United Kingdom) Regulations 2006.

11.   It is clear that the schedule contains mandatory  requirements.  Those
requirements in respect of an Applicant who  was  born  outside  the  United
Kingdom on or after 1st January 1983 to a parent registered  or  naturalised
in  the  United  Kingdom  prior  to  the  applicant's  birth  are:  (i)  the
Applicant's full birth certificate showing parents' details;  (ii)  Parents'
marriage certificate (if claiming through father); and (iii)  Parents'  full
birth certificate, registration or naturalisation certificate.

12.   The material documents  before  First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Sullivan
were: (i) the Respondent's birth certificate,  which  was  not  accepted  as
genuine by the Entry Clearance Officer nor by the  Judge  at  [25(e)],  [26]
and 31 and (ii) the Respondent's father's confirmation of registration as  a
CUKC dated 8 September 1971 relating to Mozid Ali, which  was  authenticated
and accepted as genuine by the Home Office Presenting  Officer  but  not  by
the Entry Clearance Officer. No  marriage  certificate  in  respect  of  the
Respondent's parents has been submitted either to the ECO or the First  Tier
Tribunal Judge.

13.   Consequently, I find that First Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Sullivan  erred
materially in law in allowing the Respondent's appeal on the  basis  of  the
DNA evidence alone. It is clear  that  the  mandatory  requirements  of  the
Schedule to the Immigration (Certificate of Entitlement to  Right  of  Abode
in the United Kingdom) Regulations 2006 were not met  for  the  reasons  set
out at [12] above in that the relevant documents were  either  not  produced
or were not accepted as genuine. For the avoidance of doubt,  I  accept  the
submission of Ms S. Vidyadharan that, whilst it is the  case  that  at  [23]
the Home   Office  Presenting  Officer  accepted  that  the  appeal  of  the
Respondent  should  succeed,  it  was  not  possible  for  the  Home  Office
Presenting Officer to have waived the statutory requirements which  are  set
out in the schedule.

14.   The appeal by the Entry Clearance Officer is, therefore, allowed  with
the result  that  the  Respondent  is  not  entitled  to  a  certificate  of
entitlement to the right of abode.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

22nd November 2015
