
[pic]
IAC-HX-MC/12-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/17752/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 4 November 2014                 |On 20 November 2014                |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE E B GRANT


                                   Between

                           KRANTHIKUMAR KANUKUNTLA
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Chowdhury, UK Legal and Immigration Group
For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Background to this Appeal

 1. The appellant applied for entry clearance as  the  partner  of  points-
    based scheme migrant.  He was refused entry clearance and appealed that
    decision.  His appeal was heard by FTTJ O'Keeffe and in a determination
    promulgated on 28 July 2014 she dismissed the appeal before her.

 2. On 26 August 2014 the Tribunal received an application  for  permission
    to appeal which was in the following terms:

         "2.  This is an application  for  Permission  to  Appeal  to  Upper
             Tribunal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
             O'Keeffe.  This decision was promulgated on 28 July 2014.

         3.   The Entry Clearance Officer ('ECO') in Chennai, India  refused
             the appellant's entry clearance application as a  PBS  Tier  1
             Post-Study Partner on 26/08/2013.  The ECO was not  satisfied,
             on the balance of probabilities, that the  appellant  met  all
             the requirements  under  Paragraph  319C(a)  and  falls  under
             paragraph 320(7B) of the Immigration Rules.

         4.    The  appellant  is  an  Indian  national  who  was  born   on
             06/07/1986.  He was previously granted leave to enter  in  the
             UK in October 2008 under the  category  of  Student.   He  was
             later granted leave to remain under the same category.

         5.   The appellant had submitted an application for  further  leave
             to remain under the Tier  1  (General)  category  sometime  in
             2011.  The application was submitted through an  agent  namely
             Mr Azharuddin who claimed to be from South India and  an  OISC
             Registered Immigration Advisor.  This application was  refused
             on 04/05/2011 on the ground that false  educational  documents
             were provided in support of his  application.   The  appellant
             was detained and later released on  temporary  admission.   He
             was  not  given  in  country  appeal  rights  to  contend  the
             decision.

         6.   While the appellant was under temporary admission, he assisted
             the Home Office as well as the court to find  out  the  person
             who victimized other  migrants  by  encompassing  questionable
             documents  in  support  of  the   applications   without   the
             applicants' consent.

         7.   The appellant is married to  Mrs  Deepthi  Theerthala  who  is
             living in the UK under the Tier 1 (Post Study Work)  category.
             The applicant later left the UK to  make  an  entry  clearance
             application as a PBS Dependant to join his spouse.

         8.    The  application  was  refused  allegedly  on  the  following
             grounds:

                  a)   The appellant previously made application under  Tier
                      1 (General) which was refused on 04/05/2011  alleging
                      on the ground that false  financial  and  educational
                      documents  were   submitted   in   support   of   the
                      application.  As the appellant's previous application
                      was  refused   under   paragraph   322(1A)   of   the
                      Immigration Rules, any of his future  application  is
                      to be considered under paragraph 320(7B) which means,
                      the appellant will continue  to  be  refused  for  10
                      years until 05/05/2021.   The  respondent  considered
                      that, the appellant  falls  for  general  grounds  of
                      refusal and therefore, failed  to  satisfy  paragraph
                      319C(a) of the Immigration Rules.

                                   Grounds

         9.   The appellant is credible and there was no indication that the
             appellant breached any immigration rules  or  made  any  false
             submission  himself.   The  appellant  is   indeed   of   good
             character, however, the  IJ  failed  to  give  weight  on  the
             appellant's statement as well as the statement of  Mr  Lawson.
             The IJ's assessment of available evidence  was  wrong  as  she
             failed to distinguish among the falsity of documents, the real
             perpetrator and the victim.

         10.  In paragraph  27  of  her  determination  IJ  mentioned  that,
             according to Anwar and Others v SSHD (2010) the appellant  had
             point to take the matter to the First-tier Tribunal seeking in
             country right of appeal.  IJ further stated that, she did  not
             have jurisdiction to make findings as to whether  or  not  the
             2011 decision was lawful for want of appeal rights.

         11.  While IJ may have limitation to  assess  the  SSHD's  decision
             made in 2011 in regards to in  country  right  of  appeal  but
             during his current appeal she was free to consider whether  it
             is fair to impose the complete burden on the appellant for  an
             uncontended matter that arose in 2011.  It is submitted  that,
             IJ failed to assess the common law principle of fairness."

 3. Following receipt of the application  for  permission  to  appeal  FTTJ
    Lever granted permission in the following terms:

         "1.  The Appellant seeks permission to appeal, in time,  against  a
             decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge OKeeffe) who, in  a
             determination  promulgated  on  28  Jul  2014-  dismissed  the
             Appellant's appeal to enter as a PBS post study partner.

         2.   The grounds assert that the judge whilst potentially having no
             ability to consider an earlier refusal in 2011 where there had
             been no in-country right of appeal, nevertheless was  free  to
             consider the issue of fairness in this current case.

         3.   This is a  somewhat  unusual  case.   The  Appellants  current
             application had been refused under para. 320(7B) of the rules,
             because in 2011 the Appellant had supplied false documents  in
             support of that earlier application.  There was some  evidence
             to suggest that the Appellant thereafter had assisted  the  UK
             authorities to provide evidence against an Immigration advisor
             who it was said had supplied the false documents  without  the
             Appellants knowledge, and had done the same  in  a  number  of
             cases.  It was said that whilst the  CPS  had  not  pursued  a
             prosecution the OISC had suspended the advisor from practice.

         4.   Para. 320(7B) does not apply to those who seek entry clearance
             for settlement as a spouse.  In this case the application  was
             for entry clearance to  be  with  his  sponsor  who  only  had
             limited leave to remain.

         5.   There was some evidence supporting  the  Appellants  claim  to
             have assisted the UK authorities.   It  is  not  clear  if  by
             inference it was therefore accepted by  the  authorities  that
             the false documentation had been lodged without the Appellants
             knowledge.  It may have been difficult for the judge  in  this
             case to have properly determined that issue.   However  it  is
             arguable that the unusual circumstances of  this  case  placed
             the matter in a category  that  could  potentially  have  been
             examined outside of the rules.  That is not to  say  it  would
             have been successful but arguable  it  was  an  exercise  that
             should have been  undertaken  in  terms  of  fairness  to  the
             Appellant given the somewhat unusual history.

         6.   There was an arguable error of law in this case."

 4. Thus the matter came before me to determine whether  the  determination
    contains an error of law.

 5. Ms Isherwood submitted on behalf of the respondent that the  judge  was
    looking  at  evidence  of  deception  and  found  the  respondent   had
    discharged the burden of proof required of her.   With  regard  to  the
    police officer's evidence weight was attached to it and the judge  said
    at paragraph 23 that the  police  officer  had  given  no  reasons  for
    concluding in his statement why he agreed with the appellant that false
    documents were provided on the appellant's knowledge.  The wife  is  in
    the United Kingdom on a temporary basis and there is  nothing  to  stop
    her going back to India and there are no exceptional  circumstances  in
    this appeal  requiring  consideration  of  Article  8  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 6. Mr Chowdhury submitted that the burden of proof was on  the  respondent
    with regard  to  the  false  representations/deception  point  and  the
    respondent had failed  to  discharge  the  burden  of  proof  that  the
    appellant was involved with the false representation.  This is an error
    of law because the FTTJ concluded that the  respondent  had  discharged
    the burden of proof where  there  was  a  lack  of  evidence  from  the
    respondent's side.

The Determination of the First-tier Tribunal

 7. The key findings are set out in paragraphs 16 to 30  which  I  set  out
    below:

         "16. It is not disputed before me that the  appellant  had  made  a
             previous application which was refused on 4th May 2011.   That
             application had been refused as the respondent  was  satisfied
             that  the  appellant  had  submitted  false  documents.    The
             application made on 7th August 2013 was therefore  refused  in
             accordance with paragraph 320(7B) which provides  one  of  the
             general grounds on which entry clearance or leave to enter the
             UK is to be refused.  The relevant parts of paragraph  320(7B)
             provides as follows:

                  (7B) where the applicant has previously breached the  UK's
                      immigration laws (and was 18 or over at the  time  of
                      his most recent breach) by:

                      ..........

                      (d)  using Deception  in  an  application  for  entry
                           clearance, leave to enter or remain, or in  order
                           to obtain documents from the Secretary  of  State
                           or a third  party  required  in  support  of  the
                           application (whether successful or not)

         17.  Paragraph 6 of the Immigration Rules provides that  'Deception
             means  making  false  representations  or   submitting   false
             documents (whether or not material to the application).'   The
             respondent submitted the document  verification  reports  that
             resulted in the decision to refuse the appellant's application
             in 2011.  The appellant had submitted a  bank  statement  from
             ICICI Bank in his name.  Enquiries  with  that  bank  revealed
             that the documents  had  not  been  issued  by  the  bank.   A
             statement  was  also  submitted  from  the  Bank   of   India.
             Enquiries with that bank revealed that the account number  was
             invalid.  On the evidence before me I find that the respondent
             has demonstrated that the appellant submitted false  documents
             with his application in 2011.

         18.  Mr Chowdhury submitted that there  had  been  no  evidence  of
             dishonesty  in  accordance  with  the  decision  in  AA.    At
             paragraph 67 of AA Rix LJ said, 'It  is  plain  that  a  false
             document is one that tells a lie about itself.  Of  course  it
             is possible for a person to make use of a false document  (for
             instance a counterfeit currency note, but that  example,  used
             for its clarity, is rather distant from the  context  of  this
             discussion) in total ignorance of its falsity and  in  perfect
             honesty.  But the document itself is dishonest.'

         19.  Although not cited to me, I have considered the Upper Tribunal
             decision in Mumu (paragraph 320; Article 8; scope) [2012] UKUT
             00143(IAC).  At paragraph 11 the Upper Tribunal said,  '..  in
             any event, paragraph 320(7A) does not  require  the  appellant
             even to have been aware of the false representations or  false
             documents submitted.  Whoever put forward the false  materials
             plainly did so dishonestly.  The motivation  was  obvious:  to
             pretend that the appellant was over the age of 21, so  as  not
             to fall foul of paragraph 277 of the  Immigration  Rules.   It
             matters not that the  appellant  was  not  herself  dishonest,
             although she would have to have  been  extraordinarily  supine
             not to have been aware of what was being done on  her  behalf.
             The judgments in AA (Nigeria) [2010]  EWCA  Civ  773  make  it
             plain that, although  dishonesty  is  required,  it  need  not
             necessarily be that of the applicant.'




         20.  In this case the bank statements submitted were false and each
             told a lie about itself; namely that the information contained
             therein was a genuine picture of the appellant's finances.  To
             that extent, I find that the respondent has demonstrated  that
             dishonest  documents  were  submitted  with  the   appellant's
             application in 2011.

         21.  The appellant's case was that  he  had  no  knowledge  of  the
             submission of those documents and that  he  was  the  innocent
             dupe of a rogue legal representative.  I have  considered  the
             Upper Tribunal decision in Ozhogina  and  Tarasova  (deception
             within  para  320(7B)  -  nannies)  Russia  (2011)  UKUT.   At
             paragraph 21 the Upper Tribunal said, 'There is therefore  not
             in 320(7B) the proviso that deception  as  defined  can  arise
             whether or not the falsity, and indeed its materiality, was to
             the  applicant's  knowledge.'   At  paragraph  26  the   Upper
             Tribunal said, 'we are satisfied that  the  use  of  deception
             must have been as the judge said, with the  deliberate  intent
             of securing advantage in immigration terms by  the  use  of  a
             false document known to be false...'

         22.  The appellant produced a document entitled 'Statement of  fact
             in relation to Mr. Kranthi Kumar Kanukuntla'  which  has  been
             made by Barry Lawson who describes himself as a serving police
             officer.  Mr. Lawson did not attend to  give  evidence  before
             me.  I was shown e-mail correspondence between  Mr.  Chowdhury
             and Mr. Lawson which indicated that Mr. Lawson was required at
             Wood Green Crown Court on the morning of  this  hearing.   The
             weight that I can attach to his evidence is therefore  reduced
             as it was not tested in cross examination.

         23.  Although the statement provided by Mr.  Lawson  was  submitted
             for the benefit of proceedings  before  the  Tribunal,  I  was
             surprised that it was not in  the  standard  statement  format
             usually seen when police officers make statements.  Indeed the
             first statement provided did not contain Mr. Lawson's shoulder
             number.  That was corrected in a second statement.  Mr. Lawson
             said in the body of his statement, 'I  can  confirm  that  Mr.
             Kanukuntla  did  not  make,  alter   or   supply   the   false
             documentation within his application and was unaware that  his
             application contained such documents until the application was
             refused by the Home Office.'  Mr. Lawson gives no  reasons  as
             to why he comes to that conclusion beyond  pointing  out  that
             the appellant agreed to be a witness in the case  against  his
             immigration adviser.

         24.  No evidence was provided to show  how  the  appellant's  first
             application was made or any correspondence with the new lawyer
             that the appellant instructed once he became suspicious of his
             first representative.  Ms Theerthala said in evidence that she
             had contacted Mr. Lawson before this hearing.  She  was  asked
             whether she had asked him to  provide  any  other  documentary
             evidence and she said 'He  told  us  if  you  need  any  other
             documents but  unfortunately  he  is  not  here  today.'   Mr.
             Chowdhury said that  Mr.  Lawson  had  been  asked  about  the
             investigation by the OISC and Mr. Lawson had said that it  was
             unlikely that the OISC would assist with giving information as
             it was confidential.  There was no evidence that any  attempts
             had been made to contact the OISC for information relevant  to
             the appellant's case  and  Mr.  Lawson's  statement  makes  no
             reference to the OISC being unwilling to disclose  information
             because of confidentiality.

         25.  In the notice of decision, the respondent  referred  to  false
             financial and educational documents being submitted  with  the
             appellant's application.  In his statement the appellant makes
             no reference to the false bank statements that were  submitted
             and neither did  his  witness.   On  the  evidence  before  me
             considered  as  a  whole,  I  find  that  the  respondent  has
             demonstrated that deception, as defined in paragraph 6 of  the
             Rules, was used by the appellant in his  previous  application
             for leave to remain.  The application was made by or on behalf
             of the appellant and the false statements submitted are in his
             name.  None of the evidence before me  supports  a  conclusion
             that those documents were submitted on the appellant's  behalf
             by a rogue representative acting on  his  behalf  without  his
             knowledge.  I find that the bank statements were submitted  in
             order to demonstrate that  the  appellant  met  the  financial
             requirements applicable to his application at  that  time.   I
             find that the respondent has demonstrated that  the  deception
             was for the deliberate intent  of  securing  an  advantage  in
             immigration terms.

         26.  Mr. Chowdhury submitted that the decision made in May 2011 has
             been unlawful as the appellant had not been given a  right  of
             appeal.  No documentary evidence was submitted to support that
             assertion.  It is impossible for  me  therefore  to  make  any
             finding as to whether or not the appellant was given  a  right
             of appeal.  In any event the 2011 decision is not the decision
             that is appealed before me.

         27.  In the appellant's bundle was a document entitled  Grounds  of
             Appeal although this document was not in fact  submitted  with
             the notice of appeal.  In that document there is  a  reference
             to the Court of Appeal decision Anwar and Others v SSHD (2010)
             EWCA Civ  1275.   The  point  in  Anwar  was  whether  if  the
             immigration  decision  which  was  being   appealed   to   the
             Immigration and Asylum Chamber carried no right of  in-country
             appeal, but the point was not taken on appeal  to  the  First-
             tier Tribunal, could it thereafter be contended that there was
             no jurisdiction to entertain the appeal.  I do not read  Anwar
             as authority for any suggestion that I  have  jurisdiction  to
             make any findings as to whether or not the 2011  decision  was
             lawful for want of appeal rights.

         28.  Paragraph 320(7B) is one of the mandatory grounds  of  refusal
             contained in Part 9 of the Immigration Rules.  Where it bites,
             the  respondent  has  no  discretion   but   to   refuse   the
             application.  For the reasons set out above, I find  that  the
             decision was in accordance with the Immigration Rules.

         29.  I consider the appeal  then  on  human  rights  grounds.   The
             appellant's spouse has leave to remain in the UK as a  Tier  1
             (Post study work migrant).  It was accepted on behalf  of  the
             appellant that he could not meet the requirements of  Appendix
             FM or paragraph 276ADE on the grounds of his family or private
             life.  Nor could his spouse.  The appellant's  case  therefore
             has to be considered in accordance with the guidance found  in
             the cases of MF Nigeria (2013) EWCA  Civ  1192,  Nagre  (2013)
             EWHC 720 (Admin) and Gulshan (2013)  UKUT  640.   These  cases
             make clear that proportionality  must  be  looked  at  in  the
             context of the Immigration  Rules  with  no  need  to  make  a
             specific assessment under Article 8 if it is  clear  from  the
             facts that there are no particular compelling  or  exceptional
             circumstances requiring consideration.

         30.  I bear in mind that Article 8 does not afford  the  parties  a
             right to choose where to enjoy their married life.  I asked Ms
             Theerthala whether there were any reasons why she could not go
             back to India to enjoy married life with  her  husband  there.
             She said that she wanted to settle in  the  UK  and  that  her
             goals and ambitions were in the UK.  She then  said  that  she
             did not want to go back and she wanted to live here.   On  the
             evidence before me,  I  find  that  there  are  no  particular
             compelling or exceptional circumstances  in  this  case  which
             require  consideration  outside  the  Rules.   Mr.   Chowdhury
             submitted that the exceptional  circumstances  were  that  the
             appellant would be barred from entering the UK until 2021.   I
             do not find that to be  an  exceptional  circumstance  on  the
             facts of this particular case.   On  the  evidence  before  me
             there is nothing to stop this couple resuming family  life  in
             India should that be their decision.  The fact that they would
             rather live in the UK does not afford them  any  rights  under
             Article 8."

Decision

 8. Contrary to what is submitted in the grounds which are an attempt to re-
    argue matters already placed before  the  judge,  it  can  be  seen  at
    paragraph 17 that the judge properly directed herself to the meaning of
    deception as set out in paragraph 6 of the Immigration  Rules.   It  is
    incontrovertible that two false documents had been  supplied  with  the
    earlier application.  Evidence that that was so came not only from  the
    respondent but also from  the  appellant  in  the  form  of  a  witness
    statement from police officer Barry Lawson  who  supplied  evidence  in
    support of the appeal.  The appellant did not seek to distance  himself
    from the fact that false documents had been  lodged  with  the  earlier
    application but he said that he had no knowledge that  those  documents
    had been submitted and he was  the  innocent  dupe  of  a  rogue  legal
    representative.  He co-operated  with  the  prosecution  of  the  rogue
    representative  and  gave  evidence  in   support   of   the   criminal
    prosecution.

 9. The FTTJ was fully aware of the appellant's conduct  in  assisting  the
    criminal prosecution at the appeal before her but she found none of the
    evidence before her supported a conclusion that  those  documents  were
    submitted on the appellant's behalf without his knowledge.   The  judge
    made a positive finding of fact that the bank statements were submitted
    in order to demonstrate the appellant met  the  financial  requirements
    applicable to his application at that time.  She found  the  respondent
    had discharged the burden of proof in showing that  deception  was  for
    the deliberate intent of securing an advantage in immigration terms.

10. The judge has given cogent reasons for finding that the respondent  had
    discharged the burden of proof upon  her  in  respect  of  the  earlier
    application consequently the application which was the subject  of  the
    appeal before the FTTJ was bound to be refused.   As the judge  pointed
    out paragraph 320(7B) is  one  of  the  mandatory  grounds  of  refusal
    contained in Part 9 of the Immigration Rules and where it bites (as  it
    did in the appeal before her) the  respondent  had  no  option  but  to
    refuse the application.

11. The judge went on to consider Article 8 properly noting that it  was  a
    qualified right and giving adequate reasons for finding there  were  no
    particular  compelling  or  exceptional  circumstances  which  required
    consideration outside of the Rules.

12. Although not argued before her that decision was plainly correct in the
    light of the guidance  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Meera  Muhiadeen
    Haleemudeen v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 558 where Beatson found at paragraph 40:

         "I, however, consider that the FTT Judge did err in his approach to
         Article 8. ......  These new provisions in  the  Immigration  Rules
         are a central part of the legislative and policy context  in  which
         the interests of  immigration  control  are  balanced  against  the
         interests and rights of people who have come to  this  country  and
         wish to settle in it.  Overall the Secretary of State's  policy  as
         to when an interference with an Article 8 right will be regarded as
         disproportionate is more particularised in the new  Rules  than  it
         had previously been.  The new Rules require stronger bonds with the
         United Kingdom before leave will be given under them...... ."

Summary of Decisions

The judge did not err in law.  I do not set aside the decision.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal will stand.

No anonymity order is made.



Signed                                       14 November 2014

Judge E B Grant
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

