

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/17954/2012
                                                               OA/17955/2012
                                                               OA/17956/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 22nd October 2013                          |On 7th November 2013         |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                 MANJIT KAUR
                                JASPEET KAUR
                                SURPREET KAUR
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Malik instructed by Malik Law Chambers Solicitors.

For the Respondent: Mr Avery - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge Kanagaratnam promulgated  on  17th  June  2013,  following  a
        hearing at Hatton Cross on 29th May 2013, in which he dismissed the
        appeals of all three appellants against the  refusal  of  an  Entry
        Clearance Officer (ECO) to grant them leave  to  enter  the  United
        Kingdom for the purposes of settlement.


     2. Permission to appeal was refused by another judge of the First-tier
        Tribunal but granted on a renewed  application  by  Upper  Tribunal
        Judge Craig on 9th September 2013.


     3. The Appellants' are a mother and her two children, all nationals of
        India, born on the 2nd January 1967, 19th September  1995  and  2nd
        July 1998 respectively. They were refused under the  provisions  of
        paragraphs 281 and 301, as applicable, of the Rules by the  ECO  in
        decisions dated 28th August 2012.



Discussion



     4. The grounds of appeal prepared by Mr Malik clearly indicate that he
        considers this to be a suitable case to seek a finding in relation
        to the effect of the ECO's policy on the application of paragraph
        320 (11) of the Immigration Rules. Paragraph 5 of the grounds on
        which permission to appeal is sought provides:


              5.  There is one ground, namely the Entry Clearance Officer's
   decisions to                 refuse the Appellant's application under
   Paragraph 320(11) of the                      Immigration Rules is
   inconsistent with her own published policy and
   thereby not in accordance with the law and, therefore, the FTT erred in
   law                 in upholding it.


     5. The ECO refused the appeal by reference to paragraph 281 and 301 of
        the Rules only and it was the Presenting Officer before the First-
        tier Tribunal who asked the Judge to consider whether paragraph 320
        (11) was engaged.  Judge Kanagaratnam found, on the basis of the
        evidence he heard and read, that the First Appellant had contrived
        in a significant way to frustrate the intention of the Immigration
        Rules in that her conduct fell within the relevant guidelines which
        the ECO would have observed if he knew that the First Appellant's
        husband was not with her in India at the time she claimed him to
        have been, when making an earlier application.


     6. Mr Malik sought to rely upon an unreported decision of the Upper
        Tribunal, Gurpreet Singh v ECO, New Delhi (OA/04089/2011), and
        there was much discussion regarding his ability to do so at the
        hearing.   I indicated my preliminary view that as a result of the
        fact the Upper Tribunal is now a Superior Court of Record all
        decisions of the Tribunal should be available for reference
        purposes. However, following the hearing I have considered the
        Upper Tribunal Immigration and Asylum Chamber Guidance Note 2011,
        No 2, to which I was not referred by Mr Malik, which was amended in
        February 2012 and September 2013.  In relation to the use of
        unreported determinations the guidance provides:


              3.  Most decisions of the Chamber are unreported. It is not
   considered                       conducive to the overriding objective
   for thousands of fact sensitive                    decisions to be
   published, placing onerous obligations on advocates and
   litigants in person to search for decisions of potential relevance to
   their               own.


              4.  Following promulgation to the parties other reported
   decisions are stored                  electronically and may be accessed
   on the chamber website at http://                  www.judiciary.gov.uk
   /media/tribunal-decisions/immigration-asylum-               chamber.  By
   the terms of the Senior President's Practice Direction 11 of
   unreported decisions of the Chamber may not be cited as authority without
                  the permission of the judge that it will only be granted
   sparingly where                  there is good reason to do so.


     7. There is now a new link to the database of Chamber decisions,
        https://tribunalsdecisions.service.gov.uk/utiac/decisions, which
        makes it easy to access all decisions of the Upper Tribunal.  I do
        not find on the facts of this case it is appropriate for me to go
        beyond the guidance note issued by the previous President, Mr
        Justice Blake, but I do accept that this is a case in which
        permission should be granted to Mr Malik to rely upon the case of
        Gurpreet Singh.


     8. Before considering the merits of his claim I note that all
        decisions of the High Court, another superior court of record, and
        the Court of Appeal are reported.  The issue is the weight given to
        any decision which will be fact specific.  Reported decisions will
        warrant greater weight being given to them as they are considered
        to be of use in providing guidance and fulfil the criteria for
        reported determinations as will country guidance cases, the benefit
        of which has been recognised by the Court of Appeal.


     9. The case of Gurpreet Singh was not reported for the reasons set out
        in paragraph 26 of that determination where the Panel state: "Given
        however the conspicuous failure of the respondent to offer adequate
        assistance to the Upper Tribunal on this matter, we consider that
        this case is not an appropriate one in which to seek to enunciate
        any general guidance".   The Panel therefore recognised that they
        were not seized of sufficient evidence to allow him to give any
        form of authoritative guidance, which is relevant to the weight to
        be given to their findings.


    10. Mr Malik's point arises from the fact that when an ECO is
        considering paragraph 320 (11), the Policy Guidance and
        Instructions issued to an ECO states that ECO's will need to obtain
        an Entry Clearance Managers (ECM) authorisation for refusals under
        paragraph 320 (11). Mr Malik's argument is that if such
        authorisation is not sought the refusal must be "not in accordance
        with the law".


    11. The Panel in Gurpreet Singh held that the 320 (11) decision made in
        that case by an ECO was not in accordance with the law for the
        following reasons:


              24. First of all, in the light of the failure of the
   respondent to confirm whether                 or not the decision under
   appeal was the subject to prior ECM                         authorisation
   such as is required by Entry Clearance Guidance instructions,
   we are not satisfied it was made in accordance with established policy
          instructions. As such it falls foul of D.S. Abdi [1996] Imm AR 148
   principles.


              25. Second, even if we were to accept that the decision was
   made in accordance               with Entry Clearance Guidelines
   instructions on prior ECM authorisation,               we cannot, without
    more, be satisfied that this authorisation process did
   not in fact have the effect of improperly restricting the individual ECO
   (as                 distinct from the ECM)'s exercise of judgement under
   paragraph 320 (11).                   Applying the guidance set out by
   the Court of Appeal in NA (Iraq) at [26]               and [38], and in
   light of the failure of the respondent to furnish relevant
   information, we are not satisfied that the procedure, if followed (as Ms
              Tanner and Ms Kenny urged us to accept must have been
   followed) did not                restrict the freedom of the ECO to make
   his own decision on the particular                 facts.  Indeed,
   bearing in mind that in NA the focus was on paragraph 320
   (3) which required only a judgement on whether there had been a failure
   to                  produce a valid national passport or other document
   "satisfactorily                       establishing" his identity or
   nationality, it might be thought in respect of                  a
   provision such as paragraph 320 (11), requiring a much broader
     discretionary judgement, the importance of ensuring policy instructions
                  did not fetter the ECO from making his own decision were
   even more               pressing.


    12. Mr Malik submitted that what applied in Gurpreet Singh equally
        applies to the present case such that the same result should
        follow.  There is however a material difference between Gurpreet
        Singh and this appeal in that in the former case the decision to
        refuse by reference to 320 (11) was made by an ECO whereas in this
        case the Tribunal was invited to consider it by the Presenting
        Officer as a result of issues arising from the evidence.  The
        decision it applied was made by the Judge.  The guidance considered
        by the Panel in Gurpreet Singh is clearly guidance published to
        assist ECO's making decisions 'in post'. The consequences of such a
        decision can be severe and hence the introduction of the second
        layer of administrative review by the ECM before such decisions can
        be approved.  Whilst the issues identified in Gurpreet Singh may
        need to be the subject of further findings by the Upper Tribunal in
        an appropriate case, I do not find it proved on the fact that this
        is such a case.


    13. The burden is upon the Appellants to prove that the guidance given
        to ECO's has equal effect and application upon Presenting Officers
        who appear before the Tribunals as specialist advocates. They
        represent both the ECO's and the Secretary of State for the Home
        Department.  I find any claim they are equally bound not to have
        been substantiated on the basis of a claim they appear in the
        capacity of an agent for the decision maker such that they have no
        discretionary power of their own in relation to cases they are
        dealing with.  Indeed, it is established practice that Presenting
        Officers have power to raise issues under the Rules in relation to
        appeals which may not previously have been considered for which
        such an unfettered discretion must exist, especially if matters
        arise from oral or other evidence prepared for the purposes of an
        appeal hearing which was not previously made available or known to
        the original decision maker.


    14. To suggest that a Presenting Officer, as a professional advocate,
        is unable to exercise discretion as a result of a restriction
        placed upon an ECO (if this actually exists such as to make a
        decision unlawful if there has been no ECM approval), to the extent
        that they would required to seek the authorisation of an ECM in
        such circumstances, cannot be in the interests of justice or in
        accordance with the overriding objectives of the Tribunal;
        especially based upon the resulting delay.  I do not find it
        substantiated that unless a Presenting Officer appearing before a
        Tribunal who thinks 320 (11) or other 320 grounds arise consults an
        ECM renders that decision "not in accordance with the law". It is
        also relevant, as noted above, that in a case in which such issues
        arise at hearing the decision the rule applies is actually that of
        the Judge who cannot have his or her judicial discretion fettered
        by guidance issued to an ECO or otherwise.


    15. On the basis of the evidence that arose during the hearing before
        the First-tier tribunal, it is clear that the requirements of 320
        (11) were met for the reasons set out. Such a finding in relation
        to engagement of this rule is within the range of decisions open to
        him on the evidence and legally sustainable. The decision was
        therefore determinative of the appeal.


Decision

    16. There is no material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    17. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules
        2005.


          I make no such order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal
   Procedure               (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 6th November 2013


