
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/17005/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 12 September 2013                       |                           |
|                                           |On 18 September 2013       |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

                              MR KHEM KUMAR ALE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:

                            For the Appellant: Mr C Howells of
           counsel instructed by N C Brothers & Co
          For the Respondent: Mr I Jarvis a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Nepal who was born on 26  May  1981.  He
      has been given permission to appeal the  determination  of  First-Tier
      Tribunal Judge Graham dismissing his appeal against  the  respondent's
      decision of 17 August 2012 to refuse to grant him entry  clearance  to
      settle in the United Kingdom as the spouse of his sponsor Rubi Lingden
      under the provisions of paragraph 281 of the Immigration Rules.


   2. The respondent refused the  application  on  the  basis  that  in  the
      absence of the original marriage certificate there was no satisfactory
      evidence to establish that the appellant and the sponsor  had  entered
      into a valid and legal marriage. Furthermore,  given  the  absence  of
      evidence of contact between them, the  respondent  was  not  satisfied
      that they intended to live together permanently as  spouses  and  that
      their marriage was subsisting.


   3. The appellant appealed and the judge heard the appeal on 5 June  2013.
      Both parties were represented and the sponsor gave evidence.  By  this
      stage the original marriage certificate had been provided.  The  judge
      considered the evidence  as  to  the  validity  of  the  marriage  but
      concluded that there had been no valid marriage  because  the  sponsor
      had married before she was 20 years of age  which  was  not  permitted
      even with parental consent.  She  went  on  to  find  that  there  was
      insufficient evidence to support the claim that the couple had been in
      a relationship since 2008 or that they were in a subsisting  marriage.
      The appeal was dismissed under the  Immigration  Rules  and  on  human
      rights grounds.


   4. The appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal.  The  judge
      assessed the position and reached her findings as to the  validity  of
      the marriage in paragraph 16 to 18. She said  that  the  evidence  was
      confusing and I agree. It is common ground that at  the  date  of  the
      marriage the appellant was over 20 and the sponsor 19. There appear to
      be two parallel systems affecting the validity of marriages in  Nepal.
      One is the Muluki Ain (Country Code) 2019 (1963 in our calendar) which
      appears to indicate that marriage is illegal unless both parties  have
      reached the age of 18 whilst between 18 and 20  parental  or  guardian
      consent is required. The other is the Marriage Registration  Act  2028
      (1971) which appears to indicate that marriage  is  not  legal  unless
      both parties have reached the age of 20 but without any provision  for
      consent at an earlier age.


   5. The Presenting Officer submitted to the judge that as the Country Code
      preceded the Marriage Registration Act the provisions  of  the  latter
      should be preferred, presumably on the basis that the last in point of
      time was the most likely to be the correct law. The judge adopted this
      submission as her conclusion in paragraph 18 finding that marriage was
      not legal under the age of 20 even with parental consent. As a  result
      the appellant and the sponsor were not legally married.


   6. I find that this is both factually incorrect  and  too  simplistic  an
      approach in that it fails to take into account all the evidence before
      the judge. The report from the Centre for Reproductive Rights dated 26
      April 2013 which was before the judge indicates that after a review in
      1994 the Country Code was amended to change the legal age of  marriage
      to 18 years with parental  consent  and  20  years  without.  This  is
      supported by footnote 495 to the Country  Code  which  indicates  that
      this provision was not in the original version of the  Code  and  that
      the change was made by the 11th Amendment.  These  factors  provide  a
      strong indication that the provisions  of  the  Country  Code  in  the
      version before the judge post-dated the  provisions  of  the  Marriage
      Registration Act, not the other way round.


   7. Furthermore, in reaching her conclusion the judge did not address  the
      other evidence before her which, I accept,  was  not  straightforward.
      The Tweet from the United States Embassy in Kathmandu  says  that  the
      marriage age in Nepal is 20 for both men and  women.  At  the  hearing
      before the judge both representatives accepted that the statement from
      the advocate in Nepal was incorrect and it is no longer relied on. The
      report from the Centre for Reproductive Rights states,  with  reasons,
      that the legal age for marriage is 18 with  parental  consent  and  20
      without. This is also the view of the Plan Asia Regional Office report
      which, significantly, also states that the change came with  the  11th
      Amendment to the Nepalese Country Code.


   8. I find that in relation to assessing the validity of the marriage  the
      judge erred in law by making a  factual  error  at  the  core  of  her
      conclusion and by failing properly to assess all the  evidence  before
      her.


   9. I also find that the judge erred in law in relation to her  assessment
      of whether the appellant and the sponsor intended to live  permanently
      with each  other  and  whether  their  marriage  was  subsisting.  She
      concluded  that  there  was  insufficient  evidence  to  support  such
      conclusions but appears to have done so on the basis of the  documents
      without considering or making any findings in  relation  to  the  oral
      evidence of the sponsor. In paragraph 15 she recorded the  appellant's
      representative's submission that she should find the sponsor to  be  a
      credible witness. Unfortunately, there  are  no  findings  as  to  the
      credibility of the sponsor or her evidence.


  10. Part way through Mr Howell's submissions Mr Jarvis conceded  that  the
      judge made errors of law and that her decision should be set aside.  I
      agree and so find. As the sponsor was present, with an interpreter and
      it was  not  suggested  that  any  further  documentary  evidence  was
      required I suggested and the representatives agreed that I should hear
      oral evidence from the sponsor and  re-determine  the  appeal  without
      adjournment.


  11. At this point Mr Jarvis made an important  concession  on  behalf  the
      respondent; it was now accepted that the appellant and the sponsor had
      entered into a valid marriage. As a result the only outstanding  point
      in issue was that under paragraph  281  (iii);  whether  each  of  the
      parties intended to live permanently with the  other  as  his  or  her
      spouse and the marriage was subsisting.


  12. I heard oral evidence from the sponsor which is set out in  my  record
      of proceedings. She gave evidence in chief  and  adopted  her  witness
      statement. She  was  cross-examined  at  some  length  by  Mr  Jarvis.
      Entirely properly a large part of his cross-examination  consisted  of
      taking the sponsor through the minutiae of dates, places, family names
      and addresses. I cannot recall when I last heard a witness give,  from
      memory,  what  Mr  Jarvis  conceded  were  almost  perfectly  accurate
      answers. She also produced another photograph other than  the  wedding
      photographs showing that she and the appellant had met in Nepal  since
      their marriage.


  13. At the end of the sponsor's  evidence  I  heard  submissions  from  Mr
      Jarvis. He said that he did not challenge the sponsor's  evidence.  He
      accepted her evidence and conceded that, as a result, I  should  allow
      the appellant's appeal. In the circumstances I  did  not  call  on  Mr
      Howells to make any submissions.


  14. I have not been asked to anonymise this determination and see no  good
      reason to do so.


  15. I find that it was both fair and appropriate for Mr Jarvis to  concede
      firstly the validity of the marriage and subsequently  the  appeal.  I
      find that the appellant has established to the  required  standard  of
      the balance  of  probabilities  that  he  meets  the  requirements  of
      paragraph 281 of the Immigration Rules.


  16. Having concluded that the judge erred in law I set aside her  decision
      and remake it by allowing the appellant's appeal under the Immigration
      Rules.












      .............................................
            Signed                                    Date 13 September
      2013
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

