
IAC-MD-BFD-V1
                                    [pic]

First-tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/17649/2013
     OA/17650/2013
     OA/17648/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 5th December 2014              |On 22nd December 2014             |
|                                  |                                  |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              miss elfy midimo
                               mr kulamba zubi
                              mr waswezia zubi
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mrs Z Preston, of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appeal of the ECO Nairobi against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Hillis) which in a  determination  promulgated  on
    10th July 2014 allowed the  appeals  of  the  Respondents  against  the
    refusal of their applications  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  as  the
    dependent relatives of their UK Sponsor Gishangu Zubi.

 2.  Whilst  this  is  an  appeal  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer,  for
    convenience I shall refer to the Respondents as  "the  Appellants"  and
    the Entry Clearance Officer as "the  Respondent"  in  line  with  their
    respective positions when they appeared before the First-tier Tribunal.



History of the Appeal

 3. The Appellants are citizens  of  DRC  born  28th  November  1988,  20th
    January 1991 and 3rd April 1994. They seek entry clearance as the adult
    dependant relatives of their Sponsor Gishangu Zubi, a man who is in the
    United Kingdom with recognised refugee status.

 4. The eldest Appellant  Elfy  Midimo  is  the  biological  child  of  the
    Sponsor; the other two Appellants are his de  facto  adopted  children.
    The Sponsor entered the UK in 2007 claiming asylum. He  was  recognised
    as a refugee in 2007 and subsequently his wife and six  other  children
    were granted entry clearance to join him under the Respondent's  Family
    Reunion policy. It is correct to say that one of the Sponsor's children
    Gisele Kapata (who is also an adopted child and a minor) was  initially
    refused entry clearance, but following an appeal before FtT Mensah, her
    application was granted and she also travelled to the United Kingdom to
    join the Sponsor and his wife.

 5. So far as the three Appellants  before  me  are  concerned,  they  made
    application for entry clearance on 30th  July  2013.  The  Respondent's
    refusal decision is dated 9th August 2013.

Decision of First-tier Tribunal

 6. In a determination promulgated on 10th July 2014 Judge  Hillis  allowed
    the Appellants' appeals under Article 8 ECHR. The three Appellants were
    all adults at the date of application for entry (and therefore  at  the
    date of decision) and lived in Kinshasa, where  they  had  lived  since
    2009 when their mother left them to join  the  Sponsor  in  the  United
    Kingdom with the younger children.

 7. In his determination Judge Hillis concluded concerning all  Appellants'
    that Article 8 was met and therefore he allowed their appeals. This was
    on the basis that they had  demonstrated  emotional  ties  well  beyond
    those  experienced  in  the  normal  family  situation,  even  in   the
    environment of the DRC. At  [28] of his determination he said;

         "I find that as this family has been  involuntarily  separated  the
         essential aspects of their  family  life  together  have  continued
         notwithstanding their physical  separation.  The  remaining  family
         members have simply been waiting for the opportunity  to  join  the
         rest of their family in  the  UK  and  have  constantly  stayed  in
         contact with each other. I do not find that these  Appellants  have
         set up, either voluntarily  or  involuntarily,  a  new  independent
         household during the period of separation".

 8. He continued at [29];

         "I accept the Sponsor's evidence that he has paid the rent  on  the
         Appellants' house and that they have been financially dependent  on
         him during their  enforced  separation.  I  do  not  find,  in  the
         exceptional circumstances of these Appellants, that the  fact  they
         are now over eighteen years-of-age  they  have  no  more  than  the
         normal emotional familial ties. In my judgment, the  separation  of
         these Appellants from their father for the period 2007 to 2014  and
         from their mother and siblings from 2009 to date will have  created
         emotional ties well beyond those experienced in the  normal  family
         situation, even in the environment of the DRC".

Submissions

 9. Mrs Preston before me relied on the findings of Judge Hillis (and Judge
    Mensah before him) that the Sponsor was found to be a credible witness.
    It was found  credible  that  application  for  the  passports  of  the
    Appellants had been made at the same time as the  application  for  the
    passports of their siblings. Therefore I should  accept  as  did  Judge
    Hillis, that the three Appellants applied for their  passports  at  the
    same time as other family members and had their passport been issued at
    that time then they would have been granted entry clearance at the same
    time as the other family members. This made their cases exceptional and
    compelling and their Article 8 claims should be allowed.

10. Mr Diwnycz maintained  the  stance  set  out  in  the  grounds  seeking
    permission. He said that the Appellants could  not  qualify  under  the
    Immigration Rules and that no good or compelling reasons had  been  put
    forward, within the meaning of  Article  8  ECHR,  for  granting  leave
    outside the Rules. All three Appellants are adults and were so  at  the
    date of decision. They have been living apart from their parents  since
    2009 without any  recorded  mishap.  There  is  no  evidence  that  the
    relationship between the Appellants and their parents and  siblings  go
    beyond normal emotional ties as outlined in Kugathas.

Has the Judge Erred?

11. The findings of  the  FtT  in  my  judgment  fail  to  demonstrate  any
    evidential basis for the conclusions it reached.  What  the  Judge  has
    done is simply entered in to speculation and this is seen by the phrase
    "in my judgment the separation of these Appellants  from  their  father
    for the period of 2007 to 2014 and from their mother and siblings  from
    2009 to date  will  have  created  emotional  ties  well  beyond  those
    experienced in the normal family situation". To base a conclusion  upon
    speculation is unjustifiable and for this reason I  am  satisfied  that
    the Judge has misdirected himself on the relevant test for establishing
    that the Respondent's decision breached Article  8  ECHR.  In  addition
    because of the sparse findings on the evidence  in  the  determination,
    this has led the Judge to give insufficient reasons  for  his  findings
    and this renders the determination legally unsustainable.

12. Having announced to the parties my decision that the  determination  of
    Judge  Hillis  must  be  set  aside  for  legal  error,  I  asked   the
    representatives if there was any reason why I  should  not  proceed  to
    remake the decision. Both representatives agreed that I had  before  me
    all the available evidence. Mrs Preston on  behalf  of  the  Appellants
    confirmed that there was no further evidence  she  wished  to  call.  I
    therefore proceeded to  hear  submissions  from  both  representatives.
    Essentially these submissions repeated those put forward earlier at the
    error of law stage.

Consideration and Findings

13. My starting point in this appeal is the date of decision which  is  9th
    August 2013. It is  accepted  that  when  dealing  with  out-of-country
    appeals, one is constrained by taking into  account  facts  only  which
    were in existence at the date of  decision.  However  I  remind  myself
    that, whilst  evidence  of  post  decision  facts  are  precluded,  the
    admission of further evidence adduced in order to  establish  what  the
    true picture was at the time the decision was made, is not.

14. At the date of decision all three Appellants were adults  aged  24,  22
    and 19 years of age respectively. They were all living  at  an  address
    for which their father pays the rent. They remain at  that  address  to
    date. It is an address which according to the Sponsor's evidence at the
    FtT hearing, his wife found for the Appellants prior to  her  departure
    from the  DRC  in  2009.  All  three  Appellants  were  and  still  are
    maintained by their father. All three Appellants have  received  higher
    education. They maintained contact with their parents. There is  simply
    no evidence before me to  demonstrate  that  Article  8  ECHR  is  even
    engaged. According to the Sponsor's statement the Appellants miss their
    siblings -  that  is  not  unnatural.  The  Appellants  mother  reports
    distress  at  being  separated  from  them,   but   equally   that   is
    unsurprising.

15. Judge Hillis did correctly identify in [8] of his  determination,  that
    these appeals are out-of-county appeals and  even  in  Article  8  ECHR
    cases, only facts which  were  in  existence  at  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer's date of decision can be taken into account. This is of course
    subject to my observations in paragraph 13 above.

16. What facts can be taken into account:

      i) First the Appellants at the date of decision were all adults.

     ii) They have family members and friends in the DRC.

    iii) They live in rented accommodation which is paid for by the  Sponsor
         and which was arranged for them by the Sponsor's  wife  before  she
         left the DRC to join her husband in the UK.  All  three  Appellants
         are maintained by funds which are sent from the UK.

     iv) The Sponsor in the UK is wholly reliant on public funds.

      v)  There is no suggestion that the three appellants are suffering any
         kind of serious medical complaint or are in  any  sort  of  danger.
         They have remained in the DRC since 2009.

17. On these facts I find it hard to  see  that  Article  8  ECHR  is  even
    engaged in these appeals. I am told,  and  I  accept,  that  the  three
    Appellants keep in contact with the Sponsor and their younger siblings.
    That is to be expected, but nothing has been put forward to  show  that
    this contact cannot continue. Nothing has been put forward to show that
    the arrangements made for the three Appellants cannot continue.

18. It is unfortunate perhaps that the three Appellants' passports did  not
    arrive in 2009 along with those of the other  family  members,  but  at
    that time the first and second Appellants would have  been  adults,  or
    approaching adulthood, in any event.

19. Even if I am wrong about Article 8 ECHR not being engaged and the  five
    stage test in Razgar is applied then  in  my  judgment  that  does  not
    assist the Appellants' cause either.  What  has  to  be  looked  at  is
    whether the Respondent's decision is proportionate  to  the  legitimate
    aim of  immigration  control.  What  was  before  the  Respondent  were
    applications by three adult siblings to join their parents in  the  UK,
    their parents being reliant upon public funds. There was no evidence at
    the date of decision of anything other than the normal  emotional  ties
    between parents and their adult children. It has  been  said  that  the
    Appellants' case is somehow exceptional in  that  had  their  passports
    been issued in 2009, they would have been granted entry clearance under
    the Respondent's family reunion policy. That is a question that  cannot
    be resolved. The reality is that  they  made  their  applications  when
    adults and so far as the evidence laid before me shows, their needs are
    being met in the DRC. It is noteworthy that all three  Appellants  have
    received higher education.  Because the Sponsor is reliant upon  public
    funds to fund himself his wife and their minor children here in the UK,
    any entry by the three Appellants  would  necessarily  add  to  further
    public funds being expended.

20. Looking at the totality of the  evidence  therefore,  the  Respondent's
    decision to  refuse  these  applications  is  proportionate  and  these
    appeals are dismissed.



Notice of Decision

The FtT Judge erred in law. His decision is hereby set aside. I  remake  the
decision dismissing the Appellants'  appeals  against  the  Entry  Clearance
Officer - Nairobi's decision to refuse entry.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed        Date 5th December 2014



Judge ROBERTS
Judge of the Upper Tribunal




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeals and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed        Date 5th December 2014

Judge ROBERTS
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

