
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: oa/17850/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14 October 2013                            |On 18 October 2013           |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PETER LANE

                                   Between

                                kevin cubero

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Ms H Horsley, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal brought by the Entry  Clearance  Officer,  New  York,
    against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal following a hearing  on
    4 February 2013 in which  that  Tribunal  allowed  the  appeal  of  the
    applicant, Mr Kevin Cubero, a citizen of the United States, against the
    decision of the Entry Clearance Officer to refuse him  entry  clearance
    to the United Kingdom as the spouse of a person present and settled  in
    this country.

2.   The sole issue so far as I am concerned concerns paragraph  320(18)  of
    the Immigration Rules.  That  paragraph  states  that  save  where  the
    Immigration Officer is satisfied that admission would be justified  for
    strong compassionate reasons, conviction in any country  including  the
    United Kingdom of an offence which if committed in the  United  Kingdom
    is punishable with imprisonment for a term  of  twelve  months  or  any
    greater punishment, or if committed outside the United Kingdom would be
    so punishable if the constituting offence had occurred  in  the  United
    Kingdom is a ground on which refusal of entry  clearance  or  leave  to
    enter  should  normally  be  applied.   In  other  words  this   is   a
    discretionary power to be exercised in the first instance by the  Entry
    Clearance Officer but if appealed it is the function of the  First-tier
    Tribunal to re-exercise that discretion.

2.   The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal set out his reasons  for  allowing
    the appeal at paragraphs 11 to 15 of his determination.   In  paragraph
    11 he noted the nature of the offence which was one count  in  2009  of
    cocaine possession for which  the  claimant  received  what  the  judge
    described as a relatively light sentence of probation and a fine.   The
    judge noted that the offence was never hidden from the authorities  and
    that the claimant had completed his sentence with regard to his  period
    of probation.  He had not committed any further offence and  there  had
    been a passage of time in which according to the judge  the  claimant's
    behaviour had not been seen to be criminal.  The judge noted  that  the
    claimant had worked and had shown signs  of  maturity.   He  said  that
    whilst the five year period for the offence being spent had not elapsed
    the claimant was now more than three fifths of  the  way  through  that
    period.  The authorities in the United States did not wish for  him  to
    remain on probation which he had completed.

3.    The  judge  then  went  on  to  note  that  other  matters   regarding
    maintenance and accommodation were satisfied,  that  is  not  an  issue
    which is pursued before me today.  At paragraph 14 the judge considered
    the evidence not only from  the  claimant  but  also  from  the  person
    described as the sponsor, that is the wife of the claimant, Mrs Cubero.
     She had given evidence in front of the judge and he found her evidence
    like that of the claimant to be credible.  The  judge  noted  that  Mrs
    Cubero has type 1 diabetes which meant that she had a constant need for
    medical treatment but  there  was  a  large  and  wide  family  support
    available for her and both her godmother and stepfather were  in  court
    to support her.  The judge went  on  to  allow  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules.

4.   The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  criticises  the  judge's  decision  for
    failing  to  engage  with  the  issue  as  to  whether  or  not  strong
    compassionate reasons for allowing the appeal  existed.   Criticism  is
    directed to paragraph 11 of the determination the terms of which I have
    just set out.  It is true that the judge refers in  that  paragraph  to
    certain mitigating features but it is equally apparent to me  that  the
    determination needs to be read as a whole and that paragraphs 11 to  15
    inclusive encapsulate the reasons why the  judge  decided  to  exercise
    discretion differently from that of the Entry Clearance Officer.

5.   The judge heard oral evidence from Mrs Cubero and as  I  have  said  he
    found her credible.  Her witness statement was in front  of  the  judge
    and in finding her credible it is manifest to me that he accepted  what
    she had to say in that statement.  It is also equally manifest that the
    judge accepted what was said in  the  statement  before  him  from  the
    claimant.  Both of those statements paint  a  picture  of  considerable
    stress being caused to Mrs Cubero as a result of the problems that have
    arisen regarding her husband's application for entry clearance.  Stress
    in such circumstances is as I have indicated today a  matter  that  can
    easily arise when  people  from  different  countries  decide  to  form
    relationships and get married  but  in  these  circumstances  with  Mrs
    Cubero's type 1 diabetes being plainly of  a  serious  and  significant
    kind, the issue of stress assumes a much greater significance and I see
    nothing wrong in the  judge  accepting  what  he  had  heard  from  her
    regarding the consequences to her  of  the  problems  that  had  arisen
    regarding her husband.

6.   The judge did not I find confine himself to  the  so-called  mitigation
    regarding the criminal offence but in deciding in all the circumstances
    whether to exercise his discretion differently it was plainly  material
    for the judge to have regard to that issue and what he  said  regarding
    the mitigating factors have not been sought to be challenged before me.



7.   The grounds also make reference to the judge having in  effect  ignored
    an attempt by the claimant to enter the United  Kingdom  as  a  visitor
    following an earlier refusal of an application for entry clearance as a
    spouse.  Ms Horsley is not specifically said to advance that aspect  of
    the grounds before me today.  I consider that that is correct  for  the
    reason that if one reads the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer it
    is plain that that issue played no material part in the Entry Clearance
    Officer's decision with regard to paragraph 320(18).  For  what  it  is
    worth the explanation for how the claimant came to seek entry clearance
    as a visitor is fully set out in the claimant's statement and since the
    judge accepted the evidence from both the claimant and Mrs Cubero it is
    apparent that he must have accepted that part of the evidence also.

8.   In short  therefore,  reading  the  determination  purposively,  it  is
    manifest that the judge was in substance addressing  the  issue  as  to
    whether the circumstances required by the Rules existed.  It is equally
    manifest that there was material in front of him in  the  form  of  the
    witness statements  and  the  oral  evidence  that  amply  supported  a
    conclusion  that  in  all  the  circumstances   of   this   case   such
    compassionate reasons existed.  Accordingly, for  the  reasons  I  have
    given this appeal by the Entry Clearance Officer is dismissed  and  the
    effect of that is that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.
                               Signed                                  Date


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Peter Lane

