
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/17839/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th January 2015                           |On 19th January 2015          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                 saiqa afzal
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Choudhry
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Mensah
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 30th June 2014.

Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen  of  Pakistan.   She  applied  to  join  her
    husband, Ahmed Afzal in the UK but was refused entry clearance on  18th
    September 2013.  The Entry Clearance Officer was not satisfied that the
    couple were in a subsisting relationship.  No other issues were raised.

 3. The Appellant appealed against that decision.  The judge,  in  a  brief
    determination,  dismissed  the  appeal  on  the  sole  basis  that  the
    Appellant had failed to provide material  evidence  when  she  applied.
    She appeared to accept that a child, who  had  subsequently  died,  had
    been born. However she said that the evidence was insufficient  because
    the couple married in 2001 and the application was not made until 2013.
      She  accepted  that  there  may  have  been   previous   unsuccessful
    applications but no evidence had been placed before her.  She  recorded
    that the Sponsor had given entirely credible evidence  about  his  time
    spent with the Appellant in Pakistan and there was  now  good  evidence
    that the relationship was genuine and subsisting.

 4. The Appellant sought permission to appeal, in  essence,  on  the  basis
    that the judge had failed to take into account material evidence before
    her.  She had provided evidence of eight unsuccessful applications  for
    entry clearance between October 2001 and September 2013, together  with
    40 pages of photographs and telephone statements and evidence  of  four
    lengthy visits by the Sponsor to Pakistan.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Davies on 29th September 2014
    on the basis that the judge had not made any reference  to  the  burden
    and standard of proof.

The Hearing

 6. Mr Mills properly  recognised  that  this  determination  was  entirely
    flawed and could not stand.

 7. The judge appears to have been confused  between  the  requirements  of
    points-based applications, where specified evidence  is  required,  and
    marriage applications where, save for the maintenance requirements,  it
    is not.

 8. The only issue before the judge was whether there was  evidence  before
    her which demonstrated, on the balance of probabilities, that as at the
    date of the Entry Clearance Officer's decision, the couple  were  in  a
    subsisting marriage.

 9. It is arguable that, even on the basis of the findings which the  judge
    made, the appeal should have been allowed since she accepted  that  the
    Sponsor had given wholly credible evidence before her.

10. Be that as it may, the judge erred in law  because  she  dismissed  the
    appeal on a misconceived basis and failed to take into account material
    evidence. Her decision is set aside.



Findings and Conclusions

11. Mr Mills provided a determination  from  2010  when  Immigration  Judge
    Turnock found that the marriage was not subsisting  but,  as  Mr  Mills
    very fairly observed, there has been a considerable  body  of  evidence
    produced since that date.  In any event the  judge's  conclusions  were
    affected by the fact that the refusal on that occasion was  also  based
    on paragraph 320(11) on the basis of an accepted deception in  2006  in
    relation to maintenance.

12. Having considered the evidence, Mr Mills told me that he was content to
    concede the issue of a subsisting relationship.  He accepted that there
    was documentary evidence which demonstrated that the  relationship  was
    subsisting, namely photographs, telephone records and evidence of  four
    visits since 2011.  The Sponsor has significant caring responsibilities
    for different members of his family which has  prevented  him  visiting
    Pakistan more frequently, particularly in  the  earlier  years  of  the
    marriage. He acknowledged that the Appellant had  now  made  nine  visa
    applications, at a considerable expense, since 2002.

13. On the basis of the concession,  with  which  I  wholly  concur,  I  am
    satisfied that the Appellant has demonstrated to the required  standard
    that this is a subsisting relationship.  That being the sole issue, the
    appeal is allowed.

Decision

14. The original judge erred in law.   Her  decision  is  set  aside.   The
    Appellant's appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor







