
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: OA/17256/2013
                                                               OA/17255/2013
                                                               OA/17254/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On January 8, 2016                   |On January 11, 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                           MS NADIA MENZEWA MATOKA
                              MISS FATOU IYABA
                             MASTER LOUISON IYAB
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                         THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant   Ms King, Counsel, instructed by Wilson Solicitors LLP
Respondent  Mr Bramble (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The first-named appellant was born on 8 August 1980 and is  a  national
    of the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) and claims to be the wife  of
    the Sponsor Mr Rockman Nzema Iyaba.

 2. The second and third-named appellants are also  nationals  of  the  DRC
    born on June 30, 2003  and  February  5,  1998  respectively  and  were
    respectively described in entry clearance applications as  children  of
    the first named Appellant and the Sponsor.

 3. The respondent's DNA evidence demonstrated the  second-named  appellant
    is not the Sponsor's child.

 4. The third-named appellant's application was originally made in the name
    of Christ Vie Iyaba date of birth January 4, 2000 who  it  was  claimed
    was the child of the Appellant and Sponsor but it was  claimed  in  the
    course of the appeal that Christ Vie  Iyaba  died  and  thereafter  the
    application was pursued in the name of Louison Ayab.

 5. The Appellants applied for settlement in the United Kingdom on March 5,
    2012 as the spouse and children  respectively  of  a  Sponsor  who  has
    indefinite leave to remain having been recognised as a refugee.

 6. The respondent refused their applications  on  May  11,  2012  and  the
    Appellants appealed those decisions on June 8, 2012. The decisions were
    withdrawn by the Respondent prior to the scheduled  appeal  hearing  to
    enable the DNA evidence to be further clarified.

 7. The respondent reconsidered the applications but  subsequently  refused
    each application on August 12, 2013.

 8. The appellants appealed those decisions on March 5, 2014 under  section
    82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 9. The appeals came before Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Tiffen  on
    November 3, 2014 and in a decision promulgated on November 19, 2014 she
    allowed the first-named Appellant's appeal under the Immigration  Rules
    and further allowed the appeals of all three Appellants on human rights
    grounds.

10. The respondent appealed those decisions on November 25,  2014  and  her
    appeal came before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Birrell  on  March  18,
    2015 and in a decision promulgated on April 14, 2015 she set aside  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decisions finding:

      a. The Tribunal's assessment of the DNA evidence was flawed.

      b. The Tribunal failed to engage with the evidential  requirements  in
         relation to the standard of proof that the Respondent was  required
         to meet in this case in requiring  'conclusive'  DNA  evidence  and
         rejecting the evidence that stated the DNA results  showed  it  was
         100 times more likely that the Sponsor was  related  to  the  First
         Appellant  as  half  sibling  than  if  they  are  unrelated.  This
         assessment of the DNA evidence underpinned her  assessment  of  the
         claim that the first-named Appellant and the sponsor  were  husband
         and wife and therefore the error was material to the outcome of the
         decision.

      c. The flawed approach to the DNA evidence and  paragraph  320(7A)  HC
         395 inevitably infected the Article 8 assessment.

      d. The Sponsor's claim that his son Christian Vie died in 2011  before
         the applications were made for entry clearance in 2012 were  based,
         ab initio, on a false relationship  claim.  To  conclude  that  the
         Sponsor was a credible witness given the scale  of  this  deception
         was perverse. This credibility finding was clearly material to  the
         Article 8 assessment in  respect  of  all  of  the  Appellants  and
         therefore she was satisfied that the error of law was  material  to
         the outcome.

11. Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell found the Tribunal's decision could
    not stand and must be set aside in its entirety. She directed that  all
    matters  be  decided  afresh.  The  appeals  were  listed  for  a  case
    management hearing on August 10, 2015  following  which  the  case  was
    adjourned for a full hearing.

12. Due to the unavailability of Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell  Upper
    Tribunal Judge O'Connor transferred these appeals to be  heard  by  any
    Judge on January 4, 2016 and the matter is now listed before myself for
    disposal on the date set out above.

13. The appellants' representatives served fresh DNA  evidence,  a  further
    statement from the sponsor and some financial evidence.

14. Ms King sought to re-open the venue of the appeal  and  invited  me  to
    remit this matter to the First-tier Tribunal on the basis oral evidence
    was required and full findings had to be made.

15. Mr Bramble reminded me that this option had clearly  been  rejected  by
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell both when she considered the  error
    in law application and when the matter came back before her for a  case
    management hearing on August 10, 2015. She  set  the  matter  down  for
    three hours with provision for additional witness evidence to be called
    and this was a clear indication that the Upper Tribunal was the correct
    venue.

16. I have considered the Practice Direction on venue and having considered
    both Mr Bramble's and Ms King's  submissions  I  decided  that  as  the
    evidence and issues remained the same, the mere fact oral evidence  was
    needed was not in itself a reason to remit the case back to the  First-
    tier Tribunal. The Upper Tribunal was capable of both hearing  evidence
    and submissions and those factors alone did not require the case to  be
    remitted.

17. Ms King indicated that appellants' appeals under the Immigration  Rules
    were not being proceeded with as the current  DNA  evidence  meant  the
    first-named appellant and  sponsor  could  not  succeed  as  they  were
    siblings and any "marriage" would  be  a  prohibited  relationship  and
    consequently the first-named appellant  could  not  succeed  under  the
    Rules. The  appeals  of  the  second  and  third-named  appellants  had
    previously been rejected under the Immigration Rules and  Ms  King  did
    not pursue them either. She submitted the issue for me  to  decide  was
    whether article 8 ECHR was engaged and if it  was  would  refusing  the
    appellants' entry be disproportionate.

18. Matters which fell to be considered by me at this hearing included:

      a. Was it more likely than not that the first-named appellant may  not
         have realised that the second-named appellant was not the Sponsor's
         child?

      b. Was the third-named appellant's application based, ab initio, on  a
         false relationship claim and should the  refusals  under  paragraph
         320(7A) HC 395 be upheld?

      c. Are the first-named appellant  and  sponsor  husband  and  wife  as
         claimed?

      d. Was the  Sponsor  a  credible  witness  in  light  of  the  alleged
         deceptions?

      e. Could the appellants' appeals succeed under article 8 ECHR?

19. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
    pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I see no reason to make an order now.

    SPONSOR'S EVIDENCE

20. The sponsor  adopted  his  witness  statements,  given  both  in  these
    proceedings and in two earlier asylum applications. He stated that  the
    first-named appellant was the same person who had  provided  a  witness
    statement to support his asylum application and she was the same person
    he had described in his screening interview  as  his  wife.  He  denied
    knowing  or  having  any  knowledge  that  they  were  related  and  he
    maintained that before leaving the DRC in 2007 they had lived  together
    as husband and wife. He and his wife spoke on the  telephone  at  least
    twice a month.

21. Under cross-examination he stated:

      a. He had spoken to the first-named appellant after both DNA tests and
         had spoken to her mother and he maintained he was  unaware  of  any
         sibling relationship between them.

      b.  They  had  not  obtained  evidence  of  their  original   marriage
         certificate  because  of  the  cost  and  had  simply  obtained   a
         replacement when it was required.

      c. He accepted what the DNA report said about his relationship to  the
         second-named appellant but his wife  maintained  that  he  was  the
         child's father despite the content of the report and he had brought
         her as his own.

      d. The third-named appellant had been living with his  parents  albeit
         in the same household as the sponsor's family had been living.  The
         sponsor stated that the third-named appellant and his parents lived
         in his house after he left the DRC in 2007 and were therefore  part
         of his household.

      e. Both he and the first-named appellant knowingly passed  the  third-
         named appellant off as their son in the application.

      f. He disputed the claim that he was not married  to  the  first-named
         appellant because if that had been  the  case  he  would  not  have
         waited over seven  years  to  find  a  wife.  He  had  consistently
         maintained she was  his  wife.  He  was  aware  of  family  reunion
         requirements and he could  have  brought  them  all  in  as  family
         members without the charade alleged by the respondent.

22. Having heard the sponsor's evidence, I invited the  representatives  to
    put forward their submissions.

    SUBMISSIONS

23. Mr Bramble relied on the refusal letters and invited me to dismiss  all
    appeals under paragraph 320(7A) of the Immigration Rules on  the  basis
    deception, in respect of the identity of the third-named appellant, had
    been used by both the sponsor and the first named  appellant  and  such
    deception applied to all applicants in  light  of  the  fact  paragraph
    320(7A) applies whether or not a  deception  was  with  an  applicant's
    knowledge.

24. In assessing credibility Mr Bramble invited me to have little regard to
    the information contained in the asylum papers  or  subsequent  witness
    statements  and  he  submitted  that  the  sponsor's  and   first-named
    appellant's credibility should be considered in light of  the  admitted
    deception and the two DNA reports.

25. Although  positive  findings  on  credibility  had  been  made  in  the
    sponsor's earlier asylum proceedings Mr Bramble submitted that firstly,
    the Judge in those proceedings had been considering an asylum claim and
    not an article 8 claim and secondly, the standard of proof was lower in
    asylum appeals.

26. The DNA evidence contradicted the sponsor's and first-named appellant's
    evidence. The results demonstrated firstly, that the sponsor and first-
    named were half-siblings, despite their repeated claims to be oblivious
    of this fact and secondly, the second-named appellant could not be  the
    sponsor's daughter despite the first-named appellant's claim  that  she
    had only ever had  a  relationship  with  the  sponsor.  When  the  DNA
    evidence was considered alongside the deliberate deception carried  out
    by both the first-named appellant and sponsor in respect of the  third-
    named appellant Mr Bramble submitted that no weight should be  attached
    to a recently obtained marriage certificate or the sponsor's (and first-
    named appellant's) claim that they were married despite the fact he had
    given this account when he attended a screening interview in 2007.  The
    fact the sponsor claimed he would not have waited  for  his  "wife"  to
    join him if he had not been married had to be considered  in  light  of
    the above evidence.

27. The first-named appellant's  credibility  was  undermined  by  the  DNA
    evidence and by her failure to  provide  an  updated  response  to  the
    recent DNA report provided by her legal  representatives.  The  sponsor
    claimed to have tried to speak to her mother about  the  situation  but
    the  first-named  appellant's  silence  on  the  issue   affected   her
    credibility. Ms King had accepted  the  appellants  could  not  succeed
    under the Rules and this failure and  in  particular  a  refusal  under
    paragraph 320(7A) was something to be taken into account if section 117
    of the 2002 Act was engaged.

28. Mr Bramble submitted  that  if  the  Tribunal  rejected  the  sponsor's
    evidence concerning the family  circumstances  and  in  particular  his
    claim that he lived with his "wife" and daughter before he came to  the
    United Kingdom in 2007 then article 8 ECHR would not be engaged for the
    purposes of family life.

29. However, if the Tribunal accepted that the sponsor, first  and  second-
    named appellant, however related, had lived as family unit then  regard
    must be had to section 117 of the 2002 Act and  in  particular  Section
    117B(1) which stresses  the  importance  of  immigration  control.  The
    family had been living in the DRC and were not related as  claimed  and
    it would not be disproportionate to refuse them entry.

30. The fact the sponsor supported them financially did not mean they  were
    related as he claimed but merely that he sent some funds to the DRC for
    them. Neither the appellants nor sponsor should benefit  from  a  clear
    course of deception.

31. Finally, the sponsor came to the United Kingdom in 2007 and  whilst  it
    was claimed the third-named appellant was  living  in  the  first-named
    appellant's house it is clear that when he moved there he was cared for
    by his own parents and only later, according to  the  sponsor's  claim,
    did he come to be cared for by the first-named appellant. He invited me
    to dismiss all claims under article 8 ECHR.

32. Ms King relied on her skeleton argument. She submitted  that  this  was
    both a difficult and unusual case. She submitted that the fact the  DNA
    reports contradicted the sponsor and first-named appellant's claims did
    not undermine her main submission that the sponsor and appellants  were
    a family and it would be disproportionate  to  prevent  the  appellants
    from joining the sponsor in the United Kingdom.

33. Whilst the DNA report stated the first-named appellant and sponsor were
    more likely to be half-siblings Ms King submitted that the evidence  as
    a whole demonstrated that the first-named appellant  and  sponsor  were
    married as claimed in light of the marriage certificate  and  the  fact
    the sponsor had referred to the first-named appellant as  his  wife  in
    asylum documents and witness statements.

34. It lacked credibility, as was being suggested by Mr Bramble, that  this
    was one big conspiracy because why would  the  sponsor  give  the  same
    account about his relationship to the  first-named  appellant  when  he
    applied for asylum and then maintain that account even  though  he  had
    initially been refused asylum. On a  family  reunion  application,  the
    sponsor would have been able to bring his whole family  over  so  there
    would have been no benefit to continue the charade.

35. A statement from the first-named appellant had been  obtained  in  2008
    and 2014 through a solicitor in Kinshasha and evidence of identity  had
    been produced to confirm  who  she  was.  The  sponsor  had  also  been
    interviewed by a doctor representing the Helen  Bamber  Foundation  who
    referred to the trauma and shock  suffered  by  the  sponsor.  Ms  King
    submitted that it was more likely than not the appellant's claim he was
    married was credible and the sponsor's history did not support the kind
    of deceit being alleged.

36. Ms King submitted that the evidence was that they  lived  as  a  family
    unit and that the third-named appellant was a de facto child  of  their
    family. The second-named appellant had been brought up by  the  sponsor
    and even now he was coming to terms with the DNA report that  indicated
    the second-named appellant was not his child.

37. The article 8 claim was based on the fact they were a family  unit  and
    if the Tribunal accepted that evidence then Ms King submitted that both
    children and the first-named appellant should be granted  entry  as  to
    refuse any of them would be disproportionate. The fact the sponsor  had
    lied about the third-named appellant may well  have  been  due  to  the
    circumstances that occurred around the time his own son had died.

38. The second and third-named appellants are  minors  and  should  not  be
    blamed for actions taken by adults. The children are  related  to  each
    other and  it  would  be  disproportionate  to  leave  the  third-named
    appellant behind (if  the  other  appeals  were  allowed)  because  the
    sponsor was his closest relative.

39. The sponsor cannot return to the DRC to look after the family  or  even
    the third-named appellant because h was granted refugee status. Despite
    the difficulties highlighted Ms King submitted all three appeals should
    be allowed under article 8 ECHR.

40. Having heard both representative's submissions I reserved my  decision.
    A full record of proceedings is contained on the court file.

    DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS

41. I am concerned with applications from three appellants. The first-named
    appellant is said to be the sponsor's wife, the second-named  appellant
    is the first-named appellant's daughter and the  third-named  appellant
    is said to be the sponsor's nephew.

42. All three appellants applied under the Immigration Rules and article  8
    ECHR but at the today's hearing Ms King  confirmed  that  I  need  only
    consider their applications  under  article  8  ECHR  as  none  of  the
    appellants could satisfy the Rules.

43. Ms King in her submissions invited me, when considering credibility, to
    place greater weight on the evidence given during  the  asylum  process
    whereas Mr Bramble invited me to place little weight on  that  evidence
    in light of the sponsor's and first-named appellant's deception.

44. The appellants had applied for re-union under paragraphs 352A and  352D
    HC 395. The  first-named  appellant  had  argued  that  she  should  be
    admitted under paragraph 352A HC 395 but to do so she and the  sponsor,
    as a prerequisite, had to be married. The respondent had obtained a DNA
    report but as the sponsor and first-named appellant disputed the  claim
    a further  report  was  commissioned  by  the  first-named  appellant's
    representatives. A report from Kings  College  London  found  the  most
    likely relationship is one  of  half  siblings  and  the  parties  were
    260,000 times more likely to share that relationship as  against  being
    unrelated.

45. The sponsor provided a witness statement dated January 7, 2016  but  no
    further statement  was  provided  by  the  first-named  appellant.  The
    sponsor expressed surprise at the DNA test result as he claimed he  had
    no idea they were related and from paragraph [4] of this  statement  he
    provided an explanation of how they may be related and the steps he had
    taken to resolve the matter. The sponsor stated he  called  the  first-
    named appellant's mother and raised the issue of whether she had had  a
    relationship with his father but she refused to discuss the issue.  The
    first-named appellant also refused  to  discuss  the  matter  with  the
    sponsor. The sponsor also refers to the fact that he  had  consistently
    identified the first-named appellant as his wife  from  the  moment  he
    arrived in the United Kingdom and Ms King submits that  it  was  simply
    not credible that he would have created such a story and continued that
    story ever since.

46. Ms King's  submission  on  this  point  is  something  that  cannot  be
    dismissed but the correct approach  must  be  to  consider  this  issue
    alongside other evidence because credibility is a key  factor  in  this
    appeal.

47. Ms King accepts that the second-named appellant is  not  the  sponsor's
    child. The recent Kings College London report makes it clear  that  the
    sponsor could not be the second-named appellant's father and  that  she
    is  the  daughter  of  the  first-named  appellant.  The  sponsor   was
    challenged about this in his oral evidence and he now accepts the  test
    but  stated  the  first-named  appellant  maintained  the   first-named
    appellant's claim that she had only ever had children with him.

48. The DNA report could not be clearer in this case and accordingly either
    both the sponsor and first-named appellant have deliberately  attempted
    to deceive the respondent or the first-named appellant is lying and has
    not admitted the same to the sponsor.

49. Both the sponsor and first-named appellant admit that when the original
    application  for  entry  clearance  was   submitted   the   third-named
    appellant's name was not included albeit his photograph was attached to
    the application form which had been submitted in the name of Christ Vie
    Iyaba. They both accept they acted dishonestly but blame the  deception
    on the fact they were grieving at the time. Ms King asked  me  to  take
    into account the Helen Bamber report in this regard.

50. In considering whether the sponsor is  telling  the  truth  I  have  to
    consider the account he gave on arrival (and subsequently maintained in
    respect of the first-named appellant) against other deceptions. He asks
    me to find that the only deception related to the third-named appellant
    whereas Mr Bramble invited me to find that his deception  commenced  on
    his arrival.

51. Having considered the evidence submitted I find as follows:

      a. The first-named appellant's evidence cannot be relied on.  She  has
         clearly lied twice on at least two  significant  matters.  Firstly,
         the DNA report confirms that her account of only  having  a  sexual
         relationship with the sponsor cannot be true. The report  discounts
         this  claim  and  her  evidence  is  severely  undermined  by  this
         deception. Secondly, she has  admitted  submitting  an  application
         attempting to pass the third-named appellant off as her son whereas
         the evidence now demonstrates that this is not the case. These were
         deliberate deceptions. The claim of grieving does not explain  both
         deceptions and I find this explanation has been put forward to  try
         and explain away her deception.

      b. I am satisfied the First-named appellant has  not  told  the  truth
         about either the second or third-named appellants.

      c. The sponsor has admitted he lied in  relation  to  the  third-named
         appellant and this was a conscious decision he and the  first-named
         appellant  took.  They  deliberately  substituted  the  third-named
         appellant's picture with that of "their son" and tried to pass  him
         off as "their son".

      d. The "marriage certificate" is a document that says the marriage was
         registered in 2011 which was twelve years  after  they  claimed  to
         have married and it must be considered in the round  having  regard
         to the principles of Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKIAT 00439.

      e. The above deceptions severely undermine their overall credibility.

      f. Both the sponsor and first-named  appellant  have  demonstrated  an
         ability to lie when it suits them.

52. The burden of proof in  demonstrating  they  were  married  is  on  the
    sponsor and first-named appellant and they must show on the balance  of
    probabilities they were married as claimed. They rely  on  the  earlier
    evidence as demonstrating they were married Ms King referred me to  the
    statement from the  Congolese  lawyer  but  this  does  not  prove  the
    sponsor's relationship to the first-named appellant but merely that she
    took a  statement  from  someone  who  said  she  was  the  first-named
    appellant and produced evidence to confirm her details.

53. I have  considered  this  evidence  but  in  light  of  the  deceptions
    highlighted above I reject their claim to be married and I find it more
    likely that the first-named appellant is only the sponsor's sibling and
    I reject their claim to be married.

54. Ms King invited me to find that the  second-named  appellant  has  been
    treated as a child of the family by  the  sponsor  but  I  reject  this
    submission. Whilst I am prepared to accept that they may have all lived
    together in a family home this does not mean the sponsor treated her as
    his daughter. The sponsor told me it was the African way that  families
    lived together and so the fact the sponsor  may  have  lived  with  his
    sibling and her child does not mean he treated her as his daughter.

55. Turning to the third-named appellant's  circumstances  the  DNA  report
    demonstrated that the first-named appellant was not related to him  and
    that the sponsor was related as an uncle, grandfather or other  distant
    relative. According to the sponsor's evidence he had already  left  the
    DRC before he came to live at his home and in any event  he  came  with
    his parents and lived with them in the compound. This does not make him
    a child of the sponsor's family.

56. The second and third-named  appellants  sought  to  be  admitted  under
    paragraph 352D HC  395.  The  first-named  appellant  summarised  their
    living arrangements in paragraph [3] of  her  witness  statement  dated
    October 26, 2014. She indicated they all lived in a compound  and  that
    the third-named appellant lived with his parents in the same  compound.
    Ms King does not pursue any claim under  the  Rules  and  I  find  that
    neither the second nor the third-named  appellants  were  part  of  the
    sponsor's family unit. They may have all lived in the same compound but
    in the case of the second-named appellant I find that she was  part  of
    the first-named appellant's family unit and in the case of  the  third-
    named appellant he was part of his own parent's family unit.

57. Returning therefore to the questions I posed at paragraph [18] above  I
    find:

      a. The first-named appellant knew the second-named appellant  was  not
         the sponsor's child despite her claims to the contrary. I also find
         the sponsor was aware of the actual relationship as well.

      b. The third-named appellant's application was based, ab initio, on  a
         false relationship claim. Paragraph 320(7A) HC  395  applies  where
         false representations have been whether or not to  the  applicant's
         knowledge.

      c. Legally the sponsor and first-named appellant  cannot  be  man  and
         wife due to the DNA report-a fact accepted by Ms King. Based on  my
         findings above I reject their claim, in any sense,  to  be  husband
         and wife.

      d. I do not find either the sponsor or the first-named appellant to be
         credible witnesses.

58. Primarily these were applications under paragraphs  352A  and  352D  HC
    395. The first-named appellant could not meet the requirements of  352A
    HC 395 and the second and third-named appellants  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of 352D HC 395.

59. I find that paragraph 320(7A) applies to each appellant  based  on  the
    fact the sponsor and first-named appellant  deliberately  lied  on  the
    application forms in relation to the  third-named  appellant  and  also
    because the first-named appellant  lied  on  the  application  form  in
    relation to the second-named appellant as she claimed, and continues to
    do so, the sponsor was the child's father. As stated earlier a decision
    under paragraph 320(7A) applies even where false  representations  have
    been whether or not to the applicant's knowledge.

60. Ms King argues that their claims should be allowed under article 8 ECHR
    submitting that they were a family unit and refusing them admission  to
    the United Kingdom would be disproportionate in light of the  fact  the
    sponsor cannot return to the DRC.

61. In order to establish a family  life  claim,  the  appellants  have  to
    demonstrate the existence of family life in the context of  article  8.
    The House of Lords in Razgar [2004] UKHL 00027  laid  down  five  tests
    that had to be met. Since July 2012 family life is dealt with under the
    Immigration Rules and if the Rules are not met then only in  compelling
    circumstances should the Tribunal go  on  to  consider  a  claim  under
    article 8.

62. At paragraph [44] in the Secretary of State for the Home  Department  v
    SS and Ors (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387 the Court of Appeal found-

          "If there is a reasonably arguable case under Article 8 which  has
         not already been sufficiently dealt with by  consideration  of  the
         application under the  substantive  provisions  of  the  Rules  (cf
         Nagre, para. [30]), then in considering that  case  the  individual
         interests of the applicant and others whose Article 8 rights are in
         issue should be balanced against the public interest, including  as
         expressed in the Rules, in order  to  make  an  assessment  whether
         refusal  to  grant  LTR  or  LTE,  as   the   case   may   be,   is
         disproportionate and hence unlawful by virtue of  section  6(1)  of
         the HRA read with Article 8."

63. I accept there is evidence of some financial support being sent to  the
    first-named appellant but as I have found that she is his sister I have
    to consider their relationship in light of Kugathas v SSHD [2003]  INLR
    170. The Court of Appeal said that, in order to establish family  life,
    it is necessary to show that there is a  real  committed  or  effective
    support or relationship between  the  family  members  and  the  normal
    emotional ties between a mother and an adult  son  would  not,  without
    more, be enough. In JB (India) and Others v ECO [2009] EWCA Civ 234 the
    Court of Appeal said that financial dependence "to some  extent"  on  a
    parent did not demonstrate the existence of strong family ties  between
    adult children and the parent nor did weekly telephone  calls  evidence
    anything more than the normal ties of affection between  a  parent  and
    her adult children. In AAO v Entry Clearance Officer  [2011]  EWCA  Civ
    840 the Court of Appeal held that family life would not normally  exist
    between parents and adult children within the meaning of Article  8  in
    the absence of further elements of dependency, which went beyond normal
    emotional ties. However, in Ghising (family  life  -  adults  -  Gurkha
    policy) [2012] UKUT 00160 (IAC) the Tribunal said that a review of  the
    jurisprudence discloses that  there  is  no  general  proposition  that
    Article 8 can never be engaged when the family life  it  is  sought  to
    establish is  between  adult  siblings  living  together.  Rather  than
    applying a blanket rule with regard to adult children, each case should
    be analysed on its own facts, to decide  whether  or  not  family  life
    exists,  within   the   meaning   of   Article   8(1).  Whilst   some
    generalisations are possible, each case is fact-sensitive.

64. Neither of the minor appellants are his children  and  they  have  been
    living at a compound with the first-named appellant and  others.  I  am
    not satisfied that there is family life, within article 8,  in  respect
    of any of the appellants.

65. However, even if there was family life for article 8 purposes, applying
    the Razgar tests, I find that preventing the appellants coming to  live
    with the sponsor would be an interference but such  interference  would
    be in accordance with the law and for the pursuit of a  legitimate  aim
    namely immigration control.

66. When considering proportionality, I must have regard to section 117  of
    the 2002 Act and in particular section 117B.  Section  117B(1)  of  the
    2002 Act confirms the maintenance of effective immigration  control  is
    in the public interest. There is no evidence the appellants are able to
    speak English and consequently their inability to integrate easily/work
    (in the case of the first-named appellant) with society would  be  more
    of a burden on the British taxpayer. I have no  evidence  to  show  the
    sponsor  would  meet  any  financial  requirements  for   meeting   the
    Immigration Rules  and  of  course  the  appellants  do  not  meet  the
    Immigration Rules.

67. I have balanced the fact the sponsor is related as an uncle to the  two
    minor appellants and a sibling to the remaining appellant. I have taken
    into account the fact they may have, prior to 2007, lived  together  in
    the same village and I note their claim to be a  family  unit.  I  have
    already indicated that I do not find they are  a  family  unit  in  the
    sense advance by Ms King and having regard to section 117B factors, the
    multiple deceptions committed by the sponsor and first-named  appellant
    and the other findings made  I  am  satisfied  this  it  would  not  be
    disproportionate to refuse these three appeals.

    DECISION

68. There was a material error. Deputy Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Birrell  set
    aside the earlier decisions.

69. I have remade the  decisions  and  I  dismiss  the  appeals  under  the
    Immigration Rules and Article 8 ECHR.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis






FEE AWARD

I make no fee award as I have dismissed the appeal.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
