
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/17826/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House,              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Stoke-on-Trent                       |                                     |
|On 14th September 2015               |On 7th October 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                          MISS KIMELIA CAMEO POWELL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - KINGSTON
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss L Mair (instructed by Paragon Law)
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  the  Appellant,  with
    permission, against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Frankish
    promulgated  on  18th  September  2014  by  which  he   dismissed   the
    Appellant's appeal against the Entry Clearance  Officer's  Decision  to
    refuse her leave to enter the United Kingdom as a dependent child.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Jamaica born on 28th May 1998.   She  had
    made application to join her mother in the UK, Ms Tanisha  Messem.   In
    his determination Judge  Frankish  set  out  the  basis  of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer's Decision as follows:-

       . The Appellant applied for settlement in 2011 leading  to  a  failed
         appeal in 2012.  On that occasion the Respondent was not  satisfied
         the UK mother had sole  responsibility  given  that  the  Appellant
         lived with her father and mother had only visited  three  times  in
         2005, 2006 and 2011.  Mother also lacked the means to  support  the
         Appellant and her two siblings in  the  United  Kingdom.   On  this
         occasion the Appellant relies upon  frequent  contact  with  mother
         through Skype and Facebook.  There is a Sky telephone bill from the
         Sponsor which shows some telephone calls to Jamaica from  September
         2012 to April  2013  but  nothing  before  that.   There  are  some
         Facebook transcripts between Appellant and Sponsor  from  2011  and
         2012 but nothing before that.  There is  evidence  of  the  Sponsor
         shipping a barrel of goods to the Appellant in  November  2012  and
         remittances several times in 2012 and 2013  but  nothing  prior  to
         that.  There are Bridgeport High School reports for  2011-2012  and
         2012-2013 but none of these refer to the mother as guardian.  There
         is a Bridgeport High School letter dated 17th May 2013 which states
         that the Appellant is in  Grade  9  but  neither  states  that  the
         Sponsor has supported the Appellant or is her guardian.

       . During the mother's visit to Jamaica in May  2012,  the  father  is
         said to have told her he "had to go out  looking  for  construction
         work in the countryside" and therefore it would be better  for  the
         Appellant to live with maternal aunt Tracy-Anne Scott  in  Portmore
         until the Appellant goes to the UK.  There is no evidence  of  this
         change in the father's circumstances, his whereabouts or why he had
         stopped caring for the Appellant at that point contrary to what  he
         had previously done throughout the Appellant's life.   There  is  a
         letter from Tracy-Anne Scott to say she has cared for the Appellant
         for the past year, has to go to  evening  classes  which  makes  it
         unsafe to leave the Appellant home alone, that she plans  to  start
         frequent trips to the USA and the Appellant would be best off  with
         her mother.

       . There is  evidence  of  some  financial  support  from  the  mother
         recently and of contact with her over the past three years  through
         Facebook and telephone calls, also of four visits  since  she  left
         Jamaica for the United Kingdom.   However,  there  is  insufficient
         evidence of her providing emotional support over the  years  or  of
         making the important decisions  in  the  Appellant's  life.   As  a
         Jamaican, there is no reason why the father cannot continue as  the
         carer as he was before.  The mother might have had a role and it is
         a role which has increased in recent years but she has not had sole
         responsibility for the Appellant's upbringing.

       . The Appellant lives with maternal aunt Tracy-Anne  Scott  but  says
         her plans mean it would be better for the Appellant to be with  her
         mother.  These are not credible reasons for the aunt  being  unable
         to care for the Appellant.   Furthermore,  the  father  remains  in
         Jamaica and there are no credible reasons why he cannot resume care
         for the Appellant.  There are  no  serious  or  compelling  reasons
         which  make  exclusion  undesirable,  this  being  nothing  than  a
         personal choice of the mother.

 3. Judge Frankish then noted that the Appellant had filed a bundle of  367
    pages which included her witness statement  and  those  of  her  mother
    dated 24th May 2013 and 27th August  2014.   He  then  noted  that  the
    Appellant's evidence was that she did not recall when her  mother  left
    Jamaica.  She stayed with her father whose girlfriend sometimes stayed.
     The paternal grandparents from Saint Martin's also used to visit.   In
    2011/2012 the grandparents retired and returned to Jamaica.  They  were
    frail.  Father thought it best for  the  Appellant  to  go  to  mother.
    Mother asked Aunt Tracy-Anne Scott to care for the Appellant while  she
    obtained a UK visa for her.  Aunt became  frustrated  at  this  as  the
    Appellant's stay dragged on.  She would quarrel with her  partner  over
    the Appellant's intrusion upon their privacy.  She also sometimes  kept
    some of the money sent by the mother for the Appellant.  The aunt would
    leave the Appellant with strangers when she went  out.   The  Appellant
    felt unable to complain because she had nowhere else to  go.   He  then
    set out that apart from not living with her, the mother did  everything
    for the Appellant: school fees; maintenance money;    clothes and items
    for school sent from the UK.  They speak  daily  by  Skype,  email  and
    telephone.  She advises  the  Appellant  to  study  rather  than  being
    distracted by boys.  She tries to visit once a year and make a fuss  of
    the Appellant.

 4. He noted the Appellant's evidence that since she had been  placed  with
    her aunt she had not seen her father, he had not made  enquiries  about
    her school progress.  She has spoken to him by telephone twice  in  the
    past two years and he provides no money or chattels.

 5. The Appellant sets out also that the second refusal was received during
    a visit by the aunt.  The Appellant  was  very  disappointed  when  she
    eventually found out, especially as the Respondent had granted  aunt  a
    visit visa to the UK to visit maternal grandmother in the UK  when  she
    left the Appellant in the care of a stranger.  The  Appellant's  school
    work has begun to suffer.  She received a lot of money from her  mother
    for her 16th birthday but her aunt kept most of it.  She said that  her
    relationship with her aunt  had  recently  improved  because  the  aunt
    thinks she will soon be rid of her.

 6. The sponsoring mother's evidence, as set out  by  Judge  Frankish,  was
    that she was granted leave to remain in the UK in  2005  whereupon  she
    immediately visited the Appellant in November of that year and again in
    October 2006 when she stayed with her stepfather.  She  said  that  the
    Appellant was with her father  but  increasingly  begrudgingly  on  his
    part.  The mother's relationship with her husband in the UK broke  down
    in 2009 when she moved into her own house after which she  focussed  on
    bringing the Appellant to the UK, her first application  being  refused
    in 2011.  Her second application with the  assistance  of  her  current
    representatives was again refused  and  appealed  unsuccessfully.   She
    said that  the  Home  Office  had  obstructed  her  from  visiting  the
    Appellant as often as she would have liked by taking  a  long  time  to
    renew her passport.

 7. Her next visit to Jamaica was on 6th November 2012 when she stayed with
    her stepfather again along with the Appellant who was then aged 14.  It
    was on that occasion that father told mother that  he  had  to  go  out
    looking for construction work in the countryside and that the Appellant
    would have to be on her own as his parents were not able  to  care  for
    her.  It was then that they agreed that the Appellant should stay on  a
    temporary basis with mother's sister.

 8. In August 2013 mother  again  visited  the  Appellant  in  Jamaica  and
    visited  the  school.   She  then  received  a  third  refusal  of  the
    application and visited the Appellant once more in February  2014  when
    she travelled to Jamaica along with her two other daughters and on this
    occasion stayed with her sister.  She visited the school and  was  told
    that the Appellant's performance was declining and the  Appellant  told
    her that she was unhappy with her aunt.

 9. Judge Frankish then noted a letter from father dated May  2014  stating
    that he was of no fixed address but using the address  of  his  parents
    for correspondence.  In that letter he indicated that mother had always
    played  her  role  as  a  positive  mother  in  the  Appellant's   life
    financially and emotionally with constant communication.  He said  that
    he had tried as a dad but as times have changed there  had  become  the
    need for him to seek a job outside his parish in the  country  area  so
    the opportunity presented itself where he could  work  on  construction
    sites on the north coast of Jamaica and thus it was only right that the
    mother should take full responsibility for the Appellant.

10. Judge Frankish also referred to a letter from the aunt dated  13th  May
    2013 and another of 28th August 2014.  That letter indicated  that  she
    had been handed temporary guardianship of the Appellant from 2012.   He
    indicated that it was time for the Appellant to  join  her  mother  and
    that her presence in her house was causing strain.  She had chosen  not
    to have children and did not expect to  have  to  look  after  somebody
    else's.  She also indicated that father had no interest in  caring  for
    the Appellant.

11. Finally Judge Frankish noted there was a  supportive  letter  from  the
    Appellant's sister and a letter written by the Appellant to her mother.
     There were school reports for 2012/2013 and 2013/2014 indicating  that
    the Appellant needed to work harder to produce better grades which were
    all well below 50% except for English and Social Studies but even those
    were lower  than  the  previous  year.   There  was  a  medical  report
    confirming that the mother had consulted her GP in the UK in connection
    with headaches which she attributed to the problems  with  immigration.
    There was also a supporting letter  by  the  maternal  grandmother  and
    another aunt.

12. Judge Frankish then turned his attention to the previous  determination
    from 2011 which found that there was no  evidence  of  any  remittances
    from the Sponsor to the Appellant and that the  Sponsor  had  spent  no
    more than a few weeks with her over a period of ten years.  The  father
    had signed a statutory declaration  in  February  2011  which  made  no
    mention of any financial remittances from mother and it was  said  that
    mother's husband in the UK  had  prevented  contact  whilst  they  were
    married.

13. Judge Frankish then referred to the oral evidence particularly mother's
    evidence that she advised on  choosing  school  subject  choices,  hair
    appointments, appropriate dentists and clothing.   She  also  persuaded
    aunt to take the Appellant  to  a  Roman  Catholic  Church  and  mother
    arranged for a driver to bring the Appellant home from school.

14. Having set out the appropriate requirements of  paragraph  297  of  the
    Immigration Rules Judge Frankish then noted that there were a number of
    points that were not in  issue.   Maintenance  and  accommodation  were
    accepted and there was no challenge to the visits to Jamaica or  monies
    and remittances and  parcels  that  had  been  sent  nor  was  there  a
    challenge to the communication via electronic means.

15. The facts of this case were that the sponsoring mother had come to  the
    UK in 2001 when the Appellant was aged 3.  She had come to  the  UK  to
    see her mother because she felt lonely in  Jamaica  without  her.   She
    then stayed illegally after her visit visa expired, marrying  in  2004.
    Her husband prevented any contact with the Appellant and  she  had  two
    children by her husband born in 2004 and 2009.  She separated from  her
    husband in 2009 and rekindled  her  connection  with  her  daughter  in
    Jamaica but a settlement application was refused and that  started  the
    process of applications and refusals leading to the appeal before Judge
    Frankish.

16. The Judge in the 2011 appeal was  not  satisfied  that  the  sponsoring
    mother had sole responsibility for her  daughter  and  in  that  regard
    Judge Frankish set out the law defining and giving guidance as  to  the
    meaning of sole responsibility.  He then noted at paragraph 30  of  the
    determination that it was certainly the case that the sponsoring mother
    had succeeded in "plugging many of the gaps  identified  in  the  first
    determination, notably evidence of: financial remittances and at  least
    one parcel;  further  visits;  electronic  communication  and  how  the
    witness statements came to be taken."

17. He then went on at paragraph 31 to note that  the  background  to  this
    case was that in fulfilment of her own  desires  and  contrary  to  the
    Appellant's interests the sponsoring mother had come to the UK to  join
    other family members here because she said she felt lonely.   She  then
    stayed on as an illegal immigrant with no right to earn money until she
    was eventually granted leave as a spouse in 2005.  He noted she went on
    to have two further children without first securing  the  interests  of
    the Appellant by acceding to  a  marriage  between  2004  and  2009,  a
    condition of which was to eschew all contact with the Appellant.

18. He noted at paragraph 32 that throughout the  above  events  and  until
    2012 sole care had rested with the Appellant's  father  with  whom  she
    resided.  He noted that in short the father had been  both  mother  and
    father to the Appellant until recent times when she went to  stay  with
    her aunt and he identified that the  issue  was  whether  against  that
    background the father had indeed abandoned all but the most  peripheral
    involvement in the Appellant's life.  However, at paragraph 34  of  his
    decision the Judge noted that despite the purported work on  the  north
    coast of Jamaica, the letter  from  father  gave  the  address  of  the
    paternal  grandparents.   The  Home  Office  Presenting   Officer   had
    demonstrated with the aid of a map that that was in the  same  vicinity
    as the home of the aunt where the Appellant now lives.  He  noted  that
    accordingly a number of lacunas began to emerge in the evidence.  First
    and foremost why the father, having brought up the Appellant until  she
    was 14 should suddenly want nothing to do  with  her  whatsoever.   The
    context is one of discussion between Sponsor and father in which it was
    agreed that the Appellant should move to the aunt.  That is  indicative
    of collusion in an arrangement to secure entry to  the  UK.   Secondly,
    the grandparents had supported the entire household  during  all  their
    years of work in Saint Martin's.  They, in common with the father, live
    in walking distance of the Appellant.  Having supported her  and  their
    son all the Appellant's life, there was no explanation  given  for  why
    she or they want nothing further to do with one another, especially now
    that they  are  said  to  be  becoming  old  and  frail  but  with  the
    grandmother making visits to the USA to visit her daughter.   There  is
    no evidence whatsoever  of  the  purportedly  frail  condition  of  the
    grandparents.   Thirdly,  the  Judge  noted  there  was  absolutely  no
    evidence whatsoever that the father had in  fact  had  to  go  away  to
    undertake construction work at an unspecified  location  on  the  north
    coast.  The aunt stated that he was hard to track down and  mother  had
    claimed that she eventually  succeeded  by  persistent  visits  to  the
    grandparents.  There were no particulars of where he was said  to  have
    been in the interim.  For all of those reasons Judge Frankish concluded
    that it was a matter of family choice for the Appellant to  have  moved
    from father to  aunt  solely  to  support  an  application  for  better
    economic prospects and an income more  akin  to  the  mother  than  the
    father.  The father, as stated, had  been  mother  and  father  to  the
    Appellant until she was 14 and Judge Frankish  simply  did  not  accept
    that following a  discussion  with  mother  in  November  2012  he  had
    forsaken any parental role from that  time  forward.   Accordingly,  he
    found that the requirements of paragraph 297 were not met and  also  he
    found that there  was  neither  sole  responsibility  with  mother  nor
    serious or compelling circumstances to make exclusion undesirable.

19. Permission to appeal against that Decision was  granted  on  the  basis
    that it was arguable that the Judge  had  not  considered  all  of  the
    material evidence before him or applied the sole  responsibility  test.
    The Judge also thought it arguable that  he  had  erred  in  concluding
    Article 8 was not engaged when this was a case involving a minor  child
    wishing to join a parent.

20. Miss Mair before me expanded  upon  the  grounds  and  in  relation  to
    paragraph 297 submitted that the Judge had failed  to  make  any  clear
    findings as to who had exercised responsibility for  the  Appellant  in
    this case and had made a number of assumptions on the lack of  evidence
    rather than on the evidence that was before him.  In paragraphs  32  to
    34 he did not accept father had disappeared from the  Appellant's  life
    after 2012 but there was  no  positive  finding  as  to  what  role  he
    continued to exercise especially when case law indicates it can be more
    than one person involved on a day-to-day basis but that did not prevent
    an absent parent having sole responsibility.  She argued  that  it  was
    incumbent upon the Judge to find what role the father still had and  to
    make findings as to what role the mother had and whether that  amounted
    to sole responsibility.

21. She argued there was a great deal of evidence about the role of  mother
    in relation to continuing emotional and financial support, frequency of
    contact and the level  of  decision  making  in  the  Appellant's  life
    exercised  by  her.   All  of  that,  she  argued,  pointed   to   sole
    responsibility.  She accepted that the Judge had  made  clear  findings
    that until 2012 sole responsibility had rested with the father, he  had
    failed to make findings about who had responsibility for her now.  Even
    if the Judge's conclusion that father had not  forsaken  his  parenting
    role after 2012 that did not necessarily mean that mother did not  have
    sole responsibility and just because father was in  the  same  locality
    did not mean he had involvement in his child's life.  She also referred
    to evidence of his having left the locality.  I find that  the  grounds
    upon which permission to appeal was granted  and  submissions  by  Miss
    Mair  amount  to  no  more  than  a  disagreement  with   the   Judge's
    conclusions.  He has set out very clearly his findings  in  this  case.
    It is perfectly clear, as I have indicated when  I  have  detailed  his
    findings above, that he quite  simply  did  not  accept  that  parental
    responsibility had transferred from father to mother.   The  fact  that
    mother had increased her contact and involvement,  he  found  to  be  a
    deliberate attempt to gain entry  to  the  UK  for  the  Appellant  and
    concealing the true  fact  that  the  Appellant  had  always  been  and
    remained in the sole responsibility of her father.   He  quite  clearly
    simply did not accept that father and father's  parents  had  abandoned
    the child that they had brought  up  for  fourteen  years  without  any
    assistance from mother.

22. Where I find that the Judge did fall  into  error  was  in  failing  to
    consider Article 8 and  in  finding  in  the  final  paragraph  of  his
    judgment that "Article 8 was not engaged, there being no family life in
    the UK".  There does not need to be family life in the UK for Article 8
    to be engaged and where the Appellant is the daughter of  a  sponsoring
    mother with whom she has regular contact then Article 8 is engaged.  In
    failing to deal with Article 8 at all the Judge erred and  I  indicated
    that in that regard only I set aside his Decision and I would deal with
    Article 8 on submissions.

23. Miss Mair submitted that careful consideration should be given  to  all
    of the evidence in this case and the evidence of the Appellant  herself
    that  she  wanted  to  live  with  her  mother  and  that  it  was  her
    overwhelming desire to do so.  Her aunt does not want her and  that  is
    all supported by evidence from  the  family.   Mother  is  her  primary
    emotional support and she gives great detail in her evidence as to  how
    she counsels her daughter on a whole range of matters on  such  diverse
    matters as her school work, her clothes and hairstyle all of  which  is
    consistent with what might be expected between a mother and her teenage
    daughter.  Consideration also must be given to  the  interests  of  the
    sponsoring mother and her two children in  the  UK  who  are  the  half
    siblings of the Appellant.  The three siblings  ought  to  be  enjoying
    family life together.  She argued that these all amounted to compelling
    circumstances as to why the appeal ought to be allowed  notwithstanding
    the fact that the Immigration Rules could not be met and there  was  no
    doubt that the Appellant's best interests lay with being  permitted  to
    enter the UK to live with her mother and half siblings.

24. I disagree that there are compelling circumstances in this  case.   For
    all of the same reasons that Judge Frankish found mother did  not  have
    sole responsibility I find a lack of compelling reasons.  The Appellant
    has spent all her life in  Jamaica,  having  been  brought  up  by  her
    father.  She clearly has a close parental relationship with him  and  a
    close  relationship  with  her  paternal  grandparents.    Her   entire
    education thus far has been in Jamaica and so far  as  a  child's  best
    interests  are  concerned,  particularly  in   their   teenage   years,
    preservation of the status quo will be particularly  important.   I  do
    not accept it is in the best interests of a child to be  uprooted  from
    all she has ever known and moved to another country to  live  with  her
    mother with whom she has not lived since she was a very small child  at
    a time which she will probably not remember any half siblings that  she
    barely knows.  I agree with Judge Frankish that the  evidence  that  is
    before the Tribunal in terms of letters of support from family  members
    is not persuasive and indeed is  self-serving  and  as  Judge  Frankish
    found indicative of a collusion between family members to  achieve  the
    Appellant's entry to the UK.

25. The sponsoring mother in this case made a  life  choice  to  leave  her
    daughter in Jamaica for a great many years to pursue her own interests.



26. I therefore conclude that there are no compelling  reasons  to  suggest
    that this case should be considered under  Article  8  outside  of  the
    Rules but even if it was, the Decision is entirely proportionate and it
    does not run contrary to the Appellant's best interests.

Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is thus dismissed.

The First-tier Tribunal found no reason to make an anonymity  direction  and
none was applied for before me. I see no  justification  in  making  such  a
direction.


Signed   Dated 6th October 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
