
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Number: OA/17801/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |                Decision        |
|                                      |Promulgated                     |
|On 5th August 2015                    |                On 14th August  |
|                                      |2015                            |
|                                      |                                |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     SSR
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr C Lewis (counsel) instructed by The Immigration Law
Practice solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008, precluding publication of  any  information  regarding
the proceedings which would be likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
identify the  appellant,  preserving  the  anonymity  order  made  at  first
instance.


2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings  this  appeal,  but
in order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to  as  they  were  in
the First Tier Tribunal. This  is  an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State
against the decision of First Tier Tribunal Judge R Cooper,  promulgated  on
29 April 2015  which  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  on  human  rights
grounds but allowed the appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules.  The
determination promulgated on 29 April 2015 also dealt with the case  of  the
appellant's brother whose appeal was allowed  under  the  Immigration  Rules
and dismissed on human rights  grounds.  There  is  no  appeal  against  the
decision in relation to the appellant's brother.

Background

3     The appellant is an Indian citizen, born on 20 December  1994.  On  14
August 2013, the respondent refused the appellant's  application  for  entry
clearance to enter the UK as the dependent child of her father  and  sponsor
who became a British citizen in 2003.

The Judge's Decision

4     The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal.  First  Tier
Tribunal Judge R Cooper ("the judge") dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  on
Article 8 ECHR grounds but allowed the appeal under the  Immigration  Rules,
finding that  the  appellant  submitted  her  application  before  her  18th
birthday and considering the appellant's appeal under Paragraph 297  of  the
Immigration Rules.

5     Grounds of appeal were lodged by the respondent and on 18  June  2015,
First Tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett gave permission to appeal  stating  inter
alia:


           "2    The grounds assert that the judge erred  in  finding  that
                 the appeal should be considered under Paragraph 295 and not
                 Appendix FM of HC395 as the appellant's application was not
                 accompanied by a fee and a fee was not paid until some four
                 months later, by which time the appellant was no  longer  a
                 minor. This point is arguable as  the  judge's  reason  for
                 this conclusion is not clear."

The Hearing

6     Mr Avery for the respondent submitted that  the  case  turned  on  one
narrow technical point. The appellant's 18th birthday  was  on  20  December
2012. An online application was  submitted  on  19  December  2012  but  the
lodging fee was not paid until around April 2013. The respondent  relies  on
Paragraph 30 of the Immigration Rules which  provides  that  an  application
for entry clearance is not made until any fee required  has  been  paid.  Mr
Avery therefore argued that the application was not made until  April  2013,
approximately four months  after  the  appellant's  18th  birthday.  As  the
appellant had attained majority  by  the  time  the  application  was  made,
Paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules has no relevance.

7     For the appellant, Mr Lewis submitted that there is no material  error
of law contained in the determination  promulgated  on  29  April  2015.  He
referred me to the rehearsal of evidence at [36] to [39]  of  the  decision.
He admitted that the judge had correctly directed  himself  in  law  between
[41] and [44] of the decision and that this case is analogous  to  the  case
of Basnet, that what was important was the attempt to tender  a  fee  rather
than the respondent's receipt of a fee.


Analysis

8     In R (on the application of Da'Costa) v Secretary  of  State  for  the
Home Department [2010] EWHC 2259 (Admin) Judge  Pelling  QC  said  that  the
Secretary of State had no discretion in regards to an application  that  did
not comply with the requirements relating to fees under paragraph 21 of  the
Immigration  and  Nationality  (Fees)  Regulations  2007.  Furthermore,  the
Immigration Directorate Instructions drew a  clear  distinction  between  an
application which was invalid because of non-compliance with  a  requirement
imposed by the Immigration Rules and invalidity arising from non-payment  of
fees which was subject to the 2007 Regulations. An in-time  application  not
accompanied by a fee could only be treated as valid if payment  of  the  fee
was waived. If an application was rejected, as in the instant case, then  it
could only be valid if it was resubmitted with the fee.

9. In Kaur (Entry Clearance - date of application) [2013] UKUT  00381  (IAC)
it was held that (i) The date on which an application  for  entry  clearance
is made is  not  effectively  established  by  paragraph  30  or  any  other
provisions of the Immigration Rules, and has therefore to be established  by
reference to statute and secondary legislation;  (ii)   An  application  for
entry clearance that does not comply with the requirement in  regulation  37
of the Immigration and Nationality (Fees) Regulations  2011  (SI  2011/1055)
to be accompanied by payment  of  a  fee  is  a  nullity  -  it  is  not  an
application for the purpose  of  the  immigration  rules  or  any  statutory
provisions; and (iii) An application for entry  clearance  is  made  on  the
date on which payment of the relevant fee is made.  If  the  application  is
made  online,  and  payment  of  the  relevant  fee  is  also  made  online,
contemporaneously with submission of the online  application,  the  date  of
application is the date of submission. If payment of  the  relevant  fee  is
not made until the printed  application  form  is  submitted,  the  date  of
application is the date on which those are handed over.

10     In  Basnet  (validity  of  application  -  respondent)  [2012]   UKUT
00113(IAC) the Tribunal held that (i) if  the  respondent  asserts  that  an
application (not an appeal) was not accompanied by a fee,  and  so  was  not
valid, the respondent has the onus of proof; (ii)  The  respondent's  system
of  processing  payments  with  postal  applications  risks   falling   into
procedural  unfairness,  unless  other  measures  are  adopted;  (iii)  When
notices of appeal raise issues about payment of the fee  and,  consequently,
the validity of the application and the appeal, Duty Judges  of  the  First-
tier  Tribunal  should  issue  directions  to  the  respondent  to   provide
information to determine whether an application was accompanied by the  fee.


11    At [47] the judge finds that the original application was received  by
the respondent on the day before the appellant's 18th birthday but that  the
fee was not finally paid until April  2013.  The  judge  does  not  properly
engage with the four month gap between the day before the  appellant's  18th
birthday and the date of payment of the fee, but does find  that  the  delay
is the shared responsibility of both the sponsor  and  the  respondent.  The
respondent may not have acted  flawlessly  in  this  case  but  the  judge's
finding is that the sponsor shares responsibility for the delay.

12    At [47] the judge finds "...that a valid  application  was  eventually
made..." Those findings cannot support his finding that the application  was
made whilst the appellant was in minority. In any event, the  case  of  Kaur
indicates that the judge's logic was flawed.

Conclusion

13. I therefore find that the decision  promulgated  on  29  April  2015  is
tainted by a material error of law and must be set aside.

14    Because the appellant was in majority at the date the application  was
made (April 2013) the appellant's case cannot be considered under  Paragraph
297 of the Immigration Rules and could only be considered under Appendix  FM
of the Immigration Rules.

16    The judge dismissed the appellant's  case  on  human  rights  grounds.
There is no challenge to that finding. The error  of  law  contained  within
the decision promulgated on 29 April 2015 means that  the  appellant  cannot
succeed under the Immigration Rules.

Decision

17    The decision promulgated on 29 April 2015 contains  a  material  error
of law and must be set aside.

18    I remake the decision and substitute the following decision.

19    The appellant's appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules.

Signed                                                              Date 7
August 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle


