
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/17552/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 15th August 2014                             |On 28th August 2014        |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER

                                   Between

                            MR NADO AHMED AYANLE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Evans
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 1st January 1945 is a citizen  of  Somalia.   The
    Appellant was represented my Miss Evans of Counsel.  The Respondent was
    represented by Mr McVeety, a Home Office Presenting Officer.

Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had made application for entry clearance  for  settlement
    as the  adult  dependent  relative  of  her  son  in  July  2013.   Her
    application was refused by the Respondent  on  6th  August  2013.   The
    Appellant appealed that decision and her appeal was heard by  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Brunnen sitting at  Manchester  on  29th  April
    2014.   He  had  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  under  both   the
    Immigration Rules and the Human Rights Act 1998.

 3. Application for permission to appeal was  made  and  granted  by  Judge
    Ievins on 20th June 2014.  The judge noted that the Grounds of  Appeal
    may be thought little more than a  disagreement  with  the  conclusions
    reached by the judge but it was said that if certain factors were taken
    into account they may amount to something  more  than  a  disagreement.
    Directions were issued for the Upper Tribunal to decide firstly whether
    or not an error of law  was  made.   The  Respondent  had  opposed  the
    Appellant's application.  The matter comes before me in accordance with
    the directions issued.

Submissions on behalf of the Appellant

 4. Miss Evans referred again to the application for permission  to  appeal
    and made reference to the judge  not  taking  account  of  postdecision
    features such at the attack  on  a  shopping  mall  arguing  that  such
    features were nevertheless circumstances appertaining at the  time  and
    should have been taken into account in terms of the Appellant's ability
    to live in Kenya.

Submissions on behalf of the Respondent

 5. Mr McVeety noted that the Appellant  could  not  meet  the  Immigration
    Rules and he submitted that the judge had correctly identified  matters
    under Article 8.

 6. At the conclusion I reserved my decision to  consider  the  submissions
    made.  I now provide that decision with my reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 7. The  judge  in  this  case  had  provided  a  detailed  and  considered
    determination.  He had clearly had some sympathy with  the  Appellant's
    circumstances as he recorded at paragraph 31 of the determination.

 8. The judge had noted at paragraph 20  that  Miss  Evans  of  Counsel  on
    behalf of the Appellant had rightly accepted that the Appellant was not
    able  to  meet  the  Immigration  Rules.   The  Appellant's  case   was
    essentially put on the basis of Article 8 of the ECHR.

 9. I deal firstly with the specific point raised before me that the  judge
    had failed to take account of postdecision events in Kenya but that  in
    reality those events  merely  disclosed  the  attitude  of  the  Kenyan
    Government to Somali refugees existing as at the date  of  application.



10. The judge was clearly aware of the Appellant's  personal  circumstances
    in Kenya as evidenced within the determination and  was  alive  to  the
    evidence and submissions made on behalf of the Appellant.  It  is  also
    clear  the  judge  was  aware  of  country  material  that   had   been
    specifically drawn to his attention as well as being  contained  within
    the Appellant's bundle and he made reference as such at paragraph 30 of
    the determination.  There is a reference by the judge in  paragraph  30
    to two separate areas of evidence.   Firstly,  there  was  the  general
    evidence contained  within  various  news  reports  that  outlined  the
    difficult conditions in which refugees from Somalia are living  in  the
    camps in Kenya.  The judge was  aware  of  that  fact  and  indeed  had
    already referred to such  difficulties  at  an  earlier  stage  in  his
    determination at paragraph 15.  The second aspect of  the  news  report
    that the judge was referred to was the specific security operation that
    took place in  March  and  April  2014  that  sought  to  identify  the
    criminals and supporters of Al Shabab as a response to  the  attack  on
    the Nairobi Shopping Mall in  September  2013.   That  was  a  specific
    security operation and it may well have affected  individuals  directly
    or indirectly related to that terrorist  organisation.   There  was  no
    evidence presented by the Appellant that as a 69 year old woman she had
    been directly affected by that matter which postdated her  application.
    In reality there is little or no relevance attaching to that  terrorist
    attack in relation to the Appellant.  In so far as the  Government  may
    have taken a more robust or adverse approach  to  Somali  refugees  the
    judge was aware of that evidence and indeed had referred to it  in  his
    determination and had it in mind as part of his assessment generally.

11. In dealing with Article 8 outside of the Immigration  Rules  the  judge
    had taken a most careful look at the Appellant's circumstances but  had
    properly considered her circumstances under  Article  8  in  accordance
    with the proper approach laid down in case law.  At  paragraph  21  the
    judge had noted that there was at  least  an  arguable  case  that  the
    result produced by the Immigration Rules was unjustifiably harsh and it
    was for that reason that the judge as he noted found it appropriate  to
    look at Article 8 outside of the Immigration Rules.  He had taken  note
    of all the relevant evidence and had reached conclusions based on  that
    evidence and for proper reasons given at paragraph 31 found the refusal
    of entry clearance was not disproportionate  and  did  not  produce  an
    unjustifiably harsh result.

12. The Grounds of Appeal were in reality no more than a disagreement  with
    the judge's conclusions and there was no material error of law made  in
    this case.

Decision

13. There was no material error of law made by the judge and I  uphold  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.





Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever

