
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/17819/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 28 August 2013                               |On 24 October 2013         |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ROBERTS
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                        Chukwuenwendu Chigozie Ekezie

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Echendu, instructed by Minority Advice Bureau,
Leeds
For the Respondent:    Mr J Wardle, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant,  Mr  Chukwuenwendu  Chigozie  Ekezie,  was  born  on  14
    September 1980 and is a citizen of  Nigeria.   The  appellant's  appeal
    came  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Boyd)  which,   in   a
    determination promulgated on 20 February 2013,  dismissed  the  appeal.
    Judge Boyd set out the background to the appeal as follows:

         On 15 June 2012 a decision was made to remove  the  appellant  from
         the United Kingdom.  It is against this decision that  this  appeal
         has been brought.

         In order for the appellant's appeal to succeed he has to  establish
         that his five  year  Business  Visit  Visa  should  not  have  been
         curtailed and that the respondents, upon whom the onus  lies,  have
         not established that they had  grounds  for  curtailing  his  lease
         (sic).

 2. We have papers relating to the appellant's detention in June 2012 and a
    decision to remove him as an illegal entrant under Section  10  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 which  was  dated  15  June  2012.  The
    notification to the appellant of the decision to  remove  him  had  the
    effect of invalidating his leave to remain (see Section  10(8)  of  the
    1999 Act).  The appellant was removed and he now  appeals  from  Sierra
    Leone, where he is currently living.

 3. Judge Boyd set out the background of the case as follows:

         The appellant has been issued  visit  visas  to  enter  the  United
         Kingdom ongoing since 2007.  His most recent visa was issued  on  6
         April 2011 valid until 6 April 2016.  This  was  a  business  visit
         visa sponsored by  Consomex  Export  UK  Ltd.   The  appellant  was
         arrested on 14 June 2012 by Strathclyde  police  during  a  traffic
         stop as a suspected immigration offender.  He was interviewed.  The
         appellant was issued with a notice to a person  liable  to  removal
         and on 15 June 2012 a notice of immigration decision  was  made  to
         remove him  from  the  United  Kingdom  under  Section  10  of  the
         Immigration and Asylum  Act  1999  (administrative  removal).   The
         appellant was removed from the United Kingdom in terms  of  removal
         directions (sic) on 23 June 2012.

 4. The judge went on to record that "it is not  disputed  the  appellant's
    recent visa was for five years following its issue on 6 April 2011  and
    that this was a business visit visa sponsored  by  Consomex  Export  UK
    Ltd."  Further, it is agreed that this company ceased to  trade  in  or
    around June 2011, as is shown  in  the  summary  and  reasons  for  the
    initial detention and that the appellant was aware of that fact  before
    the decision was taken to remove him.

 5. The appellant had entered the United Kingdom through  Heathrow  Airport
    on 22 April 2012 using his valid Nigerian passport and valid visa.   At
    [9] Judge Boyd noted the contents of the appellant's statement prepared
    in relation to the appeal proceedings:

         I note the  appellant's  statement.   Whilst  he  states  that  the
         company has ceased to trade is a sister company of the  company  he
         works for in Sierra Leone Consomex Export Holding SL, there  is  in
         fact no evidence  which  would  establish  that  these  are  sister
         companies.  I have no doubt, despite the appellant's  protestations
         in his statement, that he did know that he  had  an  obligation  to
         advise that the United  Kingdom  company  had  ceased  trading  and
         therefore he was entering the United  Kingdom  without  a  sponsor.
         The balance of probabilities suggests this is very much the case.

 6. The judge found that the appellant had entered the United Kingdom  with
    full knowledge that the United Kingdom company which was sponsoring him
    had ceased to trade.  He wrote at [11] that the appellant "simply  took
    the chance of entering the United Kingdom in the full knowledge of  the
    status or likely status of his business visit visa.  I am not satisfied
    that this was simply a mistake, a misunderstanding or oversight by  the
    appellant."  The judge found  at  [13]  that  the  appellant  had  used
    deception in seeking leave to remain and that he  had  also  failed  to
    observe the condition of his leave to enter "...namely the condition to
    advise of the change of circumstances".

 7. We  were  referred  to  Boahen  [2010]  EWCA  Civ  585  and  also  Fiaz
    (cancellation of leave to remain - fairness)  [2012]  0057  (IAC).   In
    Boahen, Pitchford LJ sought to navigate through  the  highly-convoluted
    law and regulations relating to the  curtailment  and  cancellation  of
    leave to enter and the refusal of leave  under  paragraph  321  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  In the same appeal, Thomas LJ described the law  as
    "very complicated" and noted the "urgent need to simplify to  write  in
    plain English the relevant Regulations and other provisions.  It cannot
    be right that officials of the UK Border Agency are required to try and
    understand and make sense of provisions that are so arcane  and  poorly
    drafted".  At [14], Pitchford LJ makes reference to Schedule 2  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971:
    Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971 contains provisions enabling
    immigration officers and others to examine persons arriving in the UK,
    and gives a power to cancel leave to enter either deemed or previously
    given. By paragraph 2A of Schedule 2:
      2A(1) This paragraph applies to a person who has arrived in the United
      Kingdom with leave to enter which is in force but which was given to
      him before his arrival.
      (2) He may be examined by an immigration officer for the purpose of
      establishing -
      (a) Whether there has been such a change in the circumstances of his
      case since that leave was given, that it should be cancelled;
      (b) Whether that leave was obtained as a result of false information
      given by him or his failure to disclose material facts;
      (c) Whether there are medical grounds on which that leave should be
      cancelled.
      (2A) Where the person's leave to enter derives by virtue of Section
      3A(3) from an entry clearance he may also be examined by an
      immigration officer for the purpose of establishing whether the leave
      should be cancelled on the grounds that the person's purpose in
      arriving in the United Kingdom is different from the purpose specified
      in the entry clearance.
      (3) He may also be examined by an immigration officer for the purpose
      of determining whether it would be conducive to the public good for
      that leave to be cancelled.
      (4) He may also be examined by a medical inspector or by any qualified
      person carrying out a test or examination required by a medical
      inspector.
      ...
      (8) An immigration officer, may, on the completion of any examination
      of a person under this paragraph, cancel his leave to enter.
      (9) Cancellation of a person's leave, under sub-paragraph (8), is to
      be treated for the purposes of this act and part 5 of the Nationality,
      Immigration of Asylum Act 2002 (Immigration and Asylum appeals) as if
      he had been refused leave to enter at a time when he had a current
      entry clearance".
      It is common ground that paragraph 2A(2)(a) and 2A(2A) applied to Mr
      Boahen.




 8. In the present case, the change of circumstances in  question  [closure
    of the United Kingdom company] occurred before leave was  granted  and,
    as a consequence, paragraph 2A(2) and (a) does  not  appear  to  apply.
    The issue  is  whether  leave  was  obtained  "as  a  result  of  false
    information given by  [the  applicant]"  was  a  "failure  to  disclose
    material facts."  At [33], the Court of Appeal  refers  to  the  Border
    Force Operations Manual:


    Included in our authorities bundle is a section from the current Border
    Force Operations Manual entitled "Cancellation of entry clearance that
    has effect as leave to enter (Paragraph 321A of HC 395)". Under
    paragraph 1, "Introduction", the authors set out in summary the power
    of the immigration officer to cancel leave to enter on one of the
    grounds provided by paragraph 321A (paragraph 17 above) and continues:
      "A person can also have their leave cancelled if they seek to entry
      [sic] for a purpose not specified by their entry clearance; although
      this refusal would fall under paragraph 320(5) and not paragraph 321A
      of HC 395." [emphasis added]
      When dealing with "7. Change of Purpose" the Manual proceeds:
      "Although refusing leave to enter to a passenger with a current entry
      clearance (which has the effect of leave to enter) based on a change
      of purpose is covered by paragraph 320(5) and not paragraph 321A, it
      is worth mentioning here. It is important to illustrate the difference
      between refusal on the grounds of change of purpose and refusal on the
      grounds of change of circumstances.
      Where a person with a valid entry clearance seeks to enter the UK,
      leave can be cancelled on the basis where:
      i) The passenger admits that leave is being sought for a different
         purpose than specified on his entry clearance, e.g. a person with a
         visit visa seeking entry to follow a course of study;
     ii) There is clear evidence that the passenger's purpose of stay is
         different to that stated in his entry clearance, as with the above
         example, any documents found in the passenger's belongings about
         his course of study or an employer's letter with someone who was
         actually seeking entry to work."
      In my judgement this advice is wrong, for the following reasons:
      (1) The summary incorrectly treats refusal synonymously with
      cancellation. Cancellation is to be treated as refusal of entry only
      for the purposes of appeal under section 92 of the 2002 Act. They are
      not otherwise synonymous terms. Paragraph 320(5) does not deal with
      cancellation; it deals with refusal of leave to enter. Leave to enter
      can be cancelled for change of purpose, but the power is given under
      paragraph 2A(2A) and (8) of Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act and not
      paragraph 320(5). Paragraph 320(5) applies only to a visitor who is
      seeking entry clearance or leave to enter, not to a person who already
      has leave to enter but who has arrived for a purpose different from
      the purpose specified in his entry clearance.
      (2) Paragraph 7 of the advice assumes a power to refuse leave to enter
      on the ground of change of circumstances. Paragraph 321A of the Rules
      and paragraph 2A(2) and (8) of Schedule 2 do not give a power to
      refuse leave to enter but a power to cancel an existing leave to
      enter.
      (3) The advice is, however, correct to distinguish between the power
      to cancel under paragraph 321A on six grounds, including change of
      circumstances, and the power to cancel for change of purpose under
      paragraph 2A(2A).




 9. The passages of the Manual quoted above indicate to us why the facts in
    the present appeal should be distinguished from  those  in  Boahen  and
    also in the Upper Tribunal determination in Fiaz.  The Court of  Appeal
    noted the reasons for the immigration decision in Boahen at [4]:
    In a facsimile letter sent on 10 November 2008 the firm of solicitors
    acting for Mr Boahen, Carl Martin, challenged the immigration officer's
    decision. On the following day, 11 November 2008, a chief immigration
    officer, Mrs M E Boden, replied saying:
      "I have decided to issue an amended form IS 82A which more clearly
      outlines the reasons for the refusal of your client."
      The amended notice read as follows:
      "On the 26th January 2008 [sic] in Accra you were issued with a United
      Kingdom entry clearance endorsed "visit" but I am satisfied that there
      has been such a change of circumstances in your case since the leave
      was granted that it should be cancelled. The change of circumstances
      in your case is that you obtained leave to enter as a visitor for five
      weeks to visit your uncle, Kwadwo Duodo Owusu, but you have stated
      that you are now seeking entry for six weeks for the purpose of taking
      care of your uncle's children and that you will be given money and
      accommodation for doing so, which amounts to paid employment. Mr Owusu
      has stated that you will stay for two to three months.
      I note that you last entered the United Kingdom as a visitor on the
      13th January 2008 but you did not leave until 4th October 2008,
      thereby overstaying by almost three months the 180 day limit endorsed
      on your visa. You claim that was because you did not feel well and had
      to consult an NHS doctor, but you have produced no evidence of this.
      You also claimed that your uncle could not afford to change your
      return ticket.
      I therefore cancel your leave under paragraph 2(A)(8) of the
      Immigration Act 1971 and paragraph 321A(1) of the Immigration Rules
      (HC395).
      Furthermore, you are now seeking entry for the purpose of employment
      but you are a visa national and have failed to produce a passport or
      other identity document endorsed with a valid and current UK entry
      clearance issued for the purpose for which the entry is sought. I
      therefore refuse you leave to enter under paragraph 320(5) of the
      Immigration Rules (HC395).
      I therefore refuse you leave to enter the United Kingdom."
      The notice proceeded to inform Mr Boahen that directions for removal
      would be set and that he had a limited out of country right of appeal
      against the decision. It was common ground before us that it was the
      amended notice of 11 November 2008 delivered in substitution for the
      notice of 4 November 2008 which would determine the issues arising in
      the appeal.




10. In Fiaz, the appellant was a student:


       On 9 February 2011 he was granted leave  to  remain  until  December
       2011 to complete the course. The appellant left the  United  Kingdom
       shortly after 26 February 2011 when he received news of the death of
       an uncle to whom he was close. He remained in Pakistan until his re-
       entry to the United Kingdom on or about 10 April 2011  when  he  was
       questioned about his intentions and he  stated  that  he  was  still
       studying at St Johns College. Following further inquiries his  leave
       to remain was cancelled on 11 April 2011 on the basis of a change of
       circumstances since it was granted.


        The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. On 9  June  2011
       Judge McIntosh dismissed his appeal. He found as follows:-
          a.     Following the refusal of 20 October 2010 the appellant was
             unable to start or continue his course with St  John's  College
             as he had no authority to do so.
          b.     The appellant informed the college  that  he  intended  to
             appeal but failed to inform them of the outcome of the  appeal,
             the result of which he was  aware  of  by  the  first  week  in
             January.
          c.      The appellant did not study at the college in January  or
             February 2011 and his statement to the Immigration Officer that
             he had attended the college in the week before his departure to
             Pakistan was misleading.
          d.      The appellant had not communicated with  the  college  on
             receipt of his identity document endorsed with leave to  remain
             on 9 February 2011.
          e.     His failure to contact the college since January 2011  and
             his failure to resume his enrolment and  continue  his  studies
             there was a material change of circumstances within the meaning
             of the Immigration Rules.
          f.      The decision to cancel his leave was in  accordance  with
             the Rules.
          g.     His removal from the United Kingdom would not  breach  his
             right to respect for private life.




11. The facts in the present appeal are very different.  The appellant  had
    been issued with a visa marked "C-VISIT-BUSINESS" valid  from  6  April
    2011 until 6 April 2016.  The only condition endorsed on  the  face  of
    the visa is "NO WORK OR RECOURSE TO PUBLIC FUNDS".  The appellant was a
    business visitor and was covered by the provisions of paragraph  40  of
    the Immigration Rules:

    40. For the purposes of paragraphs 41-46 a general visitor  includes  a
    person living and working outside the United Kingdom who comes  to  the
    United Kingdom as a tourist. A person seeking leave to enter the United
    Kingdom as a Business Visitor, which includes Academic  Visitors,  must
    meet the requirements of paragraph 46G. A person  seeking  entry  as  a
    Sports Visitor must meet the requirements of paragraph  46M.  A  person
    seeking entry as an Entertainer Visitor must meet the  requirements  of
    paragraph 46S. A visitor seeking leave to enter  for  the  purposes  of
    marriage  or  to  enter  into  a  civil  partnership  must   meet   the
    requirements of paragraph 56D. A person seeking entry  to  study  as  a
    student visitor must meet the requirements of paragraph 56K.




12. Paragraph 46G provides:

    Requirements for leave to enter as a Business Visitor

    46G The requirements to be met by a person seeking leave to enter the
    United Kingdom as a business visitor are that he:

    (i) is genuinely seeking entry as a Business Visitor for a limited
period as stated by him:

    (a) not exceeding 6 months; or

    (b) not exceeding 12 months if seeking entry as an Academic Visitor

    (ii) meets the requirements of paragraphs 41 (ii)-(iv), subject to
    paragraph 46HA, (v), (vi)-(viii) and (x)-(xii);

    (iii) intends to do one or more of the following during his visit:


    (a) to carry out one of the following activities;

    (i) to attend meetings, conferences and interviews, provided they were
    arranged before arrival in the UK and, if the applicant is a board-
    level director attending board meetings in the UK, provided they are
    not employed by a UK company (although they may be paid a fee for
    attending the meeting);

    (ii) to attend trade fairs for promotional work only, provided they are
not directly selling;

    (iii) to arrange deals, or negotiating or signing trade agreements or
    contracts; [my emphasis]

    (iv) to carry out fact-finding missions;

    (v) to conduct site visits;

    .....





13. As the Tribunal in Fiaz noted, "a change  of  circumstances  justifying
    cancellation exists when the basis for  the  grant  of  the  leave  has
    disappeared..." Unlike  the  appellants  in  Boahen  or  in  Fiaz,  the
    appellant in the present case was not seeking to change his status as a
    foreign national in the United Kingdom: in Boahen,  the  appellant  had
    sought, in effect, to convert from the status of visitor into that of a
    paid carer whilst in Fiaz the appellant had  failed  to  study  at  the
    college in respect of which he had obtained entry clearance.  In  order
    to comply with paragraph 46G, the appellant had to intend to follow one
    or more of the activities specified at 46G (iii)(a).  We find that  the
    appellant fell firmly into the category  at  sub-paragraph  (iii)  ("to
    arrange  deals  or  negotiating  or   signing   trade   agreements   or
    contracts").  The grounds of appeal at [17] state:

         "The appellant's business visit visa was given for business  visits
         to buy goods from the United Kingdom.  The appellant had since  six
         years of  visiting  the  United  Kingdom  not  deviated  from  this
         purposes.  Even on his bail, the Immigration Officer gave  him  two
         weeks to load his containers of goods he  bought  from  the  United
         Kingdom.   This  indicates  there  was  no  fundamental  change  of
         circumstances that justified the cancellation  of  the  appellant's
         five years' business visa."

14. The appellant  has  claimed  throughout  that  the  sister  company  of
    Consomex Export UK Ltd continues to trade and that it was in  order  to
    undertake business for that company that  the  appellant  came  to  the
    United Kingdom.   We  consider  it  significant  that,  notwithstanding
    closure  of  the  United  Kingdom  company,  the  appellant  had  still
    transacted business which required him, whilst on bail from immigration
    detention, to load containers  with  goods  purchased  under  contracts
    which he had negotiated in this country.   All  the  evidence,  in  our
    opinion, indicates that the appellant had done in  the  United  Kingdom
    precisely what he had intended and had been required by the Immigration
    Rules to do, that is, in the words of paragraph 46G, to arrange  deals,
    negotiate and sign trade agreements and contracts.   That  purpose  was
    not altered or interrupted by reason of the closure of Consomex UK Ltd.
     The appellant is, therefore, very  different  from  the  appellant  in
    Boahen and also does not fall foul of the difficulties  encountered  by
    the appellant in Fiaz where the requirement not  to  change  course  or
    college without the prior approval of the Home Office had been  ignored
    by the appellant.

15. Judge Boyd appears to have assumed that the appellant had an obligation
    to trade only with his "business visa sponsor".  We are not  sure  what
    the term "business visa sponsor"  actually  means  in  the  context  of
    paragraph 46G.  We consider that Judge Boyd was wrong  to  impose  upon
    the appellant a restriction and obligation which appears nowhere on the
    face of the visa issued to him or in the Immigration  Rule  subject  to
    which that visa had been issued.  Accordingly, we find that there  were
    no grounds for the Immigration Officer finding that there  had  been  a
    change  in  the  appellant's  circumstances  such  as  to  justify  the
    cancellation of his business visa.  Judge Boyd erred in law  such  that
    his determination falls to be set aside.  We have remade the  decision.
    This appeal is allowed.

DECISION

16. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 20 February
    2013 is set aside.  We  have  remade  the  decision.   This  appeal  is
    allowed.






Signed                              Date 18 October 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
