
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/17076/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre|Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 22 December 2015                  |On 7 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, DHAKA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MAZADA BEGUM JOLY
                            (NO ANONYMITY ORDER)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Vokes, instructed by Samad & Co Immigration
(Witton)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The ECO appeals against the decision and reasons  statement  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Burns that was promulgated on 16 February  2015  on
    the grounds that the judge failed to  consider  the  relevance  of  the
    restrictions on evidence contained in appendix FM-SE to the immigration
    rules.

 2. Mr Mills advised me that the issue at the heart of the ECO's appeal was
    whether the judge was required to consider the version of appendix  FM-
    SE in force at the date of the first decision (22 July 2013) or at  the
    date of the second decision (13 July 2014). Mr Mills asked if  I  could
    give an initial indication as to this issue because if I were  to  find
    the decision to be the earlier one then he had no submissions.

 3. Having noted that the notice of appeal was submitted on 21 August 2013,
    that the second decision notice clearly stated at its end that  it  was
    not a fresh decision (merely further grounds  for  refusal),  and  that
    there was no right of appeal against the second decision notice, I  was
    satisfied that the appeal was brought against the earlier decision.  As
    per s.85 of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  and
    bearing in mind the House of Lords decision in Odelola, I was satisfied
    that the facts and law that applied were those  in  force  on  22  July
    2013.

 4. Mr Mills did not disagree and therefore had no submissions to make.  He
    invited me to dismiss the ECO's appeal as  it  was  based  on  a  wrong
    assumption.  I concur and as a result did not  need  to  hear  from  Mr
    Vokes.  I am satisfied that the judge applied the right  law  and  that
    her decision is sound and should be upheld.

Decision

There is no error of law in Judge Burns's decision and reasons statement  of
16 February 2015 and her decision is upheld.




                               Signed   Date


                               Judge McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
