
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/17229/2013
     OA/17237/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 June 2016                                |On 1 July 2016                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                               MR H J E LATTER
                        (DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE)

                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, CHENNAI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Nageswary Naveenanajagam
                          Nurusanth Naveenanajagam
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms S Jegarajah, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the Entry Clearance Officer,  against  a  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Jackson)  allowing  the  respondent's
    appeal against the decision made on 23 July 2013 refusing to grant  the
    applicants entry clearance to the UK as the partner and  child  of  the
    sponsor, the first  applicant's  husband  and  the  second  applicant's
    father.  In this decision I will refer to  the  parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal, the applicants as  the  appellants  and
    the Entry Clearance Officer as the respondent.

Background

2.   The appellants are citizens of Sri Lanka, currently  living  in  India,
    born on 12 January  1972  and  1  May  1997  respectively.   The  first
    appellant married the sponsor on 19 August  1991,  the  marriage  being
    solemnised on 23 October 1996.  They have three  children,  a  son  who
    came to the United Kingdom in January 2009 and has successfully claimed
    asylum, a daughter who came to the United Kingdom in September 2010  as
    a student and the second appellant who continues to live with the first
    appellant.  The family went to India in 1976 where they were  permitted
    to stay although not formally recognised as refugees.  The sponsor  was
    subsequently arrested on the basis that he had worked for the LTTE  and
    could not stay in India.  He was released on the basis that he would be
    called back for investigation but he returned to Sri Lanka in 1997  and
    then came to the UK in March 1999.   He  applied  for  asylum  but  was
    eventually granted discretionary  leave  to  remain  under  the  legacy
    programme and indefinite leave to remain on 7 September 2015  following
    ten years' lawful residence.

3.   The appellants' applications for entry clearance  were  refused  on  23
    July 2013 on the basis that they could not meet the immigration  status
    or the maintenance and accommodation requirements  of  the  Rules.   An
    appeal against this decision was dismissed by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    in a decision issued on 13 November 2014  but  that  decision  was  set
    aside by the Upper Tribunal on 31  March  2015  and  the  decision  was
    remitted for rehearing by the First-tier Tribunal.

The Hearing Before the First-tier Tribunal

4.   At the remitted hearing  it  was  accepted  that  the  maintenance  and
    accommodation requirements of the Rules were  met  but  the  appellants
    were unable to meet the immigration status requirements as the  sponsor
    was not a person "present and settled" in the UK at the relevant  time.
    It was therefore  conceded  that,  as  they  could  not  meet  all  the
    requirements of the Rules, the appeal had to  proceeded  on  article  8
    grounds only.  It was accepted that  the  appellants  and  sponsor  had
    existing and continuing family  life  with  each  other  despite  their
    prolonged separation.  The sponsor and first  appellant  had  lived  in
    India since 1996 until the sponsor left in 1997.  The  family  were  in
    touch with each other and had maintained their family life despite  the
    absence of face to face contact for many  years.   The  judge  accepted
    that the refusal of entry  clearance  would  be  an  interference  with
    family life as it prevented the greater enjoyment of family life in the
    same country.  It was also accepted that family life could not continue
    in Sri Lanka or in India as the appellants' status was such  that  they
    did not have any permanent rights  of  residence  and  were  unable  to
    sponsor a family member to join them there.  The judge did  not  accept
    that the sponsor would not be able to visit the appellants in India but
    he could only visit and would not be able to live there.

5.   The judge accepted that  the  interference  with  family  life  was  in
    accordance with the law and pursuant to a legitimate aim within article
    8(2).  She went on to consider the final issue, whether the refusal  of
    entry clearance was proportionate to this legitimate  aim.   She  found
    that the public interest in maintaining  immigration  control  was  not
    particularly weighty, taking into account the main reason  for  refusal
    and the  factors  to  be  considered  in  s.117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The appellants  met  the  substantive
    requirements of the Rules save for the sponsor's status in  the  UK  at
    the time of decision.

6.   The judge noted that the second appellant was a child at  the  date  of
    decision although  he  was  now  an  adult.   She  found  that  it  was
    predominantly in his best interests to remain with his mother  who  had
    brought him up and with whom he had lived since birth.  She noted  that
    there were no clear or compelling factors suggesting that it  would  be
    in the second appellant's best interests to reside in  the  UK,  rather
    than in India, and that it was arguable that at his age, continuity  of
    residence in the country where he was socially and culturally aware was
    of considerable importance.

7.   The judge summarised her conclusions as follows:

         "In all of the circumstances I find that the respondent's  refusals
         of  entry  clearance  to  the  appellants  is  a   disproportionate
         interference with their right to family life.  The public  interest
         in refusing entry clearance is relatively weak in this case and  at
         least in the case of the  first  appellant,  a  future  application
         under the Immigration Rules seems likely to be successful now  that
         the sponsor has been granted indefinite leave to remain and pending
         that there would  be  continued  separation.   The  effect  of  the
         refusal would however practicably  be  to  continue  to  leave  the
         appellants separated from the sponsor as they  could  not  enjoy  a
         family life in India or Sri  Lanka  or  at  least  for  the  second
         appellant, that could potentially be a permanent state  of  affairs
         as a future application for him would not be successful  under  the
         Immigration Rules as he is now an adult.  Article 8 of the European
         Convention on Human Rights is there not just to prevent a worsening
         of family life but also to positively promote  it,  the  latter  of
         which is pertinent in this case given the long separation of family
         members and the lack of ability for them to improve their enjoyment
         of family life outside of entry clearance to the United Kingdom for
         the appellants.  The  appellants'  appeals  are  allowed  on  human
         rights grounds."

The Grounds and Submissions

8.   In the respondent's grounds it is argued that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    has failed to provide  adequate  reasons  for  its  findings  that  the
    refusal of entry clearance was disproportionate despite  the  inability
    to meet the requirements of the Rules.  The Tribunal had made a finding
    that the sponsor could visit the appellants in India and  that  it  was
    predominantly in the best interests of the second appellant  to  remain
    with his mother.  It is argued that there were no clear  or  compelling
    factors suggesting that it was in the second appellant's best interests
    to reside in the UK, rather than India.

9.   Mr Tarlow submitted that there was nothing compelling in the  facts  of
    this case to justify a grant of discretionary leave outside the  Rules.
    It was open to the first appellant to make a further application  which
    may well be granted  but  that  was  no  justification  in  itself  for
    allowing the appeal under article 8 grounds.

10.  Ms Jegarajah submitted that the judge had reached a  decision  properly
    open to her.  She had taken into account that this  was  an  admission,
    rather than an expulsion  case.   The  judge  had  looked  at  all  the
    relevant factors both for and against a finding that removal  would  be
    disproportionate.  Her decision was wholly sustainable for the  reasons
    she gave.

Consideration of Whether the First-tier Tribunal Erred in Law

11.  It is argued on behalf of the respondent that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    failed to provide adequate reasons for its finding that the refusal  of
    entry clearance was disproportionate as the requirements of  the  rules
    could not be met.  It is further argued that the judge failed  to  take
    into account the fact that the sponsor could visit  the  appellants  in
    India and that in the light of the fact the second appellant had  lived
    in India, this was  at  least  suggestive  that  it  was  in  his  best
    interests to remain there, rather than coming to the UK.

12.  However, I am not satisfied that these arguments are  made  out.   When
    the determination is read as a whole it is clear why the judge  allowed
    the appeal.  She was entitled to consider the strength  of  the  public
    interest and to take into account the fact that  the  only  reason  the
    appellants could not meet the requirements of the Rules at the relevant
    date was that the sponsor did not have settled status.  It was accepted
    at  the  hearing  that  the  appellants  could  meet  all   the   other
    requirements of the Rules and that there  was  continuing  family  life
    between all members of the family.  They had originally left Sri  Lanka
    for India in 1996 because of the situation in their home country.   The
    sponsor had been detained in India  and  then  returned  to  Sri  Lanka
    before travelling to the UK in order to  claim  asylum.   Although  his
    claim was refused on the basis that there had been a ceasefire  in  Sri
    Lanka he remained in the UK and was  eventually  granted  discretionary
    leave to remain.  His son came to the UK in January  2009  and  claimed
    asylum on the basis that  he  had  been  detained  and  ill-treated  in
    detention  because  of  his  relationship  to  the  sponsor.   He   was
    subsequently granted asylum.

13.  The judge accepted that in all likelihood the sponsor would be able  to
    pay visits to India but the appellants  who  had  no  permanent  status
    there and had not been granted Indian  nationality  could  not  sponsor
    family members to enter and reside.

14.  The judge did not ignore or leave out of account factors  supporting  a
    submission that the refusal of entry clearance was proportionate.   She
    noted the decision in Mostafa (Article 8  in  entry  clearance)  [2015]
    UKUT 00112 that weighty reasons would be needed for a  grant  of  entry
    clearance outside the Rules.  She considered the position of the second
    appellant and the fact that he had lived in India  for  all  his  life.
    The issue was not simply whether it was in his interests to be in India
    where he had always  live  rather  than  the  UK  but  whether  it  was
    proportionate for him to continue to be separated from  family  members
    in the UK.  The judge found that  it  was  predominantly  in  his  best
    interests to remain with his mother if she moved to the UK even  though
    there was at least an argument that continuity of  residence  in  India
    would be of considerable importance.  The judge was simply  considering
    both sides of the question, as she was required to do, before  reaching
    a decision.

15.  I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge  reached  findings  and  conclusions
    properly open to her on the evidence.  She has explained  why,  in  her
    judgment, in the particular circumstances of this case the  refusal  of
    entry clearance was disproportionate.  The respondent  therefore  fails
    to show any inadequacy in the judge's reasons.

16.  For the sake of completeness I would add that  when  directing  herself
    on the law the judge  did  not  refer  to  any  cases  since  2014  and
    therefore made no mention of the Court of Appeal judgment in  Secretary
    of State v SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387 where the court summarised at
    [39] the position under article 8 in relation  to  an  application  for
    leave to enter on the basis of family life with a person already in the
    UK.  The court said at [40] that the leave to enter rules maintained in
    general terms  a  reasonable  relationship  with  the  requirements  of
    article 8 in the ordinary run of cases  but  it  remained  possible  to
    imagine cases where  the  individual  interests  at  stake  were  of  a
    particularly pressing nature so that a good claim for  leave  to  enter
    could be established outside the Rules.   The  appropriate  formulation
    for this category would arise where an applicant  for  leave  to  enter
    could  show  that  compelling  circumstances  existed  which  were  not
    sufficiently recognised under the rules to require the  grant  of  such
    leave.  I am satisfied the judge was entitled to find that the facts in
    this appeal did disclose compelling circumstances requiring  the  grant
    of leave under article 8.

Decision

17.  The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law and its decision stands.

18.  No  anonymity  order  was  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  no
    application was made for an order before the Upper Tribunal.



Signed        H J E Latter                       Dated: 29 June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
