
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/17804/2013
                                                               OA/17808/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated       |
|On 16th October 2014                       |On 6th November 2014            |
|                                           |                                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                                     N W
                                     A N
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NAIROBI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mrs L Brakaj, Solicitor from Iris Law Firm
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants are citizens of Uganda born on 8th February 2000.   They
    applied for entry clearance to the United  Kingdom  in  order  to  join
    their maternal aunt, who had been granted  refugee  status,  but  their
    applications were refused by the Respondent on 30th July 2013.

 2. This appeal is subject to an anonymity  direction  that  no  report  or
    other publication of these proceedings or any part  or  parts  of  them
    shall  name  or  directly  or  indirectly  identify   the   Appellants.
    Reference to the Appellants may be by use of their initials but not  by
    name.  Failure by any person, body or institution whether corporate  or
    incorporate (for the avoidance of doubt to include either party to this
    appeal) to comply with this direction may lead to  contempt  of  court.
    This direction shall continue in force until the Upper  Tribunal  (IAC)
    or an appropriate court lifts or varies this direction.

 3. The Appellants appeal against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Fisher) who dismissed their  appeals  against  the  Respondent's
    decision taken on 30th July 2013 to refuse their applications for entry
    clearance under paragraph 352D of the Immigration  Rules  (HC  395)  as
    amended.

 4. The Appellants are citizens of Uganda born on 8th February 2000 and are
    therefore minors.  They made applications to join their  maternal  aunt
    under the family reunion provisions under paragraph 352D.  The Sponsor,
    J N, has leave to remain as a refugee.  That status was granted on 21st
    September 2013.  The application forms submitted by both Appellants set
    out their history in Uganda by reference to their upbringing  and  care
    having been taken by the Sponsor, J N who  whilst  she  was  not  their
    biological mother had cared for them since the death  of  their  mother
    during childbirth.

 5. The Respondent refused their applications  in  notices  of  immigration
    decision dated 30th July 2013.  The Entry Clearance Officer  considered
    those applications under paragraphs 352D in conjunction with 309A.  The
    reasons given by the Entry Clearance Officer made reference to the fact
    that a legal adoption had not taken place and therefore considered  the
    circumstances as to whether a de facto adoption had  taken  place.   By
    applying paragraph 309A(a) the Entry Clearance Officer considered  that
    a de facto adoption  had  not  taken  place  as  the  Sponsor  and  the
    Appellants had not been living abroad for at least eighteen months  and
    the Sponsor had not been caring for them for at  least  twelve  months.
    The  decision  recorded  that  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  was  not
    satisfied that either Appellant could be described  as  a  child  of  a
    parent who had been granted refugee status in the United  Kingdom  (see
    paragraph 352D(i)).  In the body of the refusal there was reference  to
    the fact that the Sponsor was also their aunt and therefore they  could
    apply to join her under paragraph 319X of the Immigration Rules but  as
    a fee had not been paid the application was  only  assessed  under  the
    family reunion provisions.  The decision  also  gave  consideration  to
    Article 8 but it was stated that  whilst  there  may  be  a  "perceived
    interference", the  interference  was  justified  for  the  purpose  of
    maintaining an effective immigration  control  and  was  proportionate,
    thus the applications were also refused under Article 8.

 6. The Appellants exercised their right to appeal those decisions and  the
    appeals came before the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Fisher)  on  14th
    April 2014.  In a determination  promulgated  on  25th  April  2014  he
    dismissed their appeals.

 7. It is plain from reading the determination and it  is  not  in  dispute
    that  the  Appellants  could  not  succeed  under  the  family  reunion
    provisions of paragraph 352D of the Immigration Rules.   As  the  judge
    noted at [9] the applicant must  be  the  child  of  a  parent  granted
    refugee status but that whilst the definition of a parent at  paragraph
    6 of the Rules included an adoptive parent (where the child was adopted
    in accordance with the decision taken  by  a  competent  administrative
    authority or court in a country whose adoption orders are recognised by
    the UK) or where the child is the subject of a  de  facto  adoption  in
    accordance with the requirements of paragraph 309A of  the  Rules.   In
    this case, the Appellants could not satisfy 352D or  309A.   The  judge
    therefore considered the Grounds of Appeal advanced on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant which was based on Article 8 grounds  by  reference  to  what
    were described as the "compassionate circumstances" of  the  Appellants
    and the factual circumstances that applied.  The judge observed at [10]
    that it was not suggested that the Appellants could succeed  under  the
    provisions of Appendix FM of the Immigration  Rules  and  thus  made  a
    specific finding that they could not  do  so.   He  went  on  to  apply
    Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach)  [2013]  UKUT  00640
    (IAC) and reached the  conclusion  at  [11]  that  the  nature  of  the
    relationship between the Appellants and their Sponsor would  amount  to
    arguably good grounds for considering  whether  there  were  compelling
    circumstances not sufficiently recognised  under  the  Rules.   Neither
    party in the appeal before me suggests that the  judge  erred  in  that
    respect.

 8. In making an assessment of Article 8, the judge dealt with the issue of
    whether there was family life between the Appellants, their Sponsor and
    her biological children.  This is a case where the  Sponsor  had  three
    biological children  and  had  raised  the  two  Appellants  since  her
    sister's death as her own children.  The Sponsor had entered the United
    Kingdom in  March  2012  and  was  granted  asylum  and  then  made  an
    application for family reunion in July 2013.  The applications included
    both  her  biological  children  and  the  present   Appellants.    The
    application for family reunion relating to the biological children  was
    successful and they joined her on 1st November 2013 but the Appellants'
    applications  were  refused.   The  judge  at   [12]   considered   the
    jurisprudence concerning family life and at [13] observed  that  whilst
    there had been no form of adoption in relation to  the  Appellants,  it
    was  to  the  Sponsor's  credit,  that  despite  being  named  on   the
    Appellants' birth certificates as their mother, she admitted that  this
    was not the case.  It was accepted by the Presenting Officer  that  the
    children had been mentioned in her asylum claim and the  judge  reached
    the conclusion that he accepted that the Appellants were raised by  the
    Sponsor until she left Uganda and she still remits funds for them.   He
    therefore  found  that  there  was  "some  family  life   between   the
    Appellants, their Sponsor and her biological children."  He went on  to
    find that the rest of the questions of the established test  in  Razgar
    were met which led him to the issue of  proportionality.   At  [14]  he
    reached the conclusion that the Appellants were not at risk in  Uganda;
    he did not find the Appellants were in a "bad situation".  There was no
    evidence that they had been threatened since the Sponsor  left  and  no
    medical evidence as  to  any  illness  suffered.   At  [15]  the  judge
    observed that it would be open to the Appellants to make an application
    under paragraph 319X  but  reached  the  conclusion  that  he  was  not
    satisfied on the evidence  that  there  were  "serious  and  compelling
    family  or  other  considerations  that  would  make  their   exclusion
    undesirable".  He further noted that  under  both  paragraph  319X  and
    Article 8, that the Sponsor was wholly reliant on  state  benefits  and
    that the Appellants  could  not  succeed  under  319X  because  it  was
    required that they should be maintained by a relative in the UK without
    recourse to public funds.

 9. At [16] the judge considered  the  best  interests  of  the  Appellants
    although it appears that the representative did not address that issue.
     He began from the starting point that it is in the best  interests  of
    the children to be with both their parents but found that:

         "it is  generally  in  the  interests  of  children  to  have  both
         stability and continuity of social and  educational  provision  and
         the benefit of growing up in the cultural norms of the  society  to
         which they belong.  In the absence of sufficient evidence  to  show
         that the Appellants are genuinely at risk in Uganda, and given  the
         lack of evidence of the first-named Appellant's health, I  conclude
         that their best interests are served by growing up in  the  society
         to which they belong."

    The judge also stated that the weight he attached to the  inability  of
    the Sponsor to maintain the Appellants without recourse to public funds
    outweighed any family  life  considerations.   Thus  he  dismissed  the
    appeals.

10. The Appellants sought permission to appeal that decision and permission
    was granted by a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal on  30th  July  2014.
    Thus the appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.  Mrs Brakaj appeared on
    behalf of the Appellants.  She relied upon the grounds as drafted.  She
    referred the Tribunal to the judge's findings at paragraphs 15  and  16
    of the determination which  purported  to  deal  with  the  "compelling
    circumstances" relevant to the Article 8 assessment.  In particular she
    referred me to the documents in the Appellants' bundle at pages 14,  15
    and 198 which the judge had made reference to at [14].  She highlighted
    the particular contents of those letters in the context of the  judge's
    finding at [14] that the letter stated that she is "good here" although
    she does speak of "certain hardships" and that page 198 of  the  bundle
    states "that they are doing fine."  She submitted  that  that  was  the
    only evidence the judge had referred to in reaching the conclusion that
    the evidence was inconsistent with the Sponsor's claim.   However,  she
    submitted,  the  evidence  in  the  letters  referred  to   "compelling
    circumstances"  and  whilst  he  had  stated  that  the  evidence   was
    inconsistent with the Sponsor's claim he did not make any findings that
    were consistent with the letters.  He did  not  say  the  letters  were
    unreliable and whilst he referred to "certain hardships" that  appeared
    to be inconsistent.  She further submitted that  there  was  background
    evidence in the SEF asylum claim as to what had happened to the  family
    and therefore the background factors that had led to the family  living
    together  were  relevant  factors  in  the  Article  8  assessment  but
    paragraph 14 of the determination did not indicate that  those  factors
    were   taken   into   account   when   considering   the    "compelling
    circumstances".

11. By reference to paragraph [16] of the determination, she  referred  the
    Tribunal to the judge's reference to  risk in Uganda but that failed to
    bear in mind the circumstances in which they were living  and  why  the
    Sponsor was forced to leave which was  of  a  compelling  nature.   She
    submitted that looking at the spirit and intention of  family  reunion,
    those circumstances should have been  a  consideration.   Even  if  the
    Appellants could not meet the Immigration Rules of family  reunion  the
    spirit of those provisions applied in the Article  8  assessment.   She
    submitted also that  there  was  undue  weight  placed  on  the  public
    interest factors at [16].  She  further  submitted  that  at  [16]  the
    starting point was that the children were dependent  children  who  had
    formed part of the household  but  in  looking  at  the  other  factors
    identified by the judge such as education  and  cultural  factors,  the
    judge did not consider that by reference to  the  background.   In  any
    event, the letter referred to them no longer being in education.

12. She also made reference to the decision of AS (Somalia) as referred  to
    in the grounds and also AA (Somalia) and highlighting the importance of
    Article 8 in such cases.  In essence, she also submitted that the judge
    failed to engage with the uncontested evidence and background  relevant
    to the balancing exercise.  As to any remaking of the  decision  should
    an error of law be found, she submitted that there  would  need  to  be
    further evidence and this required a further assessment  by  way  of  a
    further hearing then a remittal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  would  be
    appropriate.

13. Mr Wilding on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State  submitted  that  the
    challenge to the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  was  essentially  a
    disagreement with the conclusions reached and an attempt to reargue the
    case.  He submitted  that  there  had  been  an  Article  8  assessment
    undertaken but that the Appellants did not agree with the  outcome  and
    it has not been demonstrated that the  judge  did  anything  materially
    wrong.  He further submitted matters of weight were for the  judge  and
    only  if  it  could  be  shown  that  the  judge  acted  perversely  by
    attributing too much weight to a factor could there be any challenge on
    grounds of weight.

14. As to the public interest, that was clearly  a  relevant  consideration
    and it was inevitable that there would be recourse to public funds  and
    therefore significant weight should be placed on that factor.

15. As to the authorities referred  to  in  the  grant  of  permission,  he
    submitted that AS (Somalia) did not deal with  Article  8  in  the  way
    suggested and  that  the  facts  were  wholly  dissimilar.   The  entry
    clearance decisions in those cases were made some time ago; in  AS  and
    AA their decisions under appeal  were  in  2009  and  2010  and  in  AS
    (Somalia) it was not known when the application was made but they  were
    granted entry clearance in 2008.  He submitted those decisions predated
    paragraph 319X and its introduction into the Rules which  was  a  broad
    generous Rule for those relatives of  refugees.   This  was  a  charged
    application  and  had  also   a   requirement   for   maintenance   and
    accommodation.  He submitted further that paragraph [16] dealt with the
    Section 55 issues and found the Entry Clearance Officer's  decision  to
    be a proportionate one.  He took into account the circumstances and put
    in the balance of public interest.  The grounds do not demonstrate  any
    material error of law.

16. By way of reply Mrs  Brakaj  submitted  that  in  the  decision  of  AA
    (Somalia) it made it clear that cases that could not succeed under  the
    Immigration Rules should be dealt with under Article 8 and  that  there
    had been a failure to consider the Article 8 issues and  considerations
    by the First-tier Tribunal.  She submitted that there was  no  evidence
    in the determination that the compelling factors and history of the two
    Appellants had been considered within the balancing exercise and  there
    was an inadequate consideration of the detailed  circumstances  of  the
    children including the previous  asylum  claim  which  was  before  the
    judge.  There was no reference to the historic background at [16], thus
    it was not a matter of weight of various factors but that he had failed
    to put factors into the balance.

17. I reserved my determination.

18. I have had the opportunity of hearing  both  advocates'  oral  argument
    concerning the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and  whether  those
    arguments disclose an error of law.  Having heard them  and  considered
    those submissions in the light of the determination, I have reached the
    conclusion that the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  does
    disclose an error of law in its approach to the issues.   I  shall  set
    out below why I have reached that decision.

19. I should observe that the grounds as originally drafted relied upon the
    failure of the First-tier Tribunal to make reference to and  apply  the
    decision of AS (Somalia) (FC) and another v SSHD [2009] UKHL  32.   The
    grant of permission made express reference to Ground  3  when  granting
    leave at paragraph 2.  However, it is right to observe that the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge granted permission  to  appeal  "on  all  grounds."
    However, I cannot see that the failure to either quote or  consider  AS
    (Somalia) could give rise to an error of law.  The issue raised in that
    case related to  the  effect  of  Section  85(5)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and  also  whether  Section  85(5)  was
    incompatible with the Convention.  Furthermore the Appellants in AS had
    already been granted entry clearance by  the  date  of  the  appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds (see paragraph 29).  As I read the case, it does  not
    set out any guidance concerning either the Immigration  Rules  relating
    to family reunion or Article 8 of the ECHR.

20. However, Mrs Brakaj's oral submissions are centred  upon  a  number  of
    issues concerning the determination relating to the "compassionate  and
    compelling circumstances" that were not identified by the judge and the
    relevance to  those  in  the  balancing  exercise.   Furthermore  those
    submissions are centred upon issues concerning the judge's findings  as
    to  whether  there  were  compelling  circumstances  relating  to   the
    Appellants and that those considerations had not  formed  part  of  the
    balancing exercise.  In her submissions she made reference to paragraph
    14 of the determination where the judge set out what  purported  to  be
    findings of fact  relating  to  their  circumstances  in  Uganda.   She
    submitted that the evidence before the judge was "compelling" but  that
    whilst  the  judge  stated  the  evidence  was  inconsistent  with  the
    Sponsor's claim that the children were "in a bad situation" he did  not
    make a finding that the letters were unreliable and therefore gave  the
    appearance of having accepted the letters.  I do not conclude  that  it
    could be said that the judge accepted those letters.  Having  read  the
    letters and having done so in the context of the findings  at  [14]  it
    seems to me that the two are wholly  inconsistent.   The  judge  stated
    that he did not believe the Appellants were at risk in Uganda primarily
    because of the "tenor of the correspondence to the Sponsor".  He  cited
    the letter at page  15  relying  on  the  part  that  referred  to  the
    Appellant being "good here" but then referred to  "certain  hardships".
    The judge then contrasted this letter with the letter set out  at  page
    198 stating that they are "doing fine" and it was on this basis that he
    reached the conclusion that it  was  inconsistent  with  the  Sponsor's
    claim that the Appellants were in a "bad situation".  However,  as  Mrs
    Brakaj  pointed  out,  the  letters  did  not  demonstrate   that   the
    circumstances in which the children were living were  in  fact  "fine".
    Indeed, it made reference to a  number  of  factors  that  one  of  the
    children was travelling to the forest  to  obtain  water  and  firewood
    alone, due to the carer's  infirmity  the  children  were  cooking  and
    searching for their own food and that they were no longer in school and
    their carer was ill.  There was some reference to these matters in  the
    witness statement of the Appellant.   Therefore  the  findings  of  the
    judge do not take account of that evidence nor are they consistent with
    that evidence before him.  It was incumbent  upon  the  judge  to  make
    clear findings of fact upon the circumstances  in  which  the  children
    were living at the time of the application for  a  number  of  relevant
    reasons.  Firstly, the case could not succeed under the family  reunion
    provisions of paragraph 352D of the Immigration Rules for  the  reasons
    properly set out at [9] which have not been challenged on behalf of the
    Appellants.  The case was therefore properly advanced on the  basis  of
    Article 8 of the ECHR.  Again, Mr Wilding does not  suggest  that  that
    was an inappropriate way to proceed given the factual circumstances  of
    this case.  Indeed that is an approach supported by the decision of  AA
    (Somalia) v ECO (Addis Ababa) [2013] UKSC 88 where  the  Supreme  Court
    reached the conclusion that whilst a de facto adoption is  not  covered
    by the definition of a parent within Rule 352D as the adoption  had  to
    be recognised in the UK, the Immigration Rules are  not  exhaustive  of
    the UK's  obligations  under  international  law.   In  that  case  the
    Appellants were allowed entry to the UK under Article 8  and  the  case
    made reference to the debate about the rights in comparison to  someone
    who could qualify under paragraph 352D.  Further, the decision in  Muse
    v the ECO [2012] EWCA Civ  10  at  paragraph  21  recognised  that  the
    statutory jurisprudence placed a high value on the ability of  families
    to live together.  Therefore whether  the  judge  was  considering  the
    issues under paragraph 319X as "serious or compelling family and  other
    considerations which would make their exclusion undesirable"  or  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR, the factual circumstances of the Appellants were
    highly relevant and  clear  findings  were  necessary.   The  balancing
    exercise under Article 8 could not  be  properly  carried  out  without
    findings in accordance with the evidence and those findings then  being
    set alongside what were the accepted facts.  As the  decision  in  Muse
    stated, the authorities provide examples of cases  which  fall  outside
    the Rules but where the positive obligations of the state under Article
    8 may require the granting of leave to enter and that  such  cases  are
    difficult and require" a close analysis of the facts".

21. Whilst the grounds were not clearly drafted in this regard and the oral
    submissions that were made advanced this in a more  clear  form,  I  am
    satisfied that these issues do properly form part  of  the  grounds  on
    behalf of the Appellants and  are  relevant  considerations.   In  this
    context the decision of Mundeba (s.55 and para 297(i)(f))  [2013]  UKUT
    88 (IAC) has relevance.  The judge did make reference to this authority
    at [16] even though the representative had not  addressed  him  on  the
    issue of the best interests of the Appellants.  He  made  reference  to
    the "best interests of the children" in that paragraph and  that  as  a
    starting point it is in the best interests of the children to be with

         "both of their parents and, if both parents are being removed  from
         the United Kingdom, then the starting point suggests that so should
         dependent children who form part of their household,  unless  there
         are reasons to the contrary.  Significantly in  this  case,  it  is
         generally in the interests of children to have both  stability  and
         continuity of social and educational provision and the  benefit  of
         growing up in the cultural norms  of  the  society  to  which  they
         belong.  In the absence of sufficient evidence  to  show  that  the
         Appellants are genuinely at risk in Uganda, and given the  lack  of
         evidence of the first-named Appellant's  health,  I  conclude  that
         their best interests are served by growing up  in  the  society  to
         which they belong."

    However, whilst the stability and continuity of social and  educational
    provisions and the benefits of growing up in  the  cultural  norms  are
    relevant considerations they are  not  the  only  ones.   The  case  of
    Mundeba makes reference at paragraph 37 to the actual circumstances  in
    which they are living, and their social background,  their  development
    history and that such matters require an inquiry into whether there are
    unmet needs that should be catered for and  whether  there  are  stable
    arrangements for the children's physical  care.   Those  considerations
    were not identified or taken account of as the  judge  considered  that
    there was insufficient evidence to show that they were at  risk.   This
    failed to consider the issues I have outlined earlier  in  relation  to
    the letters upon which there were no clear findings made and that their
    social background, developmental history and  whether  there  would  be
    unmet needs and the stable arrangements for the  children's  care  were
    also factors identified in Mundeba which were not taken into account or
    put in the balance.  I  consider  that  Mrs  Brakaj  is  right  in  her
    submission to state that  the  continuity  of  stability  needs  to  be
    considered in the light of their past circumstances.  I also agree with
    Mrs Brakaj that the judge made little or no reference to the background
    facts set out in the SEF, asylum claim concerning what had happened  to
    the family in the past and how this impacted on the balancing exercise.
     This is a case where the family were living  together,  including  the
    biological children of the Sponsor and these Appellants who believe the
    Sponsor to be their mother and saw themselves as one family unit.   The
    findings at paragraphs 14  and  16  do  not  take  those  matters  into
    account.

22. Whilst Mr  Wilding  submitted  that  the  grounds  were  essentially  a
    disagreement with the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  I  do  not
    consider that that is made out.  I also do not think it is a matter  of
    weight to be given to the factors but that relevant and clear  findings
    have not been made and material considerations  were  not  put  in  the
    balance.  The judge was wholly entitled to consider the public interest
    factors he identified but those matters had to be set against the other
    relevant factors identified in the appeals.   I  would  also  add  that
    there did not seem to be any consideration of the relationship  between
    the biological children and the Appellants nor any consideration of how
    family life could be enjoyed outside of the  UK  in  the  circumstances
    where the Sponsor was a refugee.

23. For those reasons I consider that the decision cannot stand and  should
    be set aside.  As to the remaking of the decision, Mrs Brakaj submitted
    that there would have to be a further hearing and  she  indicated  that
    further evidence was necessary and indeed in the light of my  decision,
    further findings of fact are necessary.

24.  As there will be a further hearing in  this  case  and  further  fact-
    finding to take place, I consider that the  best  course  would  be  to
    remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal  to  consider  these  matters
    under Article 8 of the ECHR.  There is no dispute that  the  Appellants
    cannot meet paragraph 352D but that the case is advanced on  Article  8
    grounds as the case is one which falls outside of the  Rules.   I  have
    therefore given particular regard to the overriding  objective  of  the
    efficient disposal of appeals and the nature of the  error.   Therefore
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and the case is to
    be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  rehearing  in  accordance
    with Section 12(2)(b) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act  and
    paragraph 7.2 of the practice  statement  of  10th  February  2010  (as
    amended).




Signed                              Date 1st November 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds


No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                              Date 1st November 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds


