
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/18438/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 March 2015                     |On 28th April 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                        Sarah Faris Hasan Al-Mahdawi
                         (anonymity ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER,
                                    AMMAN
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr F Gaskin of Counsel instructed by Roli Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Prior promulgated on 10 December 2014 dismissing  the  appeal  of  Miss
    Sarah Faris Hasan Al-Mahdawi against a decision of an  Entry  Clearance
    Officer dated 1 May 2013 to refuse entry clearance to join  her  father
    in the United Kingdom.



Background

2.   The Appellant is a national of Iraq born on 28 February 1986.   She  is
    the daughter of  Mr  Faris  Hassan  Shuker  Al-Mahdawi,  hereafter  the
    Sponsor.

3.   The Sponsor entered  the  United  Kingdom  in  February  2012,  claimed
    asylum and was recognised as  a  refugee  in  August  2012.   Following
    recognition as a  refugee  the  Sponsor  supported  his  wife  and  two
    daughters in applications for entry clearance to join him in the United
    Kingdom, such applications being made on 27 December 2012.   The  other
    applicants were the Appellant's mother, Mrs Intisar Abdulrahman  Majeed
    Al-Azzawi (date of birth 1 July 1956), and the Appellant's sister, Miss
    Mays Haris Hasan Al-Mahdawi (date of birth 19 May 1997).  Each  of  the
    applications were refused for reasons set out in respective Notices  of
    Immigration Decision.

4.   The Appellant, her mother and sister appealed to the IAC.

5.   The three separate appeals were linked,  and  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge allowed the appeals of the Sponsor's wife and  youngest  daughter
    with reference to paragraphs 352A and 352D of  the  Immigration  Rules,
    but dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal  for  reasons  set  out  in  his
    Decision. Essentially the First-tier Tribunal Judge was satisfied as to
    the marital  relationship  between  the  Sponsor  and  the  Appellant's
    mother, and as to the paternal relationship between the Sponsor and the
    Appellant's sister; those Appellants thereby met  the  requirements  of
    the Rules.  The Appellant herein, however, was  too  old  to  meet  the
    requirements  of  paragraph  352D,  being  over  18  at  the  date   of
    application, and it was also conceded that she could not qualify  under
    Section EC-DR of  Appendix  FM.   Her  case  was  considered  therefore
    pursuant to Article 8 of the ECHR but  dismissed  essentially  for  the
    reasons set out at paragraph 22  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    decision.

6.   The Appellant sought permission to appeal, which was granted by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Osborne on 5 February 2015.

7.   The Respondent has filed a Rule 24  response  dated  13  February  2015
    resisting the challenge made by the Appellant.  There has been no cross-
    appeal, however, in respect of the Appellant's mother and sister.

Consideration: Error of Law

8.   Paragraphs 352A and 352D of the Immigration Rules give effect  to  what
    is sometimes termed the principle of family unity.  This is  identified
    and commented upon in the UNHCR Handbook on the Refugee  Convention  at
    Chapter VI, which is headed 'The Principle of Family Unity'.

9.   The Handbook from paragraph 181 is, in part, in the following terms:

         "181.    Beginning with the Universal Declaration of Human  Rights,
             which states that 'the family is the natural  and  fundamental
             group unit of society and is entitled to protection by society
             and the state', most international  instruments  dealing  with
             human rights contain similar provisions for the protection  of
             the unit of a family."

    There is then a citation from the Final  Act  of  the  Conference  that
    adopted the 1951 Convention and then it goes on:

         "183.    The 1951 Convention does not incorporate the principle  of
             family unity in the definition of the term refugee.  The above-
             mentioned recommendation in the Final Act  of  the  Conference
             is, however, observed by the majority of  states,  whether  or
             not parties to the 1951 Convention or to the 1967 Protocol.

         184. If the head of a family meets the criteria of the  definition,
             his dependants are normally granted refugee  status  according
             to the principle of family unity.   It  is  obvious,  however,
             that  formal  refugee  status  should  not  be  granted  to  a
             dependant if this is  incompatible  with  his  personal  legal
             status.  Thus, a dependant member of a refugee family may be a
             national of the country of asylum or of  another  country  and
             may enjoy that country's protection.   To  grant  him  refugee
             status in such circumstances would not be called for.

         185. As to which family members may benefit from the  principle  of
             family unity, the minimum requirement is the inclusion of  the
             spouse and minor children.   In  practice,  other  dependants,
             such as aged parents of refugees, are normally  considered  if
             they are living in the same household."

10.  The Immigration Rules therefore attempt to give effect to a  recognised
    international principle, albeit that there  is  no  absolute  right  to
    family reunion of an adult child of a refugee,  and  indeed  the  Rules
    limit the children who are entitled to family reunion to those who  are
    under 18.

11.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge addressed  the  particular  circumstances
    of the Appellant at paragraph 22.  It was a feature of this  case  that
    the  Appellant  was  suffering  from  mental  retardation   which   was
    attributed to brain damage at the time of  her  birth  presumed  to  be
    arising from the circumstances of a difficult  birth.   The  supporting
    evidence in this regard lacks some degree of clarity.  There  were  two
    reports before the First-tier  Tribunal,  one  indicating  a  level  of
    mental retardation described  as  'severe'  and  another  referring  to
    'moderate to severe' mental  retardation.   The  fuller  of  those  two
    reports suggested that the Appellant had a  mental  age  of  "about  10
    years".  It does not seem to have been disputed before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that the Appellant was  a  person  who  required  considerable
    assistance.  The Sponsor's evidence  in  this  regard  is  set  out  at
    paragraph 11 of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  and  includes
    this: "My wife is required to provide full-time care to both of  them",
    (that is to both daughters).

12.  Paragraph 22 has a curious sentence in its middle which  has  been  the
    subject of some discussion before me this morning.  The sentence is  in
    these terms:

         "My conclusion was  that  for  years  the  marriage  of  the  first
         Appellant and the Sponsor had been conducted at a distance  and  my
         strong inference was that it could very well have been the exercise
         of choice or the call of duty that resulted in the first  Appellant
         conducting a close and ongoing family life with, in particular, the
         second Appellant."

    The commencement of that sentence seems to suggest that  the  Judge  is
    addressing the nature of the relationship between the husband and  wife
    whereas the end of  the  sentence  is  focused  upon  the  relationship
    between the wife and her daughter, that is the Appellant herein.  It is
    unclear where the transition takes place within that sentence  and  the
    result is that the reader is left in some doubt as to exactly what  the
    Judge meant by this sentence.  In my view no clarity came  through  the
    discussion that I was afforded this morning with the assistance of  the
    representatives.

13.  Be that as it may, the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  proceeded  to  state
    the following:

         "There was no evidence whatsoever before me as to whether the first
         Appellant [that is the mother] would choose, despite succeeding  in
         the present appeal, to remain in Iraq  with  the  second  Appellant
         [that is to say the Appellant before the Upper Tribunal]  upon  the
         failure of that Appellant's appeal.  If that was  her  choice  then
         the status quo would be maintained and the second  Appellant  would
         not lose the presence, comfort and support of the  first  Appellant
         despite the failure of her application  outside  the  Rules.   That
         application could not succeed under the Rules since  the  financial
         requirements of the Rules were not  met.   Those  requirements  and
         indeed Section [it says 177(B)  but  it  should  be  117B]  of  the
         Immigration Act 2014 [that is not wholly  accurate  either,  it  is
         actually the 2002 Act that is amended by the Immigration Act  2014]
         being designed to safeguard the important economic interests of the
         United Kingdom.  According to the medical evidence relating to  the
         second Appellant she requires educational facilities for  a  person
         with special needs  and  other  special  programmes.   Clearly  the
         second Appellant would make demands, in the  United  Kingdom,  upon
         the resources of Social Services and the National  Health  Service.
         Having regard to all these considerations I am not  satisfied  that
         the refusal of the second Appellant's application would  constitute
         a disproportionate interference with  her  private  or  indeed  her
         family life."

14.  In my judgment that passage  is  inadequately  reasoned  and  fails  to
    indicate  that  the  Judge  had  duly  conducted  a  Razgar   analysis,
    notwithstanding setting out the Razgar questions at paragraph 4 of  his
    determination, and in particular does not have  regard  either  to  the
    principle in Beoku-Betts or of the context of this  case  -  being  the
    principle of family unity for refugees.

15.  Whilst the Judge recognises that the Appellant's potential loss of  the
    care and attention and support of her mother could be  avoided  by  the
    mother electing not to join the Sponsor in the UK, in so doing,  in  my
    judgment, the Judge does not give any express recognition, or otherwise
    indicate that he has weighed into the balance, that such a circumstance
    would involve an interference with the family life of the Sponsor,  the
    Appellant's mother and the Appellant's sibling in cases where they have
    established an entitlement to  be  together  under  the  Rules  and  in
    accordance  with  internationally  recognised  principles.   For  those
    reasons I am satisfied that the reasoning is incomplete at paragraph 22
    and is thereby in error of  law.   The  decision  in  respect  of  this
    Appellant therefore requires to be set aside and remade.

Remaking the Decision

16.  Both parties before me today agreed that the decision could  be  remade
    by the Upper Tribunal without the need for further evidence.  Ms Holmes
    for the Entry Clearance Officer in helpful  and  realistic  submissions
    acknowledged that whilst in other circumstances she might  have  wanted
    to explore the medical evidence in  this  case,  the  medical  evidence
    appeared to have been accepted before the First-tier  Tribunal  and  so
    she did not now seek to challenge it.  Ms Holmes also  emphasised  that
    the approach to be taken in this case would likely be different  if  it
    were a non-refugee reunion case but in the particular circumstances she
    did not seek to articulate any specific or reasoned  objection  to  the
    appeal succeeding.

17.  In my judgment there plainly is family life as  between  the  Appellant
    and her mother and her younger sibling.  The  effect  of  the  decision
    puts the Appellant's mother to election either to lose the  opportunity
    of family reunion for both herself and her younger  daughter  with  the
    Sponsor in the United Kingdom, or to have to abandon the Appellant  and
    thereby leave the Appellant without the love, care and  direct  support
    that she has received from her mother throughout her life.  Bearing  in
    mind that the Appellant has the  mental  retardation  described  and  a
    mental age of 10 it seems to me  that  the  level  of  the  Appellant's
    dependency is necessarily greater than would ordinarily be the case for
    an adult offspring.

18.  In those circumstances I  find  the  effect  of  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent to refuse entry clearance to the Appellant in  circumstances
    where her mother and younger sibling are able to travel to  the  United
    Kingdom does indeed constitute an interference with family  life  of  a
    severity to engage Article 8.  It is not disputed that the decision  is
    in accordance with the law and in pursuit of  a  legitimate  aim.   The
    issue is therefore one of proportionality.  It  is  necessary  to  have
    regard to the factors in Part 5A of the 2002 Act and in particular  the
    factors at Section 117B.

19.  As regards the questions of economic wellbeing, the public  purse,  and
    indeed of integration identified at subsection (2) and subsection  (3),
    it seems to me that in a refugee reunion case the weight to be accorded
    to the financial impact on the public purse is  diminished  bearing  in
    mind that under the Rules there  are  no  maintenance  requirement  for
    family reunion.  It  is  nonetheless  the  case  that  this  particular
    Appellant is likely to struggle to integrate into  society  because  of
    her mental health difficulties.  That, however, in the  overall  scheme
    of things is not sufficient justification in my judgment to deny  entry
    clearance.

20.  Having given consideration to  all  of  the  factors  under  117B,  and
    bearing in mind the position adopted before me today by the  Respondent
    through the Presenting Officer,  I  take  the  view  that  clearly  the
    exclusion of the Appellant in circumstances where her mother and sister
    succeed in their appeals is disproportionate.

Notice of Decision

21.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved a  material  error  of
    law and is set aside.

22.  I remake the decision in the appeal. The appeal of  Sarah  Faris  Hasan
    Al-Mahdawi (OA/184348/2013) is allowed.

23.  The decisions in respect of the other Appellants in the linked  appeals
    (OA/18437/2013 and OA/18439/2013) necessarily remain as they were.

24.  No anonymity order is sought or made.

The above represents a corrected  transcript  of  an  ex  tempore  judgement
given after the hearing on 24 March 2015.



Signed        Date: 27 April 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Tribunal Judge declined to make a fee  award  in  respect  of
the successful Appellants before him.  In  the  circumstances,  and  in  the
absence of any specific  submission  to  the  contrary,  I  follow  suit  in
respect of the instant Appellant for the  same  reason  that  matters  might
reasonably have been put differently in the initial application.

Signed        Date: 27 April 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis


