
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/18511/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 30 July 2014                                 |On 11 August 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE



                                   Between

                            JOSEPH MORRIS HOUSEN
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Gumbs (the appellant's partner)
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Joseph Morris Housen, born on 22 January 1979 and  is  a
    citizen of Jamaica.  The appellant appealed against a decision  of  the
    respondent dated 17 September 2013 to refuse to  revoke  a  deportation
    order made against him.    The appellant  had  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom in May 2001 as a visitor.  He was granted indefinite  leave  to
    remain  upon  application  in  October  2003.    An   application   for
    naturalisation as a British citizen was refused in July 2007 after  the
    appellant had been convicted at Leeds District Magistrates' Court of  a
    driving offence.  On 9 February 2010,  at  Bradford  Crown  Court,  the
    appellant was convicted of conspiracy to supply controlled a drug class
    A and was sentenced to six years' imprisonment.  He was  served  on  14
    May 2010 with a  notice  of  liability  to  automatic  deportation.   A
    deportation order  was  made  against  him  on  28  January  2013  and,
    following a unsuccessful appeal,  he  was  deported  to  Jamaica  on  4
    October 2013 from where he  has  applied  for  the  revocation  of  the
    deportation order.

 2. The appellant's appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal  sitting  at
    Bradford on 26 February 2013 (Judge Hindson).  The  Tribunal  dismissed
    the appeal in a  determination  promulgated  on  17  March  2014.   The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, against that dismissal.

3.   At the Upper Tribunal hearing on 30 July 2014,  the  appellant  was  no
    longer  represented  by  Immigration  Legal  Advice.   The  appellant's
    partner, Ms Chevon Gumbs, did attend.  I am grateful to  Ms  Gumbs  for
    the assistance she was able to give  the  court.   The  respondent  was
    represented by Mr M Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

4.   Judge Hindson heard oral evidence from Ms Gumbs and  her  mother.   The
    appellant is married to Nicole Housen, (hereafter,  Mrs  Housen).   The
    appellant and Mrs Housen have two children.  Mrs Housen has a son  from
    a previous relationship.  In addition, Mr Housen has had a longstanding
    relationship with Ms Gumbs by whom he also has two children.

5.   The grounds of appeal  complain  that  the  judge  had  not  adequately
    considered the new  evidence  which  had  been  put  forward  with  the
    application to revoke the deportation order at the appeal.  The grounds
    seek to clarify that statement by adding;

         The Immigration Judge states at paragraph 22 of  the  determination
         that he has been presented with some evidence that was  not  before
         the Immigration Judge Fisher and Mr Getlevog and that he  has  also
         been provided with more detail about the relationship  between  the
         appellant and Ms Gumbs than was put before the  previous  Tribunal.
         He  also  received  evidence  about  the  actual  effect  of   that
         separation on Ms Gumbs and her children such  as  medical  evidence
         and evidence from school.  He goes on to state at paragraph 24 that
         he is not satisfied that had the Tribunal had the  benefit  of  the
         additional evidence now before him that they would have come  to  a
         different conclusion.

6.   The grounds also challenge  the  determination  on  the  basis  of  the
    judge's failure to make specific findings on the evidence and apply the
    relevant Immigration Rules, in particular paragraph 390, 390A, 391  and
    391A of HC 395:

    Revocation of deportation order


         390.  An application for revocation of a deportation order will  be
             considered in the light of all the circumstances including the
             following:


             (i)  the grounds on which the order was made;


             (ii)     any representations made in support of revocation;


             (iii)     the  interests  of  the  community,  including   the
                  maintenance of an effective immigration control;


             (iv)      the  interests  of  the  applicant,  including   any
                  compassionate circumstances.


         390A.  Where paragraph 398 applies  the  Secretary  of  State  will
                consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies  and,  if  it
                does not, it will only be in exceptional circumstances  that
                the public interest in  maintaining  the  deportation  order
                will be outweighed by other factors.


         391.     In the case of a person who has  been  deported  following
             conviction for a  criminal  offence,  the  continuation  of  a
             deportation order against  that  person  will  be  the  proper
             course:


             (a)  in the case of a conviction for an offence for which  the
                  person was sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  less
                  than 4 years, unless  10  years  have  elapsed  since  the
                  making of the deportation order, or


             (b)  in the case of a conviction for an offence for which  the
                  person was sentenced to a period  of  imprisonment  of  at
                  least 4 years, at any time,
                  Unless, in either case, the continuation would be contrary
                  to the Human  Rights  Convention  or  the  Convention  and
                  Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees, or there  are
                  other exceptional circumstances that mean the continuation
                  is outweighed by compelling factors.


         391A.    In other cases, revocation of the order will not  normally
                be authorised  unless  the  situation  has  been  materially
                altered, either by a change of circumstances since the order
                was made, or by fresh information coming to light which  was
                not before the appellate authorities  or  the  Secretary  of
                State. The passage of time since the person was deported may
                also in itself amount to such a change of  circumstances  as
                to warrant revocation of the order."

 7.  The grounds assert that "no mention of the evidence in relation to  the
    relevant Rules were made by the Immigration Judge and therefore this is
    an error of law."  It is also asserted that there was no  consideration
    of Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

8.   It must  be  said  that  Judge  Hindson's  determination  is  certainly
    concise.  He has provided a summary of the background to the appeal and
    the reasons for the refusal by the  respondent.   At  [16],  the  judge
    noted that:

         Put briefly, the appellant's case is that he is no longer  able  to
         enjoy family life with his wife, Ms Gumbs and all of the  children.
         They are all deprived of any real family life with him.   They  all
         miss each other and the situation is making the  children  unhappy.



9.   The judge went on to note [19] that  Ms  Gumbs  had  not  attended  the
    previous appeal hearing before Judge Fisher and  Mr  Getlevog  "because
    she felt it may upset the appellant's wife if she did  so,  perhaps  so
    much that she would not attend herself to give  evidence."   The  judge
    accepted the same point advanced in the grounds of appeal, namely  that
    the basis of the appellant's  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    revoke the deportation order was on  the  basis  that  the  appellant's
    relationship with Ms Gumbs and their children had "not been part of the
    case before Judge Fisher and Mr  Getlovog,  or  at  least  it  was  not
    described in detail and therefore was not taken into account by them in
    making their decision" [19].  The judge found [20]  that  Judge  Fisher
    and Mr Getlovog had been aware of the appellant's "other family"  since
    they made reference to it in the  determination.   The  judge  recorded
    that Ms Gumbs had been willing for  the  appellant  to  live  with  her
    should he return to the United Kingdom although he also noted that  "it
    seems clear from his statement that the appellant's  preference  is  to
    return to his wife."  The judge accepted  at  [22]  that  he  had  been
    presented  with  evidence  which  had  not  been  before  the  previous
    Tribunal, in particular more details regarding the relationship between
    the appellant and Ms Gumbs.  He records  also  the  evidence  from  the
    school of one of the children (M) who had  had  a  "challenging  year."
    The judge concluded at [24]:

     I have taken careful account of all the evidence before me and  of  the
         determination of Judge Fisher and Mr Getlovog.  Having  done  so  I
         can find no reason for coming to a different  conclusion  than  did
         they.  I am not satisfied that, had the Tribunal had the benefit of
         the additional evidence now before me, they would have  come  to  a
         different conclusion.  I therefore  adopt  the  findings  of  Judge
         Fisher and Mr Getlovog and dismiss the appeal for the same reasons.



10.  In her comments to me, Ms Gumbs drew my attention to that paragraph  of
    Judge Hindson's determination and queried his  finding  that,  had  the
    previous Tribunal "had the benefit of the additional evidence" he would
    not have reached a different conclusion.  I have to say  that  I  agree
    with Ms Gumbs that Judge Hindson's conclusion is  not  entirely  clear.
    It is not immediately obvious why he has thought it necessary  to  find
    whether, if the previous Tribunal had had the benefit of  the  evidence
    which was before him, they would have reached the same decision on  the
    appeal.  I am conscious that the judge felt it necessary to follow  the
    principles of Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702 and he has clearly directed
    himself to consider the previous Tribunal's conclusions and findings as
    a starting point for his own analysis.  There was, however, no need for
    him to second-guess the previous Tribunal's probable  response  to  the
    evidence advanced by the appellant in support of his revocation appeal.

11.  However, notwithstanding those observations and  also  the  brevity  of
    the determination, I am unable to conclude that the judge erred in  law
    such that his determination falls to be set  aside.   It  would  indeed
    have been helpful if the judge had set  out  the  relevant  Immigration
    Rules but I cannot see, for example, that he has ignored  any  part  of
    paragraph 390 of the Rules (see above)  which  may  have  assisted  the
    appellant.  Although he does  not  say  so  in  terms,  the  judge  has
    considered the interests of the appellant including  any  compassionate
    circumstances and also the  representations  made  in  support  of  the
    revocation (in particular, concerning the "new" evidence  regarding  Ms
    Gumbs and her children).  The judge has not explicitly  considered  the
    interests of the community  (including  the  maintenance  of  effective
    immigration control) but it is hard to see how, had he  done  so,  this
    might have led to a favourable outcome for the appellant.  Likewise, on
    the facts before him, it is very hard to see how the judge  would  have
    concluded that there were exceptional  circumstances  which  outweighed
    the public interest (paragraph 390A).  He does not refer  to  paragraph
    391A but it is apparent from any reading of his determination that  the
    judge has had firmly in mind that revocation of a deportation order  is
    only likely to occur where "the situation has materially  altered;"  it
    is clear that the judge understood that the focus of his  determination
    should be on the new evidence which had not been  before  the  previous
    Tribunal.  Again, had the judge expressly asked himself the question as
    to whether any change of circumstances justify the  revocation  of  the
    deportation order, one can only conclude that he  would  have  answered
    that  question  in  the  negative.   With  regard  to  Section  55,   I
    acknowledge that the judge did not  refer  to  it  directly.   He  does
    engage, albeit briefly, with the evidence regarding Ms Gumbs'  children
    [22].  Finally, I note that it is not asserted by  the  appellant  that
    the passage of time since the deportation order might itself amount  to
    a change of circumstances [paragraph 391A]; the  whole  thrust  of  the
    appeal before Judge Hindson concerned Ms Gumbs and her children.  I  am
    not satisfied that the evidence which  the  judge  heard  regarding  Ms
    Gumbs and  the  children  represented  a  material  alteration  to  the
    appellant's circumstances; instead, those circumstances existed at  the
    time of the previous determination have simply not been brought to  the
    attention of the previous Tribunal in any  detail.   I  have  concluded
    that, even if  Judge  Hindson  had  attempted  to  apply  the  relevant
    Immigration Rules to the evidence or had dealt at greater  length  with
    the "new" evidence before him, he would not have come  to  a  different
    conclusion.  The appellant was deported  relatively  recently  and  the
    effect of his deportation on Ms Gumbs  and  her  children  has,  in  my
    opinion, been adequately addressed by the judge at [22].

12.  I  am  aware  that  the  dismissal  of  this  appeal  will  come  as  a
    disappointment to Ms Gumbs who helpfully explained her current position
    and that of the children to the Tribunal.  However, as I  explained  to
    her, the Upper Tribunal may only look again the  evidence  and  re-make
    the decision if it finds that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  determination
    should be set aside because it contains  an  error  of  law.   For  the
    reasons I have given above, I find that Judge  Hindson's  determination
    did not contain any such error and the appeal is dismissed accordingly.


DECISION

This appeal is dismissed.




Signed                              Date 8 August 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

