
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/18692/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7th March 2014                             |On 28th March 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            miss Kanwal Shahzadi

                                                        Respondent/ Claimant


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G .Lee, Counsel, instructed by H& M, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The claimant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 9 March 1992.  She  seeks
    to appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department dated 13 July 2012 refusing to  grant  her  entry  clearance
    under Rule 297(i) of the Immigration Rules to enter the United  Kingdom
    as a child of a relative present and settled in the United Kingdom.

2.   Initially and at the same occasion her brother Wagas Ali  Khan  born  8
    July 1993 had also submitted an application.   That  had  been  refused
    also but now granted.

3.   Both the appellant  and  her  brother  sought  to  appeal  against  the
    refusals, which appeals came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Trevaskis
    on 14 October 2013.

4.   It was found that the  claimant's  brother  satisfied  the  Immigration
    Rules not  least  because  he  was  under  18  by  two  days  when  the
    application was made in 2011.  The claimant herself  was  over  18  and
    therefore the pathway to satisfy the  ingredients  of  the  Immigration
    Rules was somewhat different.  In that respect she did not succeed  for
    the reasons as set out in paragraph 35 of the determination as follows:-



         "I am not satisfied that the second appellant is  living  alone  in
         the most exceptional compassionate circumstances;  she  lives  with
         her brother and  her  grandmother  in  her  family  home  which  is
         comfortable; she attends college; there is no evidence that she  is
         suffering from any adverse treatment in  the  community  where  she
         lives, as claimed by the sponsor."

5.   Nevertheless the Judge went on to  consider  Article  8  of  the  ECHR,
    particularly given the successful appeal of her brother.   It  was  the
    finding of the Judge that Article 8 of the ECHR was  engaged  therefore
    her appeal was allowed on that basis.

6.   The Secretary of State for the Home Department seeks to appeal  against
    that decision  essentially  on  the  basis  that  the  Judge  has  made
    contradictory findings as between paragraph 35 of the determination and
    paragraph 40.   The findings that the appellant would be  at  risk  and
    exploited had not been objectively verified and little reason has  been
    given for that conclusion.  It was contended that the Judge  failed  to
    adequately to address the issue of proportionality.  Leave was granted.

7.   Thus the matter comes before me in pursuance of that grant of leave.

8.   Mr Lee, who represents the appellant ,  submitted  that  there  was  no
    illogicality in the approach to the matter taken by the Judge.

9.   The first step that needed to be considered  was  whether  or  not  the
    appellant met the Immigration Rules and it was the  conclusion  of  the
    Judge that she had not for the reasons as set out in paragraph 35.

10.  That did not, however, exclude  further  consideration  of  the  appeal
    under  Article  8  of  the  ECHR  and  looking  at  appropriate   wider
    considerations.   The  Judge  properly  took  into  account  that   the
    appellant's situation and circumstances would fundamentally change when
    her brother left her to join her father in the United  Kingdom.   There
    would then be no close family members left other than her  grandmother.
    It was also submitted that the Judge was entitled to rely upon what the
    sponsor said as to the safety  of  his  daughter,  accordingly  it  was
    properly open to the Judge to have dealt with the matter as set out  in
    the determination.

11.  There is a slight difficulty in relation to that  particular  argument.
    The evidence of  the  sponsor  is  recorded  at  paragraph  10  of  the
    determination :

          "the  current  situation  in  Pakistan  is   dangerous   for   the
         appellants, particularly the second appellant; as  a  single  woman
         with no parents to protect her, she is vulnerable to abduction."

12.  That evidence of the sponsor was not accepted in its entirety,  as  can
    be seen from  the  phraseology  in  paragraph  35  ,because  the  Judge
    comments "there is no evidence that she is suffering from  any  adverse
    treatment in the community where she lives, as claimed by the sponsor".
     The Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  is  understandably
    concerned that the Judge's findings have  not  been  supported  by  any
    objective evidence and are therefore flawed.  It is somewhat of a  leap
    from a comfortable family home and college and no adverse treatment  in
    the community to one in which she needs protection to  move  safely  in
    public areas and prevent her being exploited as a single woman.

13.  Nevertheless it seems clear to  me  that  the  Judge  was  entitled  in
    paragraphs 39 and  40   to  consider  the  wider  implications  of  the
    departure of the brother.  It is significant that they are very much of
    an age, she being just over a year  older  than  her  brother.   It  is
    reasonable to accept that there is a close family bond as  between  the
    two of them as they had always lived together as  separate  from  other
    family members.

14.  A bundle of documents was submitted in some detail  before  the  First-
    tier Judge although little reference has been made to them.   In  order
    to clarify the family situation of the sponsor and his families I asked
    a number of questions of the  sponsor  just  to  understand  where  the
    claimant fitted in to the situation.

15.  The sponsor had divorced his first wife. There were  four  children  to
    that first marriage namely the Claimant  and  her  brother  Wagas  Also
    there was Naquah Khan born in 1991 and a further brother Awais now aged
    17, both of those brothers are living in the United Kingdom as students
    with the sponsor's first wife.

16.  The sponsor remarried and there are three  children  to  that  marriage
    aged 6, 3 and nearly 2.  There is some detail about that  marriage  and
    those children in the original bundle.

17.  Thus the reality would be that were Wagas to join the  sponsor  in  the
    United Kingdom ,as now he is permitted to do  his  appeal  having  been
    allowed ,that would mean that the appellant's three  siblings  were  in
    the  United  Kingdom  with  her  mother  and  father  and   her   three
    stepsiblings were in the United Kingdom with her father and stepmother.
     Thus the entire family apart from the appellant would be in the United
    Kingdom and she would be with her elderly grandmother in Pakistan.   It
    is of course significant in that context to note,  as  I  have  already
    indicated, that the appellant is not much older than her brother  Waqas
    and is only slightly older than her brother Awais.

18.  The Judge comments that the appellant by  herself,  without  the  wider
    support of her brother ,would be more vulnerable than  were  he  to  be
    there.  It seems to me that that is a conclusion  which  is  reasonably
    open to be made in all the circumstances.  Though she  may  live  in  a
    comfortable home with a caring and loving grandmother the reality would
    be that with the departure of her brother she would  be  isolated  from
    her large family in UK and separated from them,  particularly from  the
    company of her  brother.   That  represents  in  common  sense  a  very
    significant change in her lifestyle and condition.

19.  The Judge notes that she would be left with no close family members  in
    Pakistan which would amount to an interference with  her  family  life.
    Although that perhaps is a finding that could more helpfully have  been
    expanded,  it  seems  to  me  that  that  feature,  together  with  her
    vulnerability, with or  without  the  element  of  danger,  provides  a
    sufficient basis for the Judge to  conclude  that  continued  exclusion
    from  the  United  Kingdom  would  be  disproportionate  in   all   the
    circumstances.

20.  In the circumstances therefore I do not find there  to  be  a  material
    error of law in the determination.  It could perhaps have  been  better
    expressed and with greater clarity,  particularly  as  the  context  in
    which the claim is being made.  Nonetheless it is properly  open  as  I
    find for the Judge to have concluded as was stated.

21.  The age of the appellant, her vulnerability and  the  presence  of  the
    rest of her family in the United Kingdom are also significant  features
    to be borne in mind in assessing the proportionality of the decision to
    refuse.

22.  In the circumstances I do not find  that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    was in error of law in the findings that were made.  If in the event  I
    am in error in not finding an error  of  law  by  reason  of  the  over
    simplification of facts ,I would nevertheless have gone on to  consider
    the factors which I have set out  in  the  evidence  concerning  family
    grouping in the United Kingdom and would have concluded in  any  event,
    that it would be  disproportionate  for  the  appellant  to  remain  in
    Pakistan without her brother  notwithstanding  her  loving  and  caring
    grandmother.

23.  In all the circumstances therefore this  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department is dismissed  and  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge upheld,  namely that the  appeal  is  allowed
    under Article 8 ECHR.  It has been noted that application was  made  as
    far back as 2011.  It is my hope that entry clearance can be granted to
    the appellant without delay.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
