
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/18811/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27th January 2015                          |On 12th February 2015         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KELLY

                                   Between

                         Master Emmanuel Asafo-Adjei
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTion not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Asafo-Adjei, Sponsor
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Ghana who was born on 1st February  1998.
    He appeals with permission against a decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Oakley, which was promulgated on 15th September  2014.   In  that
    decision, Judge Oakley dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's refusal to grant his application for  entry  clearance  to
    the United Kingdom as a dependent child of a person, namely his father,
    who is present and settled in the United Kingdom.  His father, to  whom
    I shall refer hereafter as the Sponsor, is Mr David Asafo-Adjei.

 2. The issue in the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal was whether  the
    Appellant had proved that the Sponsor had had sole  responsibility  for
    his upbringing.  It is important to focus upon that from the outset  in
    view of the point that is raised in this appeal.

 3. In support of his son's application, the Sponsor wrote a letter to  the
    Entry Clearance Officer. The ground upon which permission  was  granted
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal turns entirely upon the terms  of  that
    letter. I shall therefore quote it in full.  The letter is  dated  10th
    June 2013 and is addressed to the Visa  Section  of  the  British  High
    Commission in Accra.

         "Dear Sir/Madam,

         Application for settlement visa  for  Master  Emmanuel  Asafo-Adjei
         born 1st February 1998

         I am writing to inform you that the above-mentioned is my  son  and
         that I want to apply for a settlement visa for him to come and join
         me in the UK.  He has been under the care of his  guardian  who  is
         also my friend since the time I left Ghana to be with  my  wife  in
         the UK.  The guardian had previously indicated in  several  letters
         to me that he cannot continue to cater for him because of his plans
         to travel out of Ghana.

         I have discussed it with my wife and that I have decided  to  bring
         him to come and live with me in the UK since I do not have  anybody
         to continue looking after him.  I will  be  very  grateful  if  the
         necessary assistance is given to enable him come and live with  me.
         I have given him the necessary  documentation  in  support  of  his
         application and that if you  need  further  clarifications  do  not
         hesitate to ask.  The whereabouts of his biological mother  is  not
         known hence the need to let him come to the UK.

         I am looking forward to your cooperation and assistance thank you.

         Yours faithfully

         (Mr David Asafo-Adjei)".

 4. I am bound to confess, that had it not been for the fact that both  the
    Presenting Officer and the judge appear to have considered it necessary
    to seek clarification, I would have thought  that  the  terms  of  this
    letter were clear enough.  The part of the  text  supposedly  requiring
    clarification, and around which much of the discussion  in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal  appears  to  have  revolved,  was  the  phrase  "I  have
    discussed it with my wife".  The judge interpreted  this  (and,  to  be
    fair, the Sponsor  appeared  to  confirm  it  in  his  evidence)  as  a
    reference to the Appellant's mother, to whom the sponsor has never been
    married.  However, it is plain from the text that this was not in  fact
    the person to whom the Sponsor  was  referring.  I  say  this  for  two
    reasons.  Firstly, in the first paragraph of the  letter,  the  Sponsor
    explains that he had left the Appellant in the care  of  his  guardian,
    "since I left Ghana to be with my wife in the UK" [Emphasis added]. So,
    from the very outset, it was clear that the Sponsor  was  referring  to
    his wife in the UK.  Therefore, and without more, it  was  likely  that
    any further reference by the Sponsor to his "wife" would be to his wife
    in the UK. Secondly, if there could have been any remaining doubt as to
    whom the Sponsor  was  referring,  this  was  dispelled  by  the  final
    sentence in the second paragraph: "the whereabouts of [the appellant's]
    biological mother is not known hence the need to let him  come  to  the
    UK." [Emphasis added].  I cannot therefore see  however  anybody  could
    have construed the letter in a way  that  suggested  that  the  Sponsor
    might have discussed matters  with  a  person  whose  whereabouts  were
    described as, "not known".

 5. The terms of the letter  were  nevertheless  regarded  as  sufficiently
    unclear for the Presenting  Officer  and  the  judge  to  question  the
    Sponsor about it. The results of this  questioning  are  summarised  at
    paragraph 19 of the determination.

         "I am less than satisfied that the Appellant  does  not  have  some
         contact with his biological mother.  The reason that I  state  that
         is that the Sponsor referred specifically to the fact  of  speaking
         to his wife in a letter that he sent to the High Commission.  I put
         that statement to the Sponsor at the time of the appeal hearing and
         he started to become extremely evasive and stated that this was not
         a statement that he had spoken to his wife but that he  had  spoken
         to the family of his wife.  That is not what the letter says and as
         a result of that inconsistency in the Sponsor's evidence I  am  not
         entirely satisfied that notwithstanding the fact that I accept that
         the Appellant no longer lives with his biological  mother  that  he
         has not in the past since she left  and  does  not  now  have  some
         contact with her."

 6. In deciding that the Sponsor was being  extremely  evasive,  the  judge
    appears not only to have failed to view the Sponsor's references to his
    "wife" within the context of the letter as a whole (see above) but also
    to have discounted the  possibility  that  the  Sponsor  was  genuinely
    confused as to what and to whom the judge was referring. It is unclear,
    for example, whether the Sponsor had a copy of the  letter  before  him
    when he was being questioned about it and, if so, whether he was  first
    given the opportunity to refresh his memory. Be that as it  may,  as  a
    result of the Sponsor's replies to those questions, the judge  was  not
    satisfied that the Appellant had lost contact with his mother.

 7. I turn now to the Grounds of Appeal upon which permission to appeal has
    been granted  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.  There  are  essentially  three
    grounds, although two of them are really the same ground  expressed  in
    different ways. Those grounds are contained in paragraphs 5, 6 and 7 of
    the application.

         "5.  The Appellant will contend that the determination  is  against
             the weight of the evidence that there were fatal errors  which
             affected the Immigration Judge's decision.

         6.   In paragraph  15  of  the  determination,  the  judge  in  her
             consideration stated that there was a letter dated  10th  June
             2013 from Sponsor addressed to Respondent in which the Sponsor
             stated that the application had been discussed with his  wife.
             The Appellant will contend that the contents of the letter did
             not relate to  Appellant's  mother.   It  was  meant  for  the
             Sponsor's spouse who lives in the United Kingdom.  The Sponsor
             could  not  have  refused   [this   should   presumably   read
             "referred"] to Appellant's mother  as  his  wife.   They  were
             never married.

         7.   It is submitted that there are factual errors  which  affected
             the judge's decision."

 8. Paragraphs 5 and 7 are really an expression for the same idea;  namely,
    that the Appellant disagrees with the  judge's  findings  and  contends
    that she ought to have reached different conclusions.  Those paragraphs
    do not thereby identify any error of law.

 9. However, permission to appeal was granted  upon  the  ground  which  is
    contained in paragraph 6. It was granted in the following terms:

         "An arguable error of law has arisen in relation to the analysis of
         a letter referred to at paragraph 6 in the  permission  application
         and the impact of the analysis made in relation to this  letter  on
         the outcome of the appeal."

10.  I  have  made  plain  my  view  that  there  was  only  one   sensible
    interpretation of the letter that featured so largely  at  the  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal. Had  it  not  been  for  the  Sponsor's
    evidence at that hearing, therefore, I might well have  been  persuaded
    that the judge's interpretation of the letter was perverse. However, in
    light of the evidence that the Sponsor gave  at  the  hearing,  such  a
    finding is not now open to me. It is fair to point out that the Sponsor
    provided me with credible reasons for believing that  his  evidence  in
    this regard was unreliable rather than untruthful. This was essentially
    for the reasons  that  I  canvassed  at  paragraphs  4  to  6  (above).
    Nevertheless, plausible though this explanation is, it cannot assist me
    in determining whether the First-tier Tribunal made  an  error  of  law
    concerning the evidence that was before it at the time of the hearing.

11. However, even if the judge wrongly  interpreted  the  contents  of  the
    sponsor's letter, I am satisfied that this  was  not  material  to  the
    outcome of the appeal.  This is because the judge ultimately  dismissed
    the appeal because she found that the Appellant had not discharged  the
    burden of proving that the Sponsor had had sole responsibility for  his
    upbringing.  That was the sole  issue  that  had  been  raised  by  the
    Respondent under paragraph 297 of the Immigration  Rules.  The  judge's
    consideration of it is to be found in  paragraphs  20  and  21  of  her
    decision.

         "20. I accept that the Appellant has been living with two  teachers
             from the school during the time that he is  not  boarding  but
             again I do not accept that they are merely caretakers for him.
              In particular, the Sponsor has stated that he personally  has
             no contact with the school and merely sends the money for  the
             boarding fees and therefore the Appellant's education and  all
             dealings with the school are  clearly  carried  out  by  those
             teachers with whom he has resided and therefore they have  had
             some  responsibility  for  the   Appellant's   upbringing   in
             particular and consequently the Sponsor cannot establish  that
             he has had sole responsibility.

         21.  He has  in  fact  entrusted  a  very  important  part  of  the
             upbringing and development of his son to those  teachers  with
             whom the Appellant has resided, notwithstanding the fact  that
             they are not blood relations and are merely in the case of one
             a friend and a teacher at the school and in the other merely a
             teacher at the school and that they have clearly had  a  large
             measure  of  responsibility  for  the  Appellant's  education,
             upbringing and day-to-day care and I therefore concluded  that
             the Appellant cannot satisfy that the  Sponsor  has  had  sole
             responsibility for the Appellant."

12. It has not been argued  that  those  findings  were  not  open  to  the
    Tribunal upon the evidence that was before it. Moreover, those findings
    ultimately had little if anything to do with the  question  of  whether
    the Appellant had retained contact with his mother or with whether  his
    mother had given her consent to him residing  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Indeed, such matters do not fall  directly  within  the  ambit  of  the
    requirements in paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules.

13. So, albeit with a degree of hesitation, I hold that the judge  did  not
    err in her interpretation of the letter that the sponsor wrote  to  the
    British High Commission. This is  because  she  was  entitled  to  have
    regard to the evidence about it that had  been  given  by  its  author.
    Whether it was ever necessary to seek his  assistance  in  interpreting
    the letter is another matter entirely. Furthermore, and any event, this
    particular aspect of the judge's reasoning had little  if  any  bearing
    upon the reasons why she dismissed the appeal and was  thus  immaterial
    to its outcome.

14. All that I am able to say by way of some comfort to  the  Sponsor,  who
    argued his son's case with  great  skill  and  courtesy,  is  that  the
    Appellant is still not quite 17 years of age. He thus has time to  make
    a fresh application for entry clearance as a dependent minor child of a
    person with leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

Notice of decision

15. The appeal is dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
