



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/18651/2013,

                                                      OA/18656/2013,

                                                      OA/18662/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London                    |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 22 July 2014                                 |On 14 August 2014          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts

                                   Between
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           ahmed abdulahi mahamud
                         abdulwahid abdulahi mahamud
                         abdulasiis abdulahi mahamud
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss Gunanal, of Counsel

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. In this appeal the Appellant is the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department and the Respondents are Ahmed Abdulahi  Mahamud,  Abdulwahid
    Abdulahi Mahamud and Abdulasiis  Abdulahi  Mahamud.  For  the  sake  of
    clarity however I shall  refer  to  the  Secretary  of  State  as  "the
    Respondent" and Ahmed Abdulahi Mahamud, Abdulwahid Abdulahi Mahamud and
    Abdulasiis Abdulahi Mahamud as the "the Appellants".

 2. The Appellants are citizens of Somalia, born  1st  January  1996,  29th
    February 1998 and 5th April 2000 respectively. They are the children of
    Halimo Ahmed Dhabaney, a British national residing in the UK.

 3. The Appellants made application for entry clearance on 8th May 2013  in
    order to join their mother (the Sponsor) in the UK. The Sponsor came to
    the UK in 2003 as a refugee from Somalia she was  recognised  as  such,
    and she by now, I am told, acquired British nationality.

 4. In considering the Appellants' application the Entry Clearance  Officer
    looked at  the  Immigration  Rules  and  refused  entry  to  all  three
    Appellants under paragraph 297(i)(a)-(f).

 5. The Entry Clearance Officer's consideration and refusal fell  into  two
    distinct strands.

      i) He was not satisfied that the Appellants had shown that  they  were
         related as claimed to their Sponsor.

     ii)  Neither  was  he  satisfied  that  the  Appellants  had   provided
         "satisfactory  evidence   that   there   are   serious   compelling
         circumstances that make your exclusion undesirable".

 6.  Although the Entry Clearance Officer had  said  that  he  had  refused
    under paragraph 297(i)(a)-(f) there appears to have  been  no  seperate
    consideration of whether the Appellants could meet 297(i)(e).

 7. The Appellants' appeals came  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Borsada) which in a determination dated  6th  April  2014  allowed  the
    Appellants' appeals under the Immigration Rules. The Judge then went on
    to also allow the appeals under Article 8 ECHR.

 8. The Respondent sought and was  granted  permission  to  appeal  on  one
    ground only, namely that the  Judge  had  failed  to  give  reasons  or
    adequate reasons for findings on a material matters (sic). The  grounds
    then appear to criticise the Judge's Article 8 assessment by saying,

         "It was made clear in Gulshan [2013]  UKUT  00640  (IAC)  That  the
         Article 8 assessment shall only  be  carried  out  when  there  are
         compelling circumstances not recognised by  these  Rules.  In  this
         case the Tribunal did not identify  such  compelling  circumstances
         and its findings are therefore unsustainable.  Gulshan  also  makes
         clear that at this stage an appeal should  only  be  allowed  where
         there are exceptional circumstances. Nagre [2013]  EWHC  720  Admin
         endorsed the Secretary  of  State's  guidance  on  the  meaning  of
         exceptional circumstances, namely ones where refusal would lead  to
         an unjustifiably harsh outcome. In this case the Tribunal  has  not
         followed this approach and thereby has erred".

 9. This criticism is picked up in the grant of permission which states,

         "The Judge refers briefly to the oral evidence received however  it
         is not clear what factors weighed  in  the  Judge's  mind  when  he
         decided that the Appellants met paragraph 297 and  their  exclusion
         from the UK would be unjustifiably harsh. This lack of reasoning is
         an arguable error of law.

         Given the Tribunal's decision in Gulshan (Article 8 - new  rules  -
         correct approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 it is also  arguable  that  the
         Judge misdirected himself as to the law on Article 8".

10.  At the hearing before me Mr Nath on behalf of the Respondent  outlined
    the grounds seeking permission and submitted that the determination  of
    the First-tier  Tribunal  should  be  set  aside  because  the  Judge's
    analysis and reasons were inadequate to support his findings.  Mr  Nath
    accepted  that  the  core  issue  in  this  appeal  was  one  of   sole
    responsibility. He submitted however the three Appellants have a father
    and whilst it is said  that  the  father's  whereabouts  are  currently
    unknown, it is up to the Appellants to prove that they are   alone  and
    that their mother has therefore retained sole responsibility for them.

11.  Miss  Gunanal  unsurprisingly  in  response  sought  to   defend   the
    determination. She  submitted  that  the  Judge  had  directed  himself
    appropriately in the terms of the information and  evidence  which  was
    before him. The Judge had taken note of the  Appellant's  bundle  which
    contained a significant amount of evidence which  proved  firstly  that
    the Appellants were the children of the Sponsor a point disputed by the
    Respondent,  secondly took cognisance of the  background  evidence  and
    thirdly found the Sponsor to be a credible witness. His findings for so
    doing are  set  out  in  paragraph  7  of  the  determination  and  are
    adequately reasoned.

12. Miss Gunanal went on to say that as the Judge had  allowed  the  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules there was no need for his determination  to
    go further than that. She accepted that the Article  8  assessment  was
    somewhat lacking  but  since  the  Judge  had  already  found  for  the
    Appellant under the Immigration Rules, any  lack  of  analysis  in  the
    Article 8 ECHR issue would not render the determination unsustainable.

13. I find favour with Miss Gunanal's submissions. I do not find  that  the
    Judge has erred such as to render the  determination  unsustainable.  I
    say this for the following reasons.

14. The first matter which exercised the Entry Clearance Officer's mind  is
    not subject to any challenge before me. The Entry Clearance Officer, in
    refusing the Appellant's applications, focussed a  great  deal  of  his
    attention on whether or not the Appellants were related as  claimed  to
    the Sponsor. DNA evidence was produced to show that it is  more  likely
    than not that the Appellants are the children of their UK Sponsor. This
    is a finding which the  Judge  made  and  that  finding  has  not  been
    challenged. It also helps in deciding whether the sponsor is a credible
    witness.

15. So far as the rest of paragraph 297 is concerned,  the  Judge  properly
    noted that the  applications  were  refused  under  297(i)(a)-(f).  The
    Sponsor in her evidence, outlined that the three Appellants had  become
    separated from their father and that they had fled to  a  refugee  camp
    originally in Kenya, but now live in Ethiopia. The Sponsor  managed  to
    trace them  there.  The  evidence  of  the  Sponsor,  which  the  Judge
    accepted, is that the three Appellants  have  been  left  to  fend  for
    themselves in a country which is not their own country and depend  upon
    money sent from their mother and a neighbour looking in  on  them.  The
    Judge formed the view on the evidence before him that  the  Appellants'
    father's whereabouts is unknown and he accepted  therefore  that  their
    mother exercised sole responsibility for them.

16. Those are the findings which the  Judge made. It was not  advanced   by
    Mr  Nath  that  those  findings  are  either  perverse  or  irrational.
    Therefore they  are ones, which it can be said, were open to the  Judge
    on the evidence before him. It may be said that  the  decision  can  be
    categorised as a generous one  and  another  Tribunal  may  have  found
    differently, but that does not amount to a  sustainable  challenge  for
    legal error.

17. In these circumstances it was open  to  the  Judge  to  find  that  the
    Appellants' mother, the Sponsor exercised sole responsibility for  them
    and they came within the Immigration Rules paragraph 297(i)(e).

18. It is right to say that the Judge did  go  on  to  make  an  Article  8
    assessment. It is a very brief assessment but  nevertheless  it  is  an
    adequate one. Considering that the Judge had found for  the  Appellants
    under the Immigration Rules, the brief Article 8  assessment  does  not
    mean that there is a material error in the Judge's determination.

DECISION

19. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error  of  law
    and therefore it stands. The appeal of the Respondent is dismissed.




No anonymity direction is made


Signature                                             Dated
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


