

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

Immigration and Asylum Chamber                   Appeal Number:
OA/18233/2012



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                        |Promulgated               |
|On 27 August 2013                           |On 29 August 2013         |
|                                            |                          |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?

                                   Between

                                Md Dulal Ali
                                  Appellant
                                     and

                           Entry Clearance Officer
                                    Dhaka
                                                           Respondent

                          Determination and Reasons

Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Details of appellant and basis of claim

   1.       This case comes before the Upper Tribunal following the grant of
      permission to appeal by First-tier Tribunal Judge on 16 July  2013  in
      respect of  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Blake
      promulgated on 7 June 2013 dismissing the appeal for entry clearance.

   2.       The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh who claims to have been
      born on 8 May 1996 making him 16 years old at the date of the decision
      on 29 August 2012.  He seeks to join his parents for  settlement.  The
      Entry Clearance Officer was not satisfied the appellant was related as
      claimed to his sponsors and also expressed  dissatisfaction  with  the
      recently issued birth certificate. He also considered the  appellant's
      domestic circumstances and concluded that he could  not  be  satisfied
      that all the requirements of paragraph 297(i)(a)-(f) were met.

The Hearing

   3.       The appeal came before me on 28 August 2013. I heard submissions
      from the parties as to whether or not the First-tier Tribunal had made
      an error of law and at the  conclusion  of  the  hearing  reserved  my
      determination.

   4.       The appellant was represented by Mr Karim who submitted that the
      most glaring error of law was that the judge had mistakenly considered
      the appeal under paragraph 297(i)(f).  He  submitted  that  where  the
      appellant was under 18 and had both parents present and settled in the
      UK, there was no necessity to consider whether there were serious  and
      compelling  family  or  other  considerations  which  made   exclusion
      undesirable.  He  argued  that  the  appellant  was  not  leading   an
      independent life as he still lived with family members. There was also
      no need for a judge to address every point raised by the ECO.

   5.       In response, Mr Jarvis submitted that material points raised  by
      a party had to be taken into account by judges when the  evidence  was
      assessed. The ECO had raised the issue of the  recently  issued  birth
      certificate and the judge  should  have  engaged  with  that  concern.
      Issues had also been raised about the whereabouts of  the  appellant's
      mother who did not give oral evidence and did not attend the  hearing.
      Whilst there were difficulties with the judge's failure to engage with
      these and other material matters, he had made  a  sustainable  finding
      with regard to the appellant leading an independent life. The case law
      did not require an appellant to  be  leading  a  life  independent  of
      anyone,  just  independent  of  his  parents.  As  that  finding   was
      sustainable, the requirements of paragraph 297 could not  be  met  and
      the determination should stand. If, the Tribunal did  not  agree  with
      that argument, the whereabouts of the  appellant's  mother  should  be
      highlighted as a live issue for the resumed hearing.

   6.       Mr Karim replied. He submitted that the judge had not considered
      the birth certificate in  isolation;  he  had  also  looked  at  other
      evidence and then accepted relationship. Had there been other  matters
      the judge was unhappy with  he  should  have  clarified  this  at  the
      commencement of the hearing so that the appellant was not deprived  of
      the opportunity to respond. The judge misapplied paragraph  297(i)(f).
      However  despite  that  error,  he  had  made  clear  finding  on  the
      relationship and the whereabouts of  the  appellant's  parents.  Those
      findings alone justified the appeal being allowed outright.  If  there
      was  to  be  a  re-hearing  the  finding  on  relationship  should  be
      preserved.

Findings and conclusions


   7.       Having carefully considered the submissions,  the  determination
      and the evidence I take the view that this appeal needs to be re-heard
      on all issues.

   8.        The  judge  is  criticised  for  having  considered   paragraph
      297(i)(f) when it was the appellant's  case  that  both  parents  were
      settled in the UK. Whilst it is puzzling as to why he should have done
      this, unless he was not satisfied that both parents were  in  the  UK,
      the  appellant's  representative  at  the   hearing   made   extensive
      submissions on the issue of exceptional circumstances. It may be  that
      this led to his consideration of the point but it is not  clear.  This
      is just one reason why I conclude that the  determination  is  muddled
      and confused.

   9.       There are also other serious difficulties. Contrary to  what  Mr
      Karim submitted, the judge  makes  findings  which  are  difficult  to
      reconcile  with  others  made  elsewhere  in  the  determination.  For
      example, the judge noted that the DNA evidence only took a sample from
      the appellant's father and that no sensible reason had been given  for
      the absence of a sample from  the  mother.  He  also  noted  that  the
      sponsor was  not  a  credible  witness  (in  at  least  four  separate
      paragraphs of the determination), that he knew nothing much about  the
      appellant's life and displayed no interest in  it,  that  he  had  not
      provided any good reason for not bringing the appellant to the UK with
      the rest of the family, that there was no evidence of ongoing contact,
      that the money transfers conflicted with the sponsor's  oral  evidence
      and that the appellant had not travelled to Saudi Arabia with him  and
      the rest of the family. Despite these difficulties, he found that  the
      appellant was related as claimed to the sponsor.  That  conclusion  is
      difficult to reconcile with all the other adverse findings  made.   It
      should also be noted that there is no finding on whether he is related
      as claimed to his mother, the second sponsor. The relationship to both
      was brought into question by the ECO and remains unresolved.

  10.       Mr Karim argued that the judge was not obliged to make  findings
      on all the reasons given by the ECO for the refusal. With  respect,  I
      do not agree. The respondent has put forward a case and it is for  the
      judge to engage with it and  address  the  reasons  for  refusal.  The
      appellant's recently issued birth certificate  and  its  unreliability
      has not been touched upon. Mr Karim argued that the  judge  had  taken
      into account  "other  documents"  when  making  his  decision  on  the
      relationship but it is wholly unclear what these other documents  are.
      They are not specified  and  given  the  absence  of  any  documentary
      evidence  showing  contact  and  the  unreliability  of   the   school
      documents, it is difficult to guess at what the judge had in mind.

  11.       The judge also found that the  appellant's  sponsors  were  both
      present and settled in the UK. Mr Karim argued there was  evidence  in
      the bundle to support this finding and pointed to a tenancy  agreement
      and evidence of the grant of ILR. With respect, those documents do not
      show the mother's continued presence in the UK.  The  judge  found  it
      strange that she did not attend the hearing or provide any  supporting
      evidence and he also noted that no evidence of her travel history  had
      been produced. Given these factors, his conclusion that both  sponsors
      were present in the UK lacks adequate reasoning.

  12.       For these reasons alone, the determination is flawed and  cannot
      stand. I  set  it  aside  in  its  entirety  except  as  a  record  of
      proceedings. No findings are preserved. The appeal shall  be  re-heard
      by the First-tier Tribunal on all issues. The appellant is  on  notice
      that it is for him to show that he meets all the requirements  of  the
      relevant rules and his representatives should prepare for the  hearing
      with that in mind. No submissions were made  on  Article  8  but  that
      would stand or fall with the  appeal  on  immigration  grounds  unless
      there are issues over maintenance and accommodation once concerns over
      age and relationship are resolved.

Decision

  13.       The Tribunal made errors of law and  the  determination  is  set
      aside. The appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  re-
      hearing on all relevant aspects of paragraph 297 and on Article 8,  if
      applicable.




      Dr R Keki?
      Judge of the Upper Tribunal


      29 August 2013



