
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/18390/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 17 March 2016                          |On 27 April 2016                 |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                            mohammed shandar miah
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, dhaka

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M K Hasan, Solicitor from Kalam Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Camp (the judge), promulgated on 11 September  2014,  in
    which he dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    decision of 21 August 2013. That decision  had  refused  the  Appellant
    entry clearance as the partner  of  a  person  settled  in  the  United
    Kingdom under Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules.

 2. As is clear from the dates of decision and  promulgation,  above,  this
    case has been the victim of significant delays, none of them the  fault
    of the Appellant.

 3. The 2013 refusal of entry clearance was  based  upon  relationship  and
    maintenance issues. In respect of the latter, it was said that  if  the
    Appellant appealed the decision a "final" decision on  funds  "may"  be
    made at a later stage. In fact, the  Appellant  did  appeal  the  first
    decision, and a further decision was made on 4 August 2014. The refusal
    notice expressly states that the second decision  was  not  in  fact  a
    "new" decision and so there were no further appeal rights.



The judge's decision

 4. The judge concluded that the Respondent's approach to the 2014 decision
    was not in accordance with the law. It appears as though  this  element
    of his decision relates solely to the maintenance issue.  In  light  of
    this conclusion the judge did not consider the Appellant's evidence and
    submissions on the maintenance issue.

 5. In respect of the  relationship  issue  the  judge  accepted  that  the
    Appellant and his wife (the sponsor) had married forty-five years  ago,
    and that they had three  children  together.  However,  notwithstanding
    this the judge goes on to state that there was a "dearth"  of  evidence
    about recent contact between the couple. On this basis, he  found  that
    the relationship was not a genuine and subsisting one. The  appeal  was
    purportedly allowed to a limited extent on the maintenance  issue,  and
    dismissed on the relationship issue.



The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 6. The concise grounds assert that the judge erred in failing to determine
    the merits of the maintenance issue, and erred in his  finding  on  the
    relationship issue.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam on 7
    May 2015.



My decision on error of law

 8. To Mr Richard's credit, he  did  not  put  up  any  resistance  to  the
    Appellant's attack on the judge's decision. In  my  view  this  was  an
    entirely sensible position to have adopted.

 9. There are clear material errors of law in this case.

10. First, the judge could and should have determined  the  merits  of  the
    maintenance  issue.  The  Respondent's   2013   decision   raised   the
    maintenance issue. The Appellant attended the appeal prepared to  argue
    the matter, with evidence in support. There is no sound reason provided
    by the judge as to why he was unable to deal with a live issue  in  the
    appeal.

11. Second, the judge's consideration of the relationship issue is  flawed.
    Quite apart from what  one  might  consider  was  the  persuasive  (and
    undisputed) fact of a forty-five year marriage and three  children,  it
    was simply not open to the judge to conclude that there was a  "dearth"
    of evidence relating to contact between the Appellant and his  wife.  I
    was directed to pages 64 onwards of the Appellant's bundle (before  the
    judge) in which there are reams of telephone bills  indicating  regular
    contact between the couple (Q26 of the visa application form shows that
    the numbers match up). This evidence was pre and post-decision. It  was
    relevant and material. The judge erred in failing to have any regard to
    it.

12. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.



Remaking the decision

13. Both representatives were agreed that I could remake  the  decision  on
    the evidence before me. This I now do.

14. There is ample evidence to show that the  Appellant  and  his  wife  of
    forty-five years had a perfectly genuine and subsisting relationship as
    at the date of decision and beyond.  The  telephone  bills  are  all  a
    reliable source of contact between the couple. In addition, I find that
    both the Appellant and his wife are credible in their own evidence.

15. Mr Richards did not seek to challenge  any  of  the  evidence  on  this
    issue.

16. Turning to the maintenance issue, Mr Hasan helpfully  took  me  through
    the evidence submitted back in 2013 and all relating  to  the  date  of
    decision.

17. Mr Richards expressly stated that he was not  challenging  any  of  the
    evidence. I find it all to be reliable and relevant.

18. Pages 15 and 19 of the Appellant's bundle show proof of payments during
    2012  to  2013.  Pages  21  to  22  show  National  Insurance  Class  2
    contributions. Pages 25 to 26 are the accountant's letter. Pages 27  to
    33 are the tax calculations. Pages 36 to 57 contain the bank statements
    for twelve months. Pages 58 to 61 corroborate  all  earnings.  Page  15
    contained the SA300 required by  paragraph  7(ii)  of  Appendix  FM-SE.
    Other references cited to me provided further support, both in terms of
    specified evidence and more generally.

19. In light of the foregoing, I am entirely satisfied that  the  Appellant
    met the requirements of Appendix FM as regards  both  the  relationship
    and maintenance issues, having regards to  the  fact  that  the  burden
    rests with him and that specified evidence was demanded by Appendix FM-
    SE.

20. The Appellant's appeal therefore succeeds under the Immigration Rules.

Anonymity

21. There is no need for a direction in this case.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I re-make the decision by allowing the appeal under the Immigration Rules.




Signed                                       Date:  25 April 2016


H B Norton-Taylor

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to  make  a  full  fee
award. The appeal has succeeded  on  evidence  provided  to  the  Respondent
either with the initial application or with he notice of appeal. None of  it
has been challenged before me.



Signed                                       Date:  25 April 2016

Judge H B Norton-Taylor

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

