
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/18361/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 13th April 2015                   |On 22nd April 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                             Miss Bimala Gurung
                          (NO aNONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Benitez, Counsel instructed by How & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nepal born on 27th  March  1981  and  she
    made an application for  entry  clearance  together  with  her  brother
    (previously the second appellant but whose appeal was allowed) to  join
    her father Ran Bahadur Gurung who was discharged from  the  Brigade  of
    Gurkhas in 1972.  He would have applied for settlement at that time had
    a policy been in force. He was subsequently given leave  to  remain  in
    the UK and on 13th May 2010 travelled to the UK.  His wife was  granted
    indefinite leave to enter on 15th July 2010 and she jointed him on  1st
    August 2010.  Both the appellant and her  brother's  applications  were
    refused at that time.  Their appeals were then allowed  to  the  extent
    that they should be considered under the policy in force but were again
    both refused.  Although an appeal right  was  given  limited  to  human
    rights and racial discrimination grounds the appellants  chose  not  to
    appeal.  They  made  fresh  applications  on  3rd  July  2013.    Those
    applications were refused again on 28th August 2013 and are the subject
    of the current appeal.

 2. In a determination dated 3rd September 2014 Judge  of  the  First  Tier
    Tribunal Boyes allowed the appeal of the appellant's brother on Article
    8 grounds but refused the appellant's appeal on all grounds.  The judge
    took into account the immigration history and stated that  he  did  not
    consider that the second appellant had been separated from his  parents
    by choice finding 'the second appellant  applied  for  entry  clearance
    along with his parents in 2009 but his application was refused  on  2nd
    July 2010'.  The judge took into account  the  immigration  history  in
    relation to the brother.

 3. The appellant applied for permission to appeal on the  basis  that  the
    appellant appealed together with her brother Dev Raj Gurung  and  their
    cases were similar and yet their cases were considered on  a  different
    basis.  It was asserted that the judge had erred in  the  consideration
    of the appellant's  case  by  concluding  that  Article  8(1)  was  not
    engaged.  The appellant lived with her parents until they came  to  the
    UK [50] and the judge accepted [51] that in Nepalese  culture  children
    remained with their nuclear family until married or  otherwise  forming
    an independent life and that unemployment was high in Nepal and in  the
    light of the cultural context  and  it  was  not  implausible  for  the
    appellant still to be financially dependant upon her parents [54].  She
    accepted that the appellant had a close and  loving  relationship  with
    her parents [60].  Nonetheless the appeal of the appellant was  refused
    whilst that of her brother was allowed.

 4. I found an error of law in First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Boyes'  decision
    and set that decision aside but nonetheless preserved the  findings  at
    paragraphs 37 and the findings from 42 to 57.

 5. The decision of Judge Boyes recorded that  it  was  accepted  that  the
    appellant did not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

 6. Further to Gurung & Ors [2013] EWCA Civ 8 the Court of Appeal expressly
    adopted the approach taken in Ghising:

         "45. Ultimately, the question whether an individual  enjoys  family
             life is one of fact and depends on a careful consideration  of
             all the relevant facts of the particular case."

 7. In addition to the findings set out above, the findings established the
    following: that the first appellant at the date of the decision was  32
    and the second appellant was 22.  They both  lived  with  their  mother
    from birth until August 2010 when she came to the UK.  The sponsor left
    the armed forces in 1972, nine years before the appellant was born  and
    nineteen years before the second appellant was  born,  and  he  resided
    with them until he came to the UK. The appellants were  interviewed  by
    the respondent by telephone on 7th June 2013 and  confirmed  that  they
    lived in a rented house in  Kathmandu.   The  family  had  a  house  in
    Gorkha, Nepal, but no-one lived there and the second  appellant  stated
    that they had one house in Gorkha and some  land  and  that  a  brother
    lived there.  In oral evidence the sponsor stated that he used to  have
    a house in Gorkha but sold it.  He now only had land there but a  small
    house and land in Tanahun.

 8. The judge also recorded at [53] that the first  appellant  stated  that
    she had finished her secondary education in 1996 and then followed with
    a BA and an MA in sociology  which  she  completed  in  2006.   It  was
    claimed she  was  undertaking  an  English  language  course  from  the
    Practical Language Centre at the date of the  hearing  and  provided  a
    letter from the college dated 2nd June 2013.  When  asked  if  she  had
    ever worked she stated that she had not.  She had tried but did not get
    a job.  Her parents had told  her  to  look  after  her  brother.   The
    sponsor did  not  know  what  she  had  been  studying  but  the  first
    appellant's mother stated that she had been a student all of  her  life
    and never worked.

 9. At [54] the First-tier Tribunal Judge  recorded  that  a  copy  of  the
    sponsor's standard chartered account statements were provided  covering
    a period from 1st December 2013 to 20th June 2014.   These  showed  the
    sponsor's pension being paid into the account and there are regular ATM
    withdrawals.  This provided corroboration  of  the  sponsor's  evidence
    that he had provided the first appellant with  an  ATM  card  so  funds
    could be withdrawn as required.  Whilst there was an elder  brother  in
    Nepal and other relatives there was nothing in the evidence before  the
    judge which suggested that the appellant derived any support in cash or
    kind from any other family member in Nepal.   The  judge  accepted  the
    unchallenged evidence that the unemployment levels were high in  Nepal.
    Whilst it  might  appear  that  the  first  appellant  was  old  to  be
    financially dependent upon her family, taken in  the  cultural  context
    and bearing in mind the economic situation in Nepal this  evidence  was
    accepted.

10. At the resumed hearing before me the sponsor, the  appellant's  father,
    and the appellant's mother and her brother all attended, adopted  their
    statements and gave oral testimony through a Nepalese interpreter.

11. I take particular note of  Ghising  (family  life  -  adults  -  Gurkha
    policy) [2012] UKUT 000160 and note that each case  is  fact  sensitive
    and should be analysed on its own facts.

12. Although the appellant is over thirty years of age as the offspring  of
    the sponsor and his wife the attainment of the age of majority  is  not
    of itself sufficient to displace the presumption that there is a family
    life (Etti-Adegbola v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009]
    EWCA Civ 1319 and SSHD v HK (Turkey) [2010] EWCA Civ 583 [16].

13. The evidence of all three witnesses was consistent and credible in that
    the appellant had always lived within the family unit and when she  was
    16 years old she left Tanahun where the parents were living to stay  in
    Kathmandu to pursue her studies.  Initially at  this  point  her  older
    brother, who is now in Dubai, was detailed to take  care  of  her.   He
    left.  The son Dev, whose appeal was  allowed  and  who  gave  evidence
    before  me,  confirmed  that  he  went  to  Kathmandu   when   he   was
    approximately 12 or 13 years old and stayed with his sister.   She  had
    moved to Kathmandu when she was about 16 years old. Until the  time  he
    came to the UK they were together.

14. I accept that the appellant and her  brother  were  dependent  children
    upon the sponsor and very much part  of  the  family  unit  and  relied
    wholly  on  the  sponsor  and  his  wife  for  financial  support   and
    accommodation.   The  appellant  lived  in  rented   accommodation   in
    Kathmandu and as found by Judge Boyes relied on financial support  from
    her sponsor father, who paid his pension  into  an  account  which  she
    could access in Kathmandu. The sponsor and  his  wife  were  candid  in
    stating that they lived in Tanahun and during term time  the  appellant
    and her brother would live in Kathmandu to  study.   The  evidence  was
    given that the children always returned  home  to  Tanahun  during  the
    holiday times and in the times when they were in Kathmandu the  parents
    would visit them very regularly at least every fifteen days. A  feature
    in assessing the existence of family life is continued residence in the
    family home where the dependant has not yet established an  independent
    family life, AA v United Kingdom [2011] ECHR 8000/08, paragraph 49.

15. In view of the evidence given in relation  to  employment  in  Nepal  I
    accept that the appellant has remained without  work  and  although  an
    adult of 32, she is a single female abiding by cultural norms which  is
    that she would stay within the  family  unit  until  she  was  married.
    Although submissions were made to the effect that the family wished the
    appellant to come to the UK and remain  with  the  family  rather  than
    marrying in Nepal it is the date of the respondent's decision which  is
    the relative time for my decision.   I  note  that  the  appellant  had
    previously made an application in 2010 and the appeal was heard in 2010
    but dismissed.  During that time the elder son was able to find  a  job
    abroad and he was not the subject of an application to bring him to the
    UK. Clearly the family are open to prospects  other  than  marriage.  I
    accept that the appellant is as she is and is single and the fact  that
    she might have been married is mere speculation and possibly hopeful.

16. The appellant has, according to the evidence of the sponsor and mother,
    and the appellant herself, been a student all her  life  and  has  been
    studying English courses whilst at the  same  time  looking  after  her
    brother until he came to the United Kingdom.   In  sum,  prior  to  the
    sponsor and his wife coming to the UK the appellant  effectively  lived
    with them for most of the time and along the lines  of  a  student  who
    would live with their parents whilst at college even though the student
    spends time away from home.  In addition the appellant had  lived  with
    her brother for nearly ten years prior to  the  decision  made  by  the
    Entry Clearance Officer.

17. As detailed in the statements of the sponsor and his wife I  find  that
    the first appellant has a very close  family  bond  with  her  parents.
    Oral evidence was given to the  effect  that  the  appellant  has  been
    extremely distressed at the departure  of  her  parents  and  then  her
    brother since he had obtained leave, and although  this  postdates  the
    decision, for the purposes of my decision I can  accept  that  it  does
    indicate the very close family  bond  between  the  appellant  and  her
    mother and father and her brother Dev.  The  sponsor  was  candid  that
    there were two siblings of his who lived in Tanahun but they had  their
    own family and I accept that there is no  immediate  and  close  family
    within Nepal with whom the appellant does have a family life.

18. Cumulatively, and taking into account the  previous  judge's  preserved
    findings, I therefore accept that there is the continuing existence  of
    family life between the appellant and her parents and brother and there
    is a continuing intention of the whole family to maintain family unity.
     Overall the circumstances also point to factors in the relationship in
    excess of the ordinary emotional ties (Kugathas v  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 31).

19. As Mr Duffy submitted the key issue was the question  of  family  life.
    He graciously conceded that  Ghising  &  Ors  (Ghurkhas/BOCs:  historic
    wrong; weight) [2013] UKUT 00567 confirmed that:

         "(2) When an appellant has shown that there is family/private  life
             and  the  decision  made  by  the  respondent  amounts  to  an
             interference with it, the burden lies with the  respondent  to
             show that a decision  to  remove  is  proportionate  (although
             appellants will,  in  practice,  bear  the  responsibility  of
             adducing evidence that lies within their remit and about which
             the respondent may be unaware)."

    And:

         "...

         (4)  Accordingly, where it is found that Article 8 is engaged  and,
             but for the historic wrong,  the  appellant  would  have  been
             settled in the UK long ago, this will ordinarily determine the
             outcome of the Article  8  proportionality  assessment  in  an
             appellant's  favour,  where  the  matters  relied  on  by  the
             Secretary of State/Entry Clearance Officer consist  solely  of
             the public interest in maintaining a firm immigration policy."

20. The evidence shows that the appellant would have come to  the  UK  with
    her father but  for  the  injustice  that  prevented  the  latter  from
    settling earlier.  It is clear that the  appellant  cannot  necessarily
    succeed even  if  their  family  life  engages  Article  8(1)  but  the
    respondent should point to matters over and above the  public  interest
    in maintaining a firm immigration policy which would argue in favour of
    removal or refusal of leave to enter.  Thus a bad  immigration  history
    or criminal behaviour may still be sufficient to outweigh "the powerful
    factors bearing on the appellant's side of the balance".

21. As Mr Duffy pointed out, there were no such factors in this  particular
    case. I too find there were no  countervailing  factors  which  weighed
    against the appellant.

22. I take into account Section 117 of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act  2002  and  conclude  that  the  father  has  to  date  been
    supporting the appellant financially and note from the evidence of  the
    brother that she can apparently speak English.  It  was  recorded  that
    the appellant had followed English courses in Nepal since 2013 and  the
    brother, Dev, confirmed that she  could  speak  English  as  indeed  it
    appeared could he.

23. It was accepted by the previous Immigration Judge that the  father  had
    so far supported both children in Nepal prior to the younger son coming
    to the UK and that accommodation would be available.

24. I therefore have regard to Section 117B but conclude that the appellant
    has established a family life,  there  has  been  interference,  albeit
    ostensibly, in accordance with the  law  for  the  maintenance  of  the
    legitimate aim but the  decision  to  refuse  entry  clearance  to  the
    appellant is not a proportionate decision.

25. I therefore allow the appeal on human rights grounds

Order

Appeal Allowed

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 21st April 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no  fee  award
bearing in mind the very complex nature of the appeal.



Signed        Date 21st April 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

