
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/18779/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                |Determination Promulgated            |
|On: 7th November 2013                |6 January 2014                       |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                    GAMF
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                       Entry Clearance Officer, Manila
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Ifere, Kolia Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of The Philippines date of birth 16th  July
    2007. In July last year she sought entry clearance to settle in the  UK
    with  her  adoptive  parents  who  are  both  British  nationals.  That
    application was refused on the 25th July 2012. Her appeal against  that
    decision was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Jacobs-Jones)
    on the 7th August 2013 and it is against that decision that she now has
    permission to appeal.[1]

 2. The grounds of appeal, drafted by Counsel, accept  that  the  Appellant
    could not succeed under paragraph 310  (vi)  of  the  Rules  since  her
    adoption  must  have  been  approved  by  a  competent   administrative
    authority or court in her country of origin. The  Appellant's  adoption
    was approved by the Regional Trial Court in Quezon City,  but  this  is
    not regarded by the UK as a competent authority. The appeal is  however
    pursued on two alternative grounds. First that the appeal  should  have
    been allowed on the basis that the Appellant met  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 297 of the Rules and secondly that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    erred in its approach to Article 8, and in particular the consideration
    of s 55 Border's Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

    Background and Matters in Issue

 3. The Appellant's visa application form shows that  the  application  was
    accepted under the  category  "child  or  other  dependent  of  settled
    person". The refusal notice deals at length with the Rules relating  to
    adoption, and very  with  Article  8.  No  consideration  is  given  to
    paragraph 297(i)(f) of the Rules which provides for the settlement of a
    'child of a relative'.

 4. On appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  it  was  submitted  that  the
    application should have been considered under paragraph 297(i)(f), even
    though this had not been  expressly  stated  in  the  application.  The
    Tribunal declined to  apply  the  rule  directly  but  did  record  the
    agreement between the parties that "paragraph 297  of  the  Immigration
    Rules could be considered by the Tribunal in the context of  Article  8
    of the ECHR": if the Appellant could show that she met the requirements
    of 297 the refusal of entry clearance would very likely be found to  be
    disproportionate  since  there  could  be  no  justification  for   the
    interference.

 5. The Tribunal made some findings  in  the  Appellant's  favour.  It  was
    accepted that the Sponsor Mr RPF is the Appellant's maternal uncle  and
    that the arrangement for he and his wife Mrs LGF to adopt the Appellant
    was made with the agreement of her birth parents. The  evidence  showed
    that the Appellant's birth parents  believed  it  to  be  in  her  best
    interests to be cared for by the Sponsors and that their ties to  their
    daughter had been severed, since they lived over 250km away from  where
    she was living with her maternal grandmother. It was accepted that  the
    Sponsors  had  travelled  to  the  Philippines  to  be  there  for  the
    Appellant's birth and that Mrs LGF had stayed there  for  9  months  to
    look after her.  She  and  her  husband  have  thereafter  visited  the
    Philippines twice a year and have remitted money  for  the  Appellant's
    benefit. It was also accepted that the Appellant's grandmother  who  is
    currently caring for her is now aged 86.

 6. Findings which went against the Appellant were as  follows.  The  Judge
    did not accept that the adoption was recognized by the UK, nor that the
    Sponsors had the requisite steps to be assessed in the UK  as  suitable
    for adoption. Although it  was  accepted  that  the  Appellant's  birth
    parents had relinquished parental responsibility it  was  not  accepted
    that this had been transferred in  toto  to  the  Sponsors,  since  the
    Appellant's day-to-day care was the responsibility of her  grandmother.
    There was for instance no evidence that decisions  in  respect  of  the
    Appellant's education or health were the  sole  responsibility  of  the
    Sponsors. Nor was the Judge satisfied that the Appellant's  grandmother
    was now unable to care for her as claimed.

 7. Having made these findings the Tribunal dismissed the appeal under  the
    Rules. The Appellant could not meet the requirements of  paragraph  310
    because the Philippino adoption is not recognized by the  UK,  and  the
    grounds of appeal to this Tribunal concede that this is so. In  respect
    of paragraph 297 the First-tier Tribunal properly  directed  itself  to
    the test at 297(i)(f) that required the Appellant to show that  she  is
    the child of a relative present and settled in the UK  and  that  there
    are serious and compelling family or other  considerations  which  make
    her  exclusion  undesirable,  The  Tribunal  considered  the   evidence
    relating to the ill health of the  Appellant's  grandmother  but  found
    this insufficient to meet this high test since there were other  family
    members living in the house with them. Moreover the Tribunal noted that
    the Appellant had been placed in this lady's care when her  grandmother
    was already 80, indicating that she must be  a  "very  capable  woman";
    since she was left with her grandmother the Appellant  has  only  spent
    occasional holidays with the sponsors. They had not even  attempted  to
    contact the local authority in the UK  with  a  view  to  arranging  an
    assessment, even though they knew that this was a requirement  from  as
    long ago as 2011. In the absence of any such report the Tribunal  could
    not be satisfied that the Sponsors had shown it was in the  Appellant's
    best interests to be in the UK with them. In respect of Article  8  the
    determination concludes: "I am of  the  view  that  the  refusal  is  a
    proportionate response to the government's aim  of  maintaining  proper
    immigration control and in protecting the interests of children".

 8. The grounds of appeal take issue with the "unclear" findings on whether
    the Appellant's biological parents were unable to care for her.  It  is
    further submitted that the First-tier Tribunal failed to take  relevant
    evidence into account in deciding whether  there  had  been  a  genuine
    transfer of responsibility. In respect of Article 8 it is said that the
    Tribunal failed to give adequate weight to the genuine  nature  of  the
    relationship ("the decision is as extreme for the appellant as  if  the
    refusal prevented her from joining her biological parents")  failed  to
    consider the best interests of the Appellant and to  the  argument  put
    that the decision could not be said  to  be  proportionate  since  from
    January 2014 adoption orders in the Philippines will be  recognized  by
    the UK.

    Error of Law

 9. The issue at the heart of this case is whether  this  child  should  be
    given entry clearance to join the sponsors  where  there  has  been  no
    adoption currently recognized by the UK and where the sponsors have not
    yet been assessed in the UK as suitable adoptive  parents.  This  issue
    went to the Tribunal's consideration  of  Article  8  as  well  as  the
    findings on whether there were serious and compelling reasons  why  she
    should not be excluded. Whether this  question  arose  in  relation  to
    human or paragraph 297(i)(f) of the Rules it was determinative: if  the
    Appellant could not provide good reason why these requirements had  not
    been complied with, any other criticisms of the determination could not
    be relevant.

10. For the record I do not consider that the best interests assessment was
    wanting. It  was  simply  that  the  Judge,  faced  with  a  dearth  of
    information about  the  sponsors  and  their  suitability  as  adoptive
    parents, had no evidential basis upon which to make a finding  that  it
    was in the Appellant's best to be with them in the UK. I  am  satisfied
    that the determination a factual error in that the  evidence  indicated
    that the Appellant and her grandmother were in fact living alone by the
    date of decision, not with a married daughter as found at paragraph 21.
    It may be that other criticisms can be made  about  the  way  that  the
    Tribunal assessed the evidence relating  to  the  Philippines.  However
    none of that could be determinative if there was nothing  to  weigh  it
    against. Put  baldly,  no  matter  how  bad  things  might  be  in  the
    Philippines that does not mean that it is necessarily in  this  child's
    interests to be here. All of the criticisms made of this  determination
    in the grounds of appeal  fall  away  in  absence  of  any  independent
    professional assessment of the sponsors as adoptive parents. The  Judge
    was quite entitled to limit her consideration of proportionality to the
    scant finding at paragraph 25 that the decision must be a proportionate
    response to the need to maintain immigration control  and  protect  the
    best interests of children. The legislation and regulations relating to
    foreign adoptions are in place to  protect  children.  Weighty  reasons
    would need to be given to justify granting entry clearance outwith that
    framework. In this case there does not appear be any particular  reason
    why the sponsors were  unable  to  initiate  and  co-operate  with  the
    assessment process. At the hearing before me Mr RPF explained  that  he
    had been sent from pillar to post by various agencies and I  appreciate
    that this has been an extremely stressful and distressing  process  for
    the sponsors, and  perhaps  for  the  Appellant  However  none  of  the
    difficulties he outlined amounted to insurmountable (I do not use  this
    phrase as a term of art) such that the failure  to  comply  with  these
    requirements could be overlooked or set to the side.

11. I have considerable sympathy with all of the actors  involved  in  this
    case: with the sponsors, with the Appellant's  ageing  grandmother  and
    with the Appellant herself. However I find that the Judge was perfectly
    entitled - indeed obliged  -  to  take  the  view  that  she  did.  The
    determination does not contain any errors of law.

    [pic]Decisions[pic]

12. The decision of the First-He Tribunal does not contain  any  errors  of
    law and it is upheld.

      [pic]
                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                          10th December 2013
                                                     -----------------------

[1] Granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pooler on the 18th September 2013


