

                                         [pic]



The Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal number: OA/18816/2013

                                 THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester             |Determination Promulgated|
|On October 14, 2014             |On October 15, 2014      |
|                                |                         |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                          MASTER MULUE SIMON BREHE
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER


                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Abdullah (Legal Representative)
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety (Home Office Presenting
      Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. The appellant, born August 5, 1999, is a citizen of Eritrea. On  August
    2, 2013 he applied for entry clearance as a child to enter  the  United
    Kingdom under  paragraph  352D  HC  395.  The  respondent  refused  the
    application on September 3, 2013.

 2. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal under  Section  82(1)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on October 4,  2013
    and  on  May  6,  2014  Judge  of  the  First  Tier  Tribunal   Edwards
    (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ") heard his appeal and  dismissed
    it in determination promulgated on May 8, 2014.

 3. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on May 19, 2013 and on  May  30,
    2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Gibb granted permission to appeal
    finding it arguable the FtTJ had erred.

 4. The matter came before me on July 22, 2014 and on that day I found  the
    FtTJ had failed to  consider  all  relevant  matters  when  considering
    whether there were good arguable grounds  or  compelling  circumstances
    not sufficiently recognised under Appendix FM and/or  paragraph  276ADE
    where refusal would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences for  the
    appellant. The FtTJ considered evidence provided by the  witnesses  who
    attended the hearing but failed to have any regard to:

     a. The conditions the appellant allegedly lived in.
     b. The fact the appellant's carer is not prepared to look after him.
     c. The age of the appellant and  the  fact  he  has  a  five-year  old
        sibling living in the United Kingdom

 5. I indicated that as the respondent had  not  been  represented  at  the
    original hearing and  the  appellant  wished  to  adduce  further  oral
    evidence that a resumed hearing would be  necessary  as  there  was  no
    interpreter booked and both witnesses (Ms Lemlem Weldegebriel (sponsor)
    and Mr Adane Berhane) needed the interpreter.

 6. The matter came back before me on the date set out above.

    PRELIMINARY ISSUES

 7. The appellant was not in attendance and Mr Hussain  explained  that  he
    was in difficulties.  Neither  the  sponsor  nor  the  witness  was  in
    attendance despite an indication given in July that they wished to give
    additional evidence. As regards Mr Berhane he explained that there  had
    been no contact with him since the last hearing. However,  the  sponsor
    had been into the office last week and informed his colleague that  she
    had lost contact with the appellant and  no  longer  wished  to  attend
    court in support of the application. She agreed to come  back  and  see
    the solicitor yesterday but failed to keep  her  appointment.  She  was
    spoken to on the  phone  and  said  she  had  gone  to  an  alternative
    appointment. Mr Hussain confirmed she was offered  another  appointment
    but the sponsor cancelled the appointment and reiterated she would  not
    be attending today's hearing.

 8. Mr Hussain confirmed his client was the appellant but  he  was  legally
    funded by the LAA in respect  of  the  sponsor.  He  indicated  he  was
    therefore without instructions and in a difficult situation as  he  had
    no evidence to call.

 9. I indicated that I had no alternative but to deal with  the  appeal  in
    the absence of both witnesses. I also indicated that I  would  have  to
    take into account the sponsor's refusal to attend the hearing.

    SUBMISSIONS


10. Mr McVeety submitted the appellant did not meet the  Immigration  Rules
    and in particular he failed to satisfy paragraph 352D HC 395 because he
    could not show he was part of his mother's family unit at the time  she
    fled or that the sponsor was a refugee. If he did not  meet  that  Rule
    then in order to be admitted as a child the appellant had to  meet  the
    requirements of Appendix FM or  paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and as the sponsor has chosen  not  to  attend  the  hearing  and
    through her solicitor has said she has lost contact with him there were
    no good arguable grounds or compelling circumstances to  consider  this
    appeal outside of the Rules.

11. He submitted the sponsor had only seen the appellant  twice  since  she
    left him in 2001 and the evidence of contact was poor. No weight should
    be attached to the witness statements especially as they had chosen not
    to  attend  the  hearing.  The  sponsor  was  unable  to  maintain   or
    accommodate the appellant without recourse to public funds and this  is
    a matter I am required to have regard to following  the  implementation
    of Section 117B(3) of the 2002 Act which states-

        "It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests
        of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who
        seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are financially
        independent, because such persons-

        (a)are not a burden on taxpayers, and

        (b)are better able to integrate into society."

12. Mr McVeety submitted that the appeal should be dismissed.

13. Mr Hussain felt unable to make any constructive submissions in view  of
    the fact there was no sponsor.

    FINDINGS


14. The appellant applied  for  entry  clearance  under  what  is  commonly
    described as the family reunion  provisions.  These  are  contained  in
    paragraph 352D HC 395. The sponsor's asylum application was refused and
    in effect that ends any possibility the appellant could  succeed  under
    paragraph 352D HC 395.

15. The appellant provided a letter asking to be allowed to live  with  his
    mother because his life was in danger and he was  living  with  someone
    who no longer wanted him. There was a letter  to  that  effect  in  the
    appellant's original bundle.

16. The sponsor provided two statements but in  absenting  herself  for  no
    good reason from the hearing I find unable to attach any weight to  the
    contents of those statements. The respondent  was  entitled  to  cross-
    examine her about:

     a. Her lack of contact since 2001.
     b. Her personal circumstances and how she would be  able  to  maintain
        and accommodate the appellant.
     c. Her son's personal circumstances.

17. The appellant cannot meet the requirements of Appendix FM. There is  no
    evidence that the maintenance or accommodation requirements set out  in
    sections E-ECC2.1 and  E-ECC2.4  can  be  met.  The  application  under
    Appendix FM must therefore fail and that assumes the appellant had been
    able to demonstrate that he had not formed an independent  family  unit
    as set out in section E-ECC1.3. The failure by the sponsor and  witness
    to attend and give evidence does not assist this appellant.

18. The appellant cannot apply under paragraph 276ADE HC 395 because he  is
    not living in the United Kingdom. He therefore has no private life.

19. I have considered whether this is a  case  that  should  be  considered
    outside of the Immigration Rules and I have considered the approach set
    out in R (Nagre) v SSHD [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin); MF  (Nigeria)  v  SSHD
    [2013] EWCA Civ  1192;  Gulshan  (Article  8  -  New  Rules  -  Correct
    Approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC); Shahzad (Article 8: legitimate  aim)
    [2014] UKUT 00085 (IAC) and MM (Lebanon) & Ors, R (on  the  application
    of) v Secretary of State for the Home Department & Anor [2014] EWCA Civ
    985).

20. This is a case where the  appellant  and  sponsor  have  had  extremely
    limited family life and little evidence has been  advanced  to  support
    the appeal. The failure of the sponsor to attend her own son's  hearing
    despite her  solicitor's  advice  is  jut  an  additional  factor  that
    undermines the appellant's position. In circumstances  where  the  only
    basis to be allowed entry is on the grounds of family life a refusal to
    attend the hearing fatally undermines the case.

21. I am satisfied that based on the above facts and findings there  is  no
    good arguable grounds or compelling circumstances that  would  persuade
    me that refusing the appellant's entry clearance application  would  be
    unjustifiably harsh. I therefore find no basis to consider this  appeal
    outside of the Rules and find the Immigration  Rules  properly  address
    article 8 ECHR.

    DECISION


22. There was a material error of law and I have remade  the  decision.   I
    dismiss the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

23. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended) the  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    order has been made and no request for an order was submitted to me.

Signed:                           Dated:





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT

I do not make a fee award as the application did not succeed.

Signed:                           Dated:





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
