
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: oa/18561/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|Oral determination given following hearing    |On 19 February 2015          |
|On 9 February 2015                            |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                                     BA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim, instructed by Melvyn Everson & Co.
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana who was born on  30  October  2000.
    It is common ground now between the parties that he is the son  of  the
    sponsor.  Apparently the sponsor came to the United Kingdom in 1990 and
    he met the appellant's mother in 1996 in the  United  Kingdom  but  she
    returned to Ghana.  It is not clear exactly when she returned to Ghana.
     In paragraph 7 of the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge  E  B
    Grant which is now under appeal it is said that she  returned  in  1999
    and then telephoned the sponsor to inform him that she was pregnant  by
    him.  That is unlikely  to  be  true  because  if  that  is  right  the
    pregnancy must have lasted considerably more than nine  months  as  the
    appellant was not born until 30 October  2000.   It  may  be  that  she
    returned early in 2000 but this is not a material factor in this  case.
    In any event again it is common ground (and this was the evidence given
    by the sponsor, the appellant's father), that  the  appellant's  mother
    took care of her son until he was approximately 3.   The  sponsor  says
    that his son was then taken to his  mother,  that  is  the  appellant's
    paternal grandmother, and left him with her there.  Then  apparently  a
    cousin, a Ms Akua Pokuaa agreed to take the appellant in to  live  with
    her and her other children (she apparently had  five)  and  it  is  the
    sponsor's case that he then sent money to Ms Pokuaa to take care of his
    son and pay for his school fees.

 2. It is the sponsor's case that subsequently a concerned neighbour, a  Ms
    Appiah Cosmos, was not happy with  the  care  that  the  appellant  was
    receiving from Ms Pokuaa and took him in herself  but  subsequently  Ms
    Appiah married and wants to move to a different area in Ghana with  her
    new husband who is a teacher.

 3. The appellant  made  an  application  for  entry  clearance  which  was
    apparently refused because the Entry Clearance Officer did not  believe
    the sponsor was the father of the appellant but  following  receipt  of
    DNA evidence it is now accepted that he is and a subsequent application
    was made.  This was refused by the respondent on 28 August 2013 and the
    appellant appealed against that refusal.

 4. The appeal was heard before First-tier Tribunal Judge E B Grant sitting
    at Hatton Cross on 26 August 2014 and 13 October 2014  but  the  appeal
    was dismissed.  The basis of the appeal  was  that  the  appellant  was
    entitled to entry clearance under the Rules  because  her  father,  the
    sponsor, had been exercising sole responsibility for  him  as  set  out
    within the Tribunal decision of TD (Yemen).  It was accepted of  course
    that the father could not have had day to day care  and  responsibility
    for his child in the sense of being physically with him but nonetheless
    if he had taken the main  decisions  with  regard  to  the  appellant's
    welfare and upbringing then that was a finding which nonetheless  could
    be made.

 5. Having heard the evidence from the sponsor and  having  considered  all
    the documents set out in the file, Judge Grant was  not  satisfied  the
    appellant satisfied the requirements under the Rules.

 6. At paragraph 7 of her determination  she  stated  that  "the  sponsor's
    witness statement is very sparse on detail and  information  about  the
    appellant some of which emerged during evidence before  me".   Then  at
    paragraph 11, having set out the gaps in the evidence at  paragraph  12
    she found that "I am not satisfied  that  either  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer or the Tribunal have been given the full story with  regard  to
    the arrangements for care of the appellant or the  whereabouts  of  his
    biological mother".

 7. Amongst the matters set out at  paragraph  10  it  is  noted  that  the
    sponsor had never resided with his son in Ghana and also that there was
    no  evidence  from  the  sponsor's  mother  with  whom  the  child  was
    apparently left initially.  Judge  Grant  then  goes  on  to  state  at
    paragraph 11 (it was argued before me that this was  speculation)  that
    "I observe that Madam Akua Pokuaa has the same Christian  name  as  the
    appellant's mother (Akua) and for all I know may well be his biological
    mother remarried with other children as well as the appellant". Because
    of the gaps in  the  evidence  put  before  her  Judge  Grant  was  not
    satisfied that there was credible evidence before her that the  sponsor
    had exercised sole responsibility for the appellant, even adopting  the
    tests set out within TD (Yemen).  Also, at paragraphs  15  and  16  she
    gives her reasons for not being  satisfied  that  the  maintenance  and
    accommodation requirements under the Rules were satisfied either.

 8. At paragraph 14 the judge sets out the procedure  which  she  considers
    ought to be adopted if there is to be  another  application  for  entry
    clearance which includes that the appellant should be  interviewed  and
    also the evidence that ought to be obtained and given on behalf of  the
    appellant by his grandmother on his father's side.  The evidence should
    also be given to demonstrate  that  Ms  Pokuaa  "is  not  actually  the
    child's biological mother".  It is also noted that  although  a  letter
    was submitted from Ms Appiah Cosmos stating that  she  wished  to  move
    that had not apparently been put before the Entry Clearance Officer and
    this should be done as well.

 9. Judge Grant did not deal with Article 8 at all  even  though  there  is
    some reference within  the  Record  of  Proceedings  to  indicate  that
    Article 8 was at least raised within the appeal.  Permission to  appeal
    was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Foudy on 18 December  2014  in
    the following terms:

         "...2.   The grounds  appear  to  argue  that  the  Judge  did  not
             adequately  deal  with  the  Appellant's  appeal   under   the
             Immigration Rules.  The grounds  also  argue  that  the  Judge
             failed to consider the Article 8 grounds relied  upon  by  the
             Appellant.

         3.   The Judge dealt with the oral evidence under  the  Immigration
             Rules in detail.   Her  determination  sets  out  the  matters
             relied upon by the Appellant and makes findings in respect  of
             them in a comprehensive and reasoned manner.  There is nothing
             in the determination to support that allegation that the Judge
             did not adequately deal with  that  part  of  the  Appellant's
             case.

         4.   It is clear from the Record of Proceedings that Article 8  was
             pursued in front of the Judge.  She has made  no  findings  on
             that part of the appeal.  This is an arguable error of law."

10. It is in my judgment clear from the reasons given by Judge Foudy  which
    were of course sent to the appellant's  solicitors  together  with  the
    notice informing him that permission to appeal had  been  granted  that
    permission to appeal had only  been  granted  to  make  the  Article  8
    submissions because Judge Foudy made it plain that there was  no  error
    of  law  in  her  judgement  regarding  the  decision  which  was  made
    dismissing the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

11. In the course of his exceptionally  well-argued  submissions  Mr  Karim
    submitted first that the Tribunal ought to allow  argument  as  to  the
    entirety of the appeal.  He referred the Tribunal in  particular  to  a
    decision of this Tribunal made in 2012, that is Ferrer (limited  appeal
    grounds; Alvi) [2012] UKUT 00304 in which a panel of the Upper Tribunal
    (Upper Tribunal Judges Storey and Peter Lane) had set out the procedure
    which should be adopted where permission was granted only in respect of
    certain of the grounds.  Mr Karim referred the Tribunal  in  particular
    to head note (2) where it was stated as follows:

         "Where the First-tier Tribunal judge nevertheless intends to  grant
         permission only in respect of certain of the  applicant's  grounds,
         the judge should make this abundantly plain, both  in  his  or  her
         decision under Rule 25(5) of the Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
         (Procedure)  Rules  2005  and  by  ensuring  that  the   Tribunal's
         administrative staff send out  the  proper  notice,  informing  the
         applicant  of  the  right  to  apply  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  for
         permission to appeal on  grounds on which the  applicant  has  been
         unsuccessful in the application to the First-tier Tribunal."

12. It was Mr Karim's argument that notwithstanding  that  the  appellant's
    solicitors would have been sent the reasons nonetheless  the  appellant
    was still entitled to be sent a notice formally stating  his  right  to
    appeal against that part  of  the  decision  effectively  refusing  him
    permission to appeal under the Rules.  On behalf of the respondent with
    regard to this point Miss Pal submitted that the court ought to take it
    as read that Counsel and solicitors know what the  Rules  are  and  can
    understand the reasons which are given by  a  judge  when  granting  or
    refusing permission to appeal.  In my judgment, on the  facts  of  this
    case, that submission is well-founded.  It is very  clear  indeed  from
    the reasons given by Judge Foudy that permission was not being  granted
    to the appellant to argue that there was an error of law in the judge's
    dismissal of his claim under the Rules.   The  reasons  given  make  it
    clear that in Judge Foudy's words:

         "The judge dealt with the oral evidence under the Immigration Rules
         in detail.  Her determination sets out the matters relied  upon  by
         the  appellant  and  makes  findings  in  respect  of  them  in   a
         comprehensive and reasonable  manner.   There  is  nothing  in  the
         determination to support [the] allegation that the  judge  did  not
         adequately deal with that part of the appellant's case."

13. In these circumstances it  cannot  realistically  be  argued  that  any
    legally qualified person reading this could  have  been  in  any  doubt
    whatsoever but that permission was refused to argue this aspect of  the
    appeal.  The appellant was legally represented and the  solicitors  who
    were instructed must have known because they practise in this  area  of
    the law what steps the appellant would have to take  if  he  wished  to
    challenge this aspect of the decision.

14. Notwithstanding that I am quite clear that the appeal  was  limited  to
    consideration of whether any case could  be  made  under  Article  8  I
    nonetheless  allowed  Mr  Karim  to  advance  those  arguments  as   he
    considered appropriate to deal with the appeal under the Rules so  that
    it cannot in any event be said that he has not had a full hearing.

15. With regard to Article 8, Judge Foudy did not when granting  permission
    consider whether or not that failure to consider  Article  8  in  terms
    could have made a material difference to the outcome.  I note  in  this
    regard that in  the  Rule  24  response  submitted  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent it is said  at  paragraph  5  that  "given  the  significant
    adverse factual findings on the requirements of the Rule  it  is  clear
    that no properly directed Tribunal could have found an engagement  with
    Article 8".

16. With regard to the substantive argument  under  the  Rules  although  I
    entertained Mr Karim's  submissions  on  this  point  which  were  made
    succinctly and clearly, I nonetheless also consider as did Judge  Foudy
    that there is no merit in them.  The argument that  the  appeal  should
    succeed under the Rules was comprehensively dismissed by the  judge  on
    almost every ground.  Not only were the maintenance  and  accommodation
    requirements not met but she also found for reasons which she gave that
    it had not been established on his behalf that  the  sponsor  had  sole
    responsibility for his upbringing.  Although Mr Karim did  submit  that
    the evidence was not all referred to in the determination (and  it  was
    not) there is no obligation on a judge to set out every  single  aspect
    of the evidence and  in  this  case  I  consider  that  she  has  given
    sufficient reasons for the decision which she made.   There  is  little
    for me to add on this.  The appellant was rightly refused permission to
    argue this aspect of the case and such arguments as have been  advanced
    regarding the refusal under the rules could not have succeeded  anyway.



17. With regard to Article 8, Mr Karim invited the Tribunal to consider the
    decision of this Tribunal in T (s.55 BCIA  2009  -  entry  clearance  -
    Jamaica) [2011] UKUT 00483 in which the Tribunal (presided over by  the
    President) stated that it may be necessary where  the  interests  of  a
    child are under consideration  in  an  entry  clearance  case  to  make
    investigations and "where appropriate having regard to age,  the  child
    [himself] may need to be interviewed".  However, in  this  case,  there
    was a lack of evidence such as to come close to establishing  that  the
    welfare of the appellant would be in jeopardy (rather than would merely
    be affected) were entry clearance refused.  Mr Karim accepted that this
    was not "the most compelling" case such  as  where  a  child  might  be
    killed if he is not granted entry clearance but he  nonetheless  argued
    that because Ms Appiah's decision to move to another  region  of  Ghana
    would affect the appellant's education and he had no one else in  Ghana
    to live with, he should have been interviewed.  In my judgment that  is
    taking the obligation of the respondent in these circumstances too far,
    even though it may be appropriate in certain circumstances for a  child
    to be interviewed. Although, as Judge Grant  noted,  in  this  case  if
    another application is made consideration must be given to interviewing
    the appellant, this is not a  legal  requirement  and  the  failure  to
    interview, or give  consideration  to  interviewing  the  appellant  in
    respect of the present application is simply no  basis  upon  which  an
    Article 8 claim which would have  any  realistic  prospect  of  success
    could be founded.  Accordingly, although there was a technical error of
    law in Judge Grant's failure to have specific regard to Article  8,  on
    the facts of this case this was  not  a  material  error  because  such
    consideration could not have led her to allow this appeal.  It  follows
    of course that even had I decided that I would have myself  to  re-make
    the decision, I would have had no hesitation in dismissing  the  appeal
    under Article 8 as well.   It  further  follows  that  there  being  no
    material error of law in Judge Grant's determination, this appeal  must
    be dismissed and Judge Grant's decision affirmed and I will so order.

Decision

There being no material error of law in the determination of the  First-tier
Tribunal the appellant's appeal is dismissed both under the Rules and  under
Article 8.






    Signed:


    [pic]     Date: 17 February 2015
    Upper Tribunal Judge Craig
