
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/18026/2013
                                                             & OA/18018/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                        |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 15th January 2015                     |On 10th February 2015             |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                      deputy upper Tribunal JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

                     THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - DHAKA
                                                                   Appellant
                                   and

                                TASLIMA BEGUM
                                Rumena Begum
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bashir, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction

 1. The Entry Clearance Officer appeals against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Saffer who,  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  the  23rd
    September 2014, allowed the appeal of Ms Tasilma Begum against  refusal
    of her application for a Certificate of Entitlement of a Right of Abode
    in the United Kingdom. For ease of reference,  I  shall  refer  to  the
    parties in accordance with their status  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal;
    that is to say, Ms Taslima Begum  as  'the  appellant'  and  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer as 'the respondent'.

 2. The appellant's case was linked in the First-tier Tribunal to  that  of
    her claimed sister, Ms Rumena Begum (reference number 'OA/18018/2013').
    However, Judge Saffer dismissed her  appeal  and  she  has  not  sought
    permission to appeal against that decision. Despite this, permission to
    appeal was apparently granted for the respondent to appeal the decision
    in both cases. Moreover, the grant of permission is headed 'Mrs Reumena
    Begum + 1'. Not surprisingly, however, Mr Diwnycz made  it  clear  that
    the respondent does not seek to challenge the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to dismiss the appeal of Ms Rumena Begum. The  respondent
    does however argue that the Tribunal erred in allowing the appeal of Ms
    Taslima Begum. It follows that I am only seized of  an  appeal  in  the
    case of Ms Taslima Begum

 3. Despite the above, Mr Bahir argued that  I  was  able  to  reverse  the
    decision to dismiss Ms Rumena Begum's appeal because he had raised  her
    case in his Rule 24 response to Taslima Begum's appeal. However, whilst
    Rule 24 permits a party to argue that a decision should be  upheld  for
    reasons other than those which are the subject of  challenge,  it  does
    not permit a person to challenge a decision to which  they  are  not  a
    party. I am therefore satisfied  that  I  am  without  jurisdiction  to
    entertain an appeal by Ms Rumena Begum.

Background

 4. The case of the appellants was that they were full sisters, whose later
    father was 'Afruz Ali' and whose mother is 'Rushna Begum'. I  emphasise
    that this was their case because, for reasons that Mr Bashir was unable
    to explain, the author of the DNA report that was before the First-tier
    Tribunal had apparently only been asked to consider the hypothesis that
    they were half sisters.

 5. Afruz Ali had acquired British citizenship prior to the  birth  of  the
    appellant. However, because he is now deceased, the only way of testing
    the hypothesis that he was her father was to compare  her  DNA  samples
    with one 'Mohammed Moinul  Islam'.  Moinul  Islam's  birth  certificate
    recorded that his  father  was  Afruz  Ali  and  that  his  mother  one
    'Goytun'.  Judge Saffer accurately summarised the  conclusions  of  the
    author of the DNA report at paragraph 8 of his determination:

         The DNA results establish that is it is 320 times more likely  that
         Rumena and Taslima are half siblings than if they are unrelated. It
         is 64 times more likely that Mohammed and Taslima are half siblings
         than if they are unrelated.  It  is  3.6  times  more  likely  that
         Mohammad and Rumena are half siblings  or  more  distant  relatives
         than if they are unrelated.

 6. Having set  out  the  evidence,  Judge  Saffer  made  his  findings  at
    paragraph 11:

         I accept that Mohammad's parents are Afruz and Goytun as  there  is
         no evidence that they are not. I accept that Taslima  and  Mohammed
         are half siblings given the DNA results. I accept that their common
         parent is Afruz as there is no evidence  it  is  Goytun  and  given
         Mohammad's British birth certificate.

Analysis

 7. The basis of the respondent's appeal is that the Judge made unwarranted
    assumptions about facts that were critical to his line of reasoning and
    thus effectively reversed the correct burden of proof. I have concluded
    that this argument has been made out for the following reasons.

 8. In order to establish that the appellant shared her  biological  father
    with Moinul Islam,  it  was  necessary  for  the  appellant  to  adduce
    evidence, (a) to prove that the relationship between them was  that  of
    half sibling, and (b) to exclude the possibility that either Goytun  or
    Rushna was their shared biological mother. However, the DNA report  did
    not prove the former. This was because, as Mr Diwnycz correctly  noted,
    the author of the DNA report had only compared the probability of  them
    being unrelated with that of them being half siblings. The  possibility
    that they may be related in some other way - as cousins with  a  common
    grandparent for example - had not been considered.

 9. Mr Bashir struggled to identify a flaw in this argument.  He  was  thus
    driven to seeking to persuade me that I  should  admit  a  further  DNA
    report that belatedly addressed the above issues.  It  is  not  however
    possible, at the stage of considering whether the  First-tier  Tribunal
    has erred in law, to admit further evidence in order to fill evidential
    lacunae that existed at the time of the appealed decision.

10. It is therefore clear that, in the absence of evidence to the contrary,
    Judge Saffer simply made assumptions about  Moisin  Islam's  parentage.
    More fundamentally, he misinterpreted the DNA evidence  concerning  the
    relationship between  Moisin  Islam  and  the  appellant.  I  therefore
    announced to the representatives that I had decided to  set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal to re-make the decision.

11. Mr Bashir thereafter renewed his  application  to  admit  the  new  DNA
    report, the effect of which is to  establish  that  the  appellant  and
    Rumena Begum are likely to be  full  (not  half)  siblings,  and  which
    effectively excludes the possibility that they share their mother  with
    Moinul Islam. In support of  this  application,  Mr  Bashir  repeatedly
    cited "the  interests  of  justice"  as  a  reason  for  admitting  the
    evidence. However, in deciding where the interests of justice  lie,  it
    is necessary to consider why the evidence  in  question  was  not  made
    available to the First-tier Tribunal,  and  Mr  Bashir  was  unable  to
    provide me with any explanation  for  this.  In  a  case  such  as  the
    present, where the fundamental human rights of the  appellant  are  not
    engaged, it seems to me that further evidence should only  be  admitted
    if it could not, with reasonable diligence, have been placed before the
    court or tribunal of first instance. Absent any argument from Mr Bashir
    to the contrary, there would appear to be no reason why  this  evidence
    could not have been made available to the First-tier Tribunal.  I  have
    therefore decide not to consider it when remaking my decision.

12. Based upon the evidence that was before the First-tier Tribunal,  I  am
    not satisfied that the Moinul Islam and the appellant are  either  full
    or half siblings. I am not therefore satisfied that  they  have  either
    parent (mother or father) in common. It  follows  from  this  that  the
    appellant has failed to prove that the late Afruz Ali  was  her  father
    and her appeal must therefore fail. It is  now  a  matter  for  her  to
    decide whether to make a fresh application, which  would  no  doubt  be
    supported by the evidence  that  I  have  refused  to  admit  in  these
    proceedings.

Notice of Decision

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the appeal against the
    respondent's refusal to grant her  application  for  a  Certificate  of
    Entitlement to a Right of Abode in the United Kingdom is set aside  and
    is substituted by a decision to dismiss that appeal.



Signed        Date: 9th February 2015

Judge D Kelly

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

