
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/18646/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 September 2015                           |On 4 September 2015           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                             Proud Mncedisi Dube
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Lane, instructed by TRP Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision promulgated on 4 August 2015  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  Raikes  which  refused  the  appeal  against
    refusal of entry clearance as a dependent child.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe, born on 3 September 1995.

 3. Judge Raikes found that the sponsor, the appellant's  father,  did  not
    have sole responsibility, that there were not "serious  and  compelling
    family or other  considerations  which  make  exclusion  of  the  child
    undesirable" and that it had also not  been  shown  that  the  decision
    amounted to a breach of the appellant's  rights  under  Article  8  the
    ECHR.

 4. Ground 1 argues that the First-tier Tribunal did not apply the  correct
    test under paragraph 297 (i) (f) of the Immigration Rules  of  "serious
    and compelling family or other considerations which make  exclusion  of
    the child undesirable". The grounds refer to the wording  used  by  the
    judge at [35], [38] and [39] which was for a  need  to  show  that  the
    appellant was "living in  serious  and  compelling  circumstances  that
    would make his exclusion from the UK and undesirable".

 5. The just set out the correct test is at [8]. The wording used at  other
    points of the determination does not, in my judgement,  show  that  the
    correct test was not applied in substance. It  is  suggested  that  the
    wording used meant that material considerations were left  out  of  the
    assessment. Mr Lane set out a number of what he maintained  were  those
    material considerations [6] of his skeleton argument. To my mind   this
    list comes fully within the comments  in  VHR  (unmeritorious  grounds)
    Jamaica [2014] UKUT 00367 (IAC) which stated in the head note:

        "Appeals should not be mounted on the basis of a litany of forensic
        criticisms of particular  findings  of  the  First  Tier  Tribunal,
        whilst ignoring the basic legal test which  the  appellant  has  to
        meet"

     and at [24]:

        "This is not how appeals should be mounted. As  McCombe  LJ  in  VW
        (Sri Lanka) [2013] EWCA Civ 522 said:  "Regrettably,  there  is  an
        increasing  tendency  in  immigration  cases,  when  a   First-tier
        Tribunal Judge has given a judgment explaining why he has reached a
        particular decision, of seeking to burrow out  industriously  areas
        of evidence that have been less fully dealt with  than  others  and
        then to use this as a basis for  saying  the  judge's  decision  is
        legally flawed because it did not deal  with  a  particular  matter
        more fully.  In my judgement, with respect, that  is  no  basis  on
        which to sustain a proper challenge to a judge's finding of fact".

 6. This submission is also put on the basis of the evidence being accepted
    at its highest. It was not. Judge Raikes found the sponsor not to be  a
    reliable witness as regards sole responsibility at paragraphs [36]  and
    [37]. It is the appellant's mother who was found to be the parent  with
    most parental responsibility in  emotional  and  practical  terms.  The
    social work report from which some factors are taken was prepared at  a
    time when the appellant was living in different circumstances  and,  in
    any event, was assessed in the context of paragraph 297(i) (f) at  [39]
    but not found to show that the test was met given the importance of the
    appellant's relationship with his mother.

 7. This ground fails to recognise that  it  was  entirely  open  to  Judge
    Raikes to make a finding at  [40] to the effect  that  the  appellant's
    relationship with and  proximity  to  his  mother  was  important,  his
    welfare being provided for by  that  relationship  and  care  from  her
    family in Zimbabwe with whom the appellant was living. Where  that  was
    so, it is difficult to see how paragraph 297(i)(f) could be met.

 8. Ground 2 raises what, to my mind are immaterial matters. The challenges
    were no more important an objection to a reference at one point in  the
    decision to "appellants" rather than "appellant".  The  judge  was  not
    obliged to refer in terms to the appellant's skeleton argument. Mr Lane
    effectively conceded the lack of merit in the written ground and sought
    to re-argue it as a challenge to the finding at [51] that Article 8 was
    not engaged. I can only refer again to the sustainable finding on   the
    strength  of  the  appellant's  relationship  with   his   mother   and
    satisfactory nature of his current environment. In that context it  was
    open to the Judge to find at that any interference was  not  sufficient
    to engage Article 8  as  the  decision  kept  the  appellant  in  those
    circumstances. A submissions that finding on Article  8  being  engaged
    went  behind  a  concession  as  to  the  appellant  having  a  genuine
    relationship with his father misstates the reasons given at [51].

 9. Ground 3 maintained that the judge failed to give adequate  reasons.  I
    did not find that this ground had any merit. It was open to  the  judge
    to find it reasonable for evidence of a school place being  refused  to
    be provided and to place weight on the point when it was not.   It  was
    equally open to the judge to look for better evidence  to  support  the
    allegation of abuse by the appellant's step-father.  Judge  Raikes  did
    not make a bare finding at [56] that  the  appellant  was  sufficiently
    well provided for by his mother's relatives. The comment  was  made  in
    the context of the all of findings in the earlier parts of the decision
    as to the importance of his relationship with his mother, proximity  to
    her, care offered by her family and so on.

10. Ground 4 is really a submission that the judge was required to  make  a
    finding every aspect of the appellant's case arising from the evidence.
    He was not. The determination contains  more  than  sufficient  reasons
    explaining to the appellant why the appeal did not succeed.

11. Ground 5 maintains that the judge misdirected himself as to  the  ratio
    of Huang v SSHD [2007] UKHL 11 by imposing a test of exceptionality. In
    fact, the judge refers correctly to the ratio of  Huang  at  [50]  and,
    again correctly, to R (Razgar) v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27 at some length  at
    [48]. The reference to a case succeeding under Article 8  being  "rare"
    or "so special on its facts" does not show that a higher test,  one  of
    exceptionality was applied. The grounds fail to identify where or  how,
    in the substance of  the  article  8  assessment  the  judge,  such  an
    incorrect approach was taken. Given that the  finding  at  [51]  as  to
    Article  8  not  being  engaged  here  is  sustainable,  there  was  no
    requirement for a proportionality assessment  applying  the  Huang  and
    Razgar tests in any event so this ground cannot be material.

12. For all of those reasons I did not find that an error on a point of law
    had been shown in the First-tier Tribunal decision.

Decision

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error on a
    point of law and shall stand.


Signed   [pic]                               Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
