
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/18942/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 27 April 2015                     |On 29 April 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                            MOLLIKA NAHIDA BEGUM
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - DHAKA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Miah of Shazu Miah Solictors
For the Respondents:   Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Appeal

 1. This is an appeal against the determination promulgated  on  2  October
    2014 of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Tully  which  refused  the  appeal
    against the respondent's decision dated 3 August 2014 to  refuse  entry
    clearance as a spouse.

 2. It was common ground before me that this appeal turns around  a  single
    document, that being an original bank statement for July 2013  for  the
    sponsor.

 3. The initial ECO refusal dated 1 October 2013 stated in terms that  this
    bank statement was required for the purposes of Appendix FM-SE but  had
    not been provided. The decision of 1 October 2013  was  provisional  as
    the respondent was waiting for the outcome of the Court of Appeal  case
    of MM v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 985 on the minimum income requirements for
    spouses set by the Immigration Rules. In the final refusal notice dated
    3 August 2014 the respondent again indicated that  the  omission  of  a
    bank statement for July 2013 was a material reason for refusal. The ECO
    review dated 3 August 2013 stated the same thing.

 4. It was therefore the position at the date of the  application  and  the
    decision and the ECO review that no July 2013 bank  statement,  whether
    copy or original, was before the ECO at the relevant time.

 5. It is also common ground that by the time of the hearing  before  Judge
    Tully, the sponsor had provided a copy of the July 2013 bank  statement
    but not an original as required  by  Appendix  FM-SE.  As  Judge  Tully
    indicated at [22], it was conceded for the appellant that "the original
    documents in the form of payslips or bank statements for  the  relevant
    period" were not before her.  She found, correctly, in  my  view,  that
    the requirements of Appendix FM-SE could not be met where the  original
    bank statement had not been provided to the ECO.

 6. Nothing in the determination shows that it was argued before the First-
    tier Tribunal that the sponsor had, in fact, sent an original or a copy
    of the July 2013 bank statement to the respondent.

 7. Before me, Mr Miah submitted that an original July 2013 bank  statement
    was sent to the ECO but somehow did not arrive. That submission  cannot
    have any merit where it was not put to the First-tier Tribunal. I found
    it a surprising submission where, as above, it had never been suggested
    prior to the hearing before me that even a copy of the July  2013  bank
    statement was provided to the ECO, let alone an original.

 8. Mr Miah also submitted that the provisions of  Appendix  FM-SE  allowed
    for the respondent to request a further document if a copy was provided
    rather than an original. That  cannot  assist  the  appellant  for  two
    reasons.

 9. Firstly, as above, the ECO was not provided with  any  version  of  the
    July 2013 bank statement. There was no copy that could be  remedied  by
    the provision of an original. There was no incorrect format that  could
    be remedied by an original. It  was  not  a  document  missing  from  a
    sequence. The "evidential flexibility" provisions simply do  not  apply
    in these circumstances.

10. Secondly, also as above, the provisional decision dated 1 October  2013
    put the sponsor on notice of the omission of  the  original  July  2013
    bank statement. The notice indicated that further evidence was provided
    it would be taken into account if submitted by the time  of  the  final
    decision. In effect, the respondent did provide an opportunity for  the
    missing document to be provided but it was not, not even a copy.

11.  Mr  Miah's  submission  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  should   have
    considered the documents before her in the round against the balance of
    probabilities cannot get off the ground in the light  of  the  detailed
    provisions approved by Parliament in Appendix FM-SE.

12. For all of these reasons, I find no material error in the determination
    of First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error on a
    point of law such that it should be set aside and therefore  and  shall
    stand.



Signed:[pic]      Date: 27 April 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

