





UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/18773/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On: 19 November 2014              |On: 12 December 2014              |
|                                  |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                       entry clearance officer, LAgos

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                         Miss Omotayo Kuburat Idris
                         No anonymity direction made
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr G Davison, counsel (instructed by MA Consultants)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. For the sake of convenience I shall refer  to  the  appellant  as  "the
    entry clearance officer"  and to the respondent as "the claimant."


 2. The claimant is a national of Nigeria, born on 23  December  1980.  Her
    appeal against the decision of the entry  clearance  officer  dated  11
    September 2013 to refuse to grant her entry clearance as the spouse  of
    her sponsor, a person settled in the  UK,  was  allowed  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Cohen in a determination promulgated on 22 August 2014.


 3. On 3 October 2014, First-tier Tribunal Judge Frankish granted the entry
    clearance officer permission to appeal.


 4. The entry clearance officer had refused her application  on  the  basis
    that she had not produced evidence  of  having  passed  an  appropriate
    English language test under paragraph E-ECP.4.2 of the rules.  Although
    she  provided  a  Higher  National  Diploma  in  Accountancy   from   a
    polytechnic, that did not meet the required standard.


 5. Although it had been initially contended by the entry clearance officer
    that she had not met the  financial  requirements,  this  was  conceded
    after review [2].


 6. However, the entry clearance officer was still not satisfied  that  the
    parties were in  a  genuine  and  subsisting  marriage  and  that  they
    intended to live permanently together in the UK.


 7. First-tier Tribunal Judge Cohen found that in the light of the totality
    of the evidence, the parties were in a genuine  and  existing  marriage
    and intended to live permanently with each other in the UK [11].


 8. He had regard to the  "final  reasons"  for  the  refusal,  namely  the
    failure to provide evidence of having passed  the  appropriate  English
    language test. The sponsor informed the Tribunal that he had  "misread"
    the exceptions [12]. The claimant had taken an HND in Nigeria, which he
    (incorrectly) believed to be the equivalent of a degree  and  that  she
    had therefore been exempt.


 9. After discovering that this was not the case,  the  claimant  took  the
    IELTS and passed with marks at 6.5 and 7.0 throughout. The test results
    were produced to the Tribunal [12].


10. Judge Cohen found that "... the fact that the claimant would  take  the
    English test  was  'reasonably  foreseeable'  to  the  entry  clearance
    officer." In finding that this evidence "can be admitted before me"  he
    went on to find that she now met all the requirements under  the  rules
    and her appeal was accordingly allowed under the rules.


11. At paragraph 15 of his determination Judge Cohen stated that  "for  the
    sake of completeness"  even if  he  had  not  allowed  the  appellant's
    appeal under the rules, ".....that I allow the  same  on  human  rights
    grounds in any event." The basis was  that  she  met  the  requirements
    under the rules "in all respects." Whilst the entry  clearance  officer
    may argue that the English language test was not available at the  date
    of decision, he found that the  requirement  that  she  makes  a  fresh
    application for entry clearance and be delayed  further,  just  so  the
    English language certificate can be considered when she  has  satisfied
    all the other criteria, "would be totally disproportionate in  all  the
    circumstances"  and  contrary  to  the  respondent's  requirements   to
    maintain effective immigration control.


12. There was no public interest element in refusing her  claim  for  entry
    clearance. Although he stated at the end of the determination under the
    heading "Decision" that the appeal is  allowed  under  the  Immigration
    Rules, without reference to allowing it on human rights grounds, it  is
    clear that he  intended to, and in fact did allow the appeal on Article
    8 grounds [15].


13. Mr Nath submitted that the Tribunal should not have considered evidence
    that post-dated the  decision,  having  regard  to  the  provisions  of
    s.85A(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.  It  is
    provided that an appeal against an immigration  decision  refusing  the
    claimant entry clearance (s.82(2)(b)) meant that the Tribunal was  only
    able to consider the circumstances appertaining  at  the  time  of  the
    decision (s.85A(2)).


14. The English language test certificate was only produced on the date  of
    the hearing and the test had been taken after the date of the decision.
    The decision was dated 11 September  2013.  I  was  informed  that  the
    claimant took the examination on 12 October 2013  and  the  certificate
    was dated 23 October 2013.


15. In the claimant's grounds of appeal, received  by  the  Tribunal  on  4
    October 2013, she stated that the English language test was to be  held
    on 12 October 2013.


16. Mr Nath also submitted that the Judge in any event failed to conduct  a
    proper Article 8 assessment outside the rules and in particular  failed
    to give adequate reasons allowing  the  appeal  on  those  grounds.  He
    failed to follow the 'guidance' set out in Gulshan where  it  was  held
    that after applying the requirements of the rules, only if there may be
    arguably good grounds for granting leave to remain outside them  is  it
    necessary for Article 8 purposes to go on to consider whether there are
    compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised under them.


17. On behalf of the claimant, Mr Davison accepted that  the  claimant  had
    only undertaken the test after the date of decision.


18. Mr Davison relied on the decision of  Mr  Justice  Turner  in  judicial
    review proceedings before the Administrative Court in Zhang [2013] EWHC
    891 (Admin)


19. In that case, counsel for the secretary of state sought to persuade the
    High Court that in the face of repeated authoritative pronouncements to
    the contrary, it was still only in an exceptional or a  small  minority
    of cases that  Article  8  would  frustrate  the  requirement  that  an
    applicant should leave the country before making an application [76].


20. Mr Justice Turner dealt with the contention on behalf of the  secretary
    of state that returning an applicant to his home country  in  order  to
    make an entry clearance application may still  be  proportionate  in  a
    small number of cases. That however implied that returning an applicant
    to  his  home  country  will,  more   often   than   not,   involve   a
    disproportionate interference with his Article 8 rights.


21. Mr Davison submitted with  regard  to  the  entry  clearance  officer's
    second ground of appeal that the "Gulshan test" has gone. Judge Cohen's
    findings in relation to proportionality is sustainable.


22. Mr Nath replied that the Gulshan approach has not disappeared.


    Assessment


23. The claimant did not provide a certificate at the date  of  application
    that she had passed an English language test with a  provider  approved
    by the UKBA. Nor did she hold an academic qualification which  was  the
    equivalent to the standard Bachelor's or Master's or PhD degree in  the
    UK.


24. An English language certificate was only produced on the  date  of  the
    hearing. It is accepted that the test was taken  during  October  2013.
    The certificate was signed on 23  October  2013.  Accordingly,  it  was
    taken a month after the date of refusal.


25. That evidence was not admissible, having regard to  the  provisions  of
    s.85A of the 2002 Act. Accordingly, the Tribunal only had  jurisdiction
    to consider the circumstances pertaining at the date  of  decision.  At
    that date, it is evident that the claimant did  not  meet  the  English
    language test requirement.


26. The Judge found that the fact that the claimant would take the  English
    test was "reasonably foreseeable to the respondent." The basis for that
    finding, however, has not been given. In any event,  the  evidence  was
    not admissible. Accordingly, I find that the First-tier Tribunal  erred
    in finding that she had met all the appropriate requirements under  the
    immigration rules [12] and [15].


27. With regard to the alternative basis, namely Article 8,  I  agree  with
    paragraph 3 of the reasons for decision granting  the  entry  clearance
    officer permission to appeal. Judge Frankish stated  that  the  Judge's
    approach arguably amounted to a  near  miss  approach  which  has  been
    repeatedly proscribed by cases such as Patel and Others v  SSHD  [2013]
    UKSC 72. He also noted the absence of any consideration  of  compelling
    circumstances "before undertaking the proportionality" decisions.


28. I also note that the claimant did not raise any Article  8  grounds  as
    part of her grounds of appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.


29. I find the reliance on  Zhang,  supra,  to  be  misplaced.  There,  the
    claimant concluded that she would have no option  but  to  go  back  to
    China and  stay  there  for  as  long  as  it  took  to  "surmount  the
    bureaucratic hurdles which there awaited her before she could expect to
    be granted leave to enter the UK as a 'partner'." [9] She did return on
    15 September 2011 to China. Entry clearance was granted on  25  October
    2011. The university in the UK which had made her  a  job  offer,  lost
    patience  and  withdrew  it.  She  challenged  the  legality   of   the
    immigration rule itself that she could not make an  application  for  a
    partner visa unless she returned to China to do so.


30. It was in that context that Turner J in  the  administrative  court  at
    paragraph 78, concluded that the application of the blanket requirement
    to leave the country imposed by paragraph 319C(h)(i) of the Immigration
    Rules was unsustainable. It was not consistent  with  the  decision  in
    Chikwamba.


31. However, in the present case, the claimant is  not  being  required  to
    return to Nigeria as  she  is  already  there,  having  made  an  entry
    clearance application.


32. I find that Judge Cohen has not given proper reasons for  finding  that
    the decision would be totally disproportionate in the circumstances and
    contrary to the  entry  clearance  officer's  requirement  to  maintain
    effective immigration control [15].


33. In any event, that "near miss" rationale flies in the face of the  rule
    and s.85A of the 2002 Act. The requirement to provide all the necessary
    evidence,  including  the  English  language  certificate,   had   been
    signalled well in advance of its implementation. The claimant  and  her
    sponsor were consequently expected to submit  that  evidence  with  the
    application rather than after it had been refused. I do not regard that
    as being in any way unfair or unreasonable.


34. In Alam and Ors [2012] EWCA Civ 960, the Court stated [35] that  it  is
    true that bringing s.85A into force deprived applicants (in  this  case
    under the points based system)  of  a  "second  bite  of  the  cherry."
    However, the immigration rules, and  the  prescribed  application  form
    made it clear  that  the  submission  of  the  required  documents  was
    necessary. If they were not produced with the application, it would  be
    refused. This may well result in "hard decisions" in individual  cases.
    This however ensures consistency and predictability.


35. I find that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  not  consider  what
    compelling circumstances were not  sufficiently  recognised  under  the
    rules. I find that he was wrong to conclude that there  was  no  public
    interest to refusing the  application  based  on  the  requirements  of
    maintaining effective immigration control, even though the claimant had
    met the other requirements under the rules.


36. In order to give  effect  to  the  interests  of  maintaining  a  fair,
    predictable and effective  immigration  control,  the  claimant  should
    submit a further application for entry clearance. There is no  evidence
    that there would be a  significant  delay  before  her  application  is
    considered. Nor is there any evidence put forward as to why her husband
    would not be able to  travel  to  Nigeria  to  visit  her  pending  the
    decision.


37. I accordingly  find  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    involved the making of material errors of law. I accordingly set  aside
    the decision and re-make it.


38. I find from the circumstances to which I have referred above that there
    would not be a disproportionate interference with  the  rights  of  the
    claimant or her husband to respect for their family life.


39. The claimant is not being required to return to Nigeria for the purpose
    of making an entry clearance application.  She  is  already  there.  No
    reason has been given or suggested as to why her husband would  not  be
    able to be with her or  visit  her  whilst  the  application  is  being
    considered.


40. In the interests of consistency and predictability in  the  maintenance
    of effective immigration control, I  find  that  the  decision  in  the
    circumstances is proportionate.


    Notice of Decision


    The claimant's appeal is dismissed.


    No anonymity direction made.



                           Signed   Date 8/12/2014


                           C R Mailer
                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
