
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/18414/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                             |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 18th October 2013                          |On 1st November 2013         |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MOHAMMED SHARFRAZ
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Spence - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr Holt instructed by Reiss Solicitors.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. Following a hearing at Bradford on 20th August 2013 I set aside the
        determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Dickson, promulgated  on
        12th July 2013, in which he allowed Mr Sarfraz's appeal against the
        refusal of the Secretary of State to  revoke  a  deportation  order
        made against him for the reasons  set  out  in  the  error  of  law
        finding and directions document dated 21st August 2013.


     2. The matter comes before me for the purposes of  a  Resumed  hearing
        after which I shall  substitute  a  decision  to  either  allow  or
        dismiss the appeal.


     3. Shortly before the hearing correspondence was received  from  Reiss
        Solicitors confirming that since the last hearing the  sponsor  had
        visited Mr Sarfraz in Pakistan where she had unfortunately suffered
        a miscarriage.  A  second  letter  was  also  received  dated  15th
        October 2013 which was discussed with Mr Holt.  It is not necessary
        to set out the content of the correspondence, which was  copied  to
        both advocates, and Mr Holt was given time to speak to the  sponsor
        who attended court, to Reiss Solicitors, and  the  Bar  Council  to
        clarify his position. Having done so he advised the  Tribunal  that
        Reiss Solicitors considered themselves to be without  instructions,
        as a result of recent  adverse  developments,  and  that  they  had
        withdrawn from the appeal.  As a result Mr Holt was  professionally
        obliged to take no further part  in  the  proceedings  and  he  too
        withdrew. The hearing continued with the sponsor present in court.



Background


     4. Mr Sarfraz is a citizen of Pakistan born on  21st  June  1981.   He
        claimed to have entered the United Kingdom in April  2007  using  a
        forged Italian passport.  He was served with illegal  entry  papers
        on 8th May 2008 and on 28th May 2008  he  was  convicted  at  Lewes
        Crown Court of knowingly possessing a false or improperly  obtained
        or another's identity document and was sentenced to a period of  12
        months imprisonment and recommended for deportation.


     5. On 30th August 2008 Mr Sarfraz applied for the  Facilitated  Return
        Scheme as a result of which removal directions were  set  for  11th
        August 2008 although on 23rd July 2008 he claimed asylum.  On  10th
        August 2008 Mr Sarfraz was  released  from  prison  and  placed  in
        immigration detention.  His asylum application was refused  on  5th
        December 2008.


     6. On 12th August 2008 Mr Sarfraz was served with the decision to make
        a deportation order against which he appealed and  on  5th  January
        2009 he was granted bail by the Tribunal.  His Appeal  against  the
        deportation decision was dismissed on 5th  February  2009,  a  High
        Court review filter was refused on 23rd February 2009 and a further
        High Court review refused on 22nd May 2009 at which point he became
        'appeal rights exhausted'.


     7. The deportation order was signed on 9th June 2009 although when  an
        enforcement team visited his address on 10th July  2009  they  were
        told he no longer lived there.  On 15th December 2009 he  undertook
        a religious marriage with his sponsor and was granted a certificate
        of approval to marry in the United Kingdom on 15th June  2010.   On
        12th May 2010 another enforcement team  visited  the  same  address
        but, again, he was  not  present  although  telephone  contact  was
        established.  Mr Sarfraz was detained under immigration  powers  on
        29th June 2010.  On 8th July 2010 the deportation order was  served
        on Mr Sarfraz although, on the same day, he  applied  to  have  the
        order revoked based on  his  Article  8  rights.   His  appeal  was
        refused on 14th July 2010 and he was deported to Pakistan the  same
        day.


     8. On 25th October 2010 Mr  Sarfraz  submitted  an  appeal  against  a
        decision to refuse  to  revoke  the  deportation  order  which  was
        dismissed on 1st July 2011 by  Judge  Grant-Hutchison  who  made  a
        number of adverse findings against Mr Sarfraz.  His  appeal  rights
        became exhausted on 20th August 2011 although prior to this, on 4th
        August 2011, Mr Sarfraz married the sponsor in Pakistan.


     9. Mr Sarfraz subsequently made another application for the revocation
        of the deportation order in September 2011 and for entry  clearance
        as a spouse on 16th September 2011.  The  application  was  refused
        and the appeal against the decision dismissed on 13th August  2012.
        In a decision dated 10th August 2012 the Secretary of State refused
        to revoke the deportation order.


    10. A child was born in Bradford on 25th January 2013. He is the  child
        of Mr Sarfraz and the sponsor.   It  was  the  appeal  against  the
        refusal to revoke the deportation  order  that  came  before  Judge
        Dickson.




Discussion



    11. Paragraph 390 states:


          Revocation of deportation order
          390.    An application for revocation of a deportation order  will
   be considered in             the light of all the circumstances including
   the following:


              (i)      the grounds on which the order was made;
              (ii)     any representations made in support of revocation;
               (iii)     the  interests  of  the  community,  including  the
   maintenance of an                effective immigration control;
               (iv)      the  interests  of  the  applicant,  including  any
   compassionate                    circumstances.


    12. Paragraph 390A states:


          390A.   Where paragraph 398 applies  the  Secretary  of  State  or
   Entry                   Clearance Officer assessing the application  will
   consider whether                 paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it
   does not, it will only be in                   exceptional  circumstances
   that the public interest in maintaining  the                  deportation
   order will be outweighed by other factors.


    13. The provisions of paragraphs 391 and 392 are not applicable to this
        appeal.


    14. In relation to paragraph 398; this provides that if the deportation
        of a person from the UK is conducive to the  public  good,  because
        they have been convicted of an offence for  which  they  have  been
        sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than four  years  but
        at least twelve months, (298 (b)),  paragraphs  399  and  399A  are
        applicable.  Paragraph 399 allows an individual to  remain  in  the
        United Kingdom if they are able to meet the specific  criteria  set
        out in subsections (a) and (b).  Mr Sarfraz  is  unable  to  do  so
        because there is another family member who is able to care for  the
        child, namely the child's mother (399 (a) (ii) (b). The alternative
        provisions are not applicable.  Paragraph 399A does not apply as he
        is unable to meet the specific requirements of this rule.


    15. Mr Sarfraz was deported from the United Kingdom as a result of  the
        offence of identity theft for which he received a 12  month  period
        of imprisonment. His arguments in support of the deportation  order
        being revoked are based upon  the  fact  he  and  his  sponsor  are
        legally married, their Article  8  ECHR  have  been  breached,  and
        because the sponsor cannot live in Pakistan.


    16. The fact the parties are married is not challenged  before  me  but
        the chronology shows the parties chose to get  married  at  a  time
        that they both knew Mr Sarfraz was subject to the deportation order
        with neither having  a  legitimate  expectation  that  he  will  be
        permitted to re-enter the United Kingdom whilst that order  remains
        in force.


    17. I accept Mr Sarfraz is now the father of a son born on 25th January
        2013  and  that  the  best  interests  of  the  child  are  a  very
        important/primary consideration, but not necessarily determinative.
         If the marriage and conception were solely a means  to  facilitate
        re-entry this impacts upon the weight to be attached to  the  same,
        although Lady Hale in ZH (Tanzania) expressly stated that the needs
        of the child cannot be devalued by the failings of  their  parents.
        I accept it is generally accepted to be in a child's best interests
        to be brought up in a family unit composed of  both  a  mother  and
        father who can provide for the child's physical, psychological, and
        emotional needs, but there is no evidence that this  child's  needs
        are not currently being met by his mother.


    18. The status of the Immigration Rules was recently considered by  the
        Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 who found:


          44. We would, therefore, hold that the new rules  are  a  complete
   code and that the            exceptional circumstances to  be  considered
   in the balancing  exercise  involve  the               application  of  a
   proportionality  test  as  required  by  the  Strasbourg   jurisprudence.
   We accordingly respectfully do not agree with the UT that  the  decision-
   maker is            not "mandated or directed" to take all  the  relevant
   article 8 criteria into account           (para 38).
          45. Even if we were wrong about that, it  would  be  necessary  to
   apply a                      proportionality test outside the  new  rules
   as was done by the UT. Either way, the             result should  be  the
   same.  In  these  circumstances,  it  is  a  sterile   question   whether
   this is required by the new rules or it is a requirement of  the  general
   law. What           matters is that it is required to be carried  out  if
   paras 399 or 399A do not apply.
          46. There has been debate as to whether there is a  one  stage  or
   two stage test. If the           claimant succeeds on an  application  of
   the new rules at the first hurdle ie he            shows that para 399 or
   399A applies, then it can be said that he has  succeeded  on            a
   one stage test. But if he does not, it is necessary to  consider  whether
   there are           circumstances which are sufficiently compelling  (and
   therefore exceptional) to             outweigh  the  public  interest  in
   deportation. That is an exercise which is  separate               from  a
   consideration of whether para 399 or 399A applies. It is the second  part
   of             a two stage approach which, for the reasons we have given,
   is required by the           new rules. The UT concluded (para  41)  that
   it is required because  the  new  rules           do  not  fully  reflect
   Strasbourg  jurisprudence.  But  either   way,   it   is   necessary   to
   carry out a two stage process.


    19. Mr Sarfraz cannot succeed under  the  Rules  and  therefore  it  is
        necessary to consider whether there  are  circumstances  which  are
        sufficiently compelling to outweigh  the  public  interest  in  his
        remaining outside the United Kingdom.


    20.  Mr  Sarfraz  committed  a  serious  offence  and  one   which   is
        unfortunately prevalent amongst  some  immigration  offenders.  The
        weight to be given to the Secretary of State's position based  upon
        the prevention of crime and disorder and the  deterrent  effect  of
        deportation is substantial. I accept that the deportation order was
        not made under UK Borders Act 2007 but the Rules provide  that  his
        deportation and exclusion from the United Kingdom is  conducive  to
        the public good.


    21. In light of recent developments this is not a family life  case  in
        terms of Mr Sarfraz and the sponsor as that source of  support  has
        been withdrawn. It is whether when weighing up the refusal  of  the
        Secretary of State to revoke the deportation order for the  reasons
        stated, which are set out in the refusal letter dated  10th  August
        2010 including the various attempts made by  Mr  Sarfraz  to  avoid
        deportation, the best interests of  the  child  and  desire  of  Mr
        Sarfraz to be able to develop a family life with his son  outweighs
        the Secretary of State's case.


    22. With the child being a young baby, still only 10  months  old,  his
        world is going to be focused upon his primary carer  which  is  his
        mother. There is no evidence that his  mother  will  not  make  him
        aware of the identity  his  father  and  indirect  contact  can  be
        maintained.  The fact the child was born at a  time  there  was  no
        legitimate expectation that Mr Sarfraz will be allowed to  re-enter
        the United Kingdom is something both parents were aware of.


    23. In the case of  Latif  [2012]  UKUT  78  the  Tribunal  stated,  at
        paragraph 25,:


              "Under paragraph 391 in the case of any applicant who has been
   deported                 following  her   criminal   offence,   continued
   exclusion will normally be the proper              course. In other cases
   revocation   of   the   order   will   not   normally    be    authorised
   unless the situation has been materially altered,  either  by  change  of
               circumstances  since  the  order  was  made,  or   by   fresh
   information coming to light           which was not before the  Appellate
   Authorities or the Secretary of State.  The             passage  of  time
   since the  person  was  deported  may  also  in  itself  amount  to  such
   a change of circumstances as to warrant revocation of the order"


    24. Having considered the evidence with the most anxious  scrutiny,  as
        required in an appeal of this nature, it is  my  finding  that  the
        Secretary of State has discharged the burden of proof upon  her  to
        the required standard to show that Mr Sarfraz's continued exclusion
        from the United Kingdom is proportionate and necessary in light  of
        all the facts of this appeal.  I  accept  that  there  has  been  a
        material change in circumstances as a result of  marriage  and  the
        birth of a child but, as a result of Mr Sarfraz's  conduct,  he  no
        longer has the support of the sponsor.   Indirect  contact  can  be
        maintained and whilst this may not be the best form of contact,  it
        is only that Mr Sarfraz could realistically  have  expected  to  be
        able to enjoy  in  light  of  his  circumstances  at  the  time  of
        conception. It has not been shown there  will  be  any  detrimental
        impact upon the child by the deportation order being maintained and
        his father excluded which, after  all,  is  a  result  of  his  own
        deliberate conduct.


Decision

    25. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I  have  set
        aside the decision of the original Judge. I remake the decision  as
        follows. This appeal is dismissed.


   Anonymity.


    26. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


          I make no  such  order  (pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
   Procedure (Upper        Tribunal) Rules 2008).



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 31st October 2013












