
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/18416/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 December 2014                           |On 8 January 2015             |
|Prepared 19 December 2014                     |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   between

                             munish kumar parmar

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K Tiku, Counsel instructed by H & M Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of India, born on  31  August  1989,  appeals,
    with permission, against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    N M K Lawrence who in a determination promulgated on 9  September  2014
    dismissed the appellant's  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer, New Delhi, to refuse him entry clearance as a spouse
    under the provisions of Appendix FM and paragraph 320(11) of HC 395.

2.    The Entry Clearance Officer noted that the appellant  had  arrived  in
    Britain as an illegal entrant in November 2007 and  had  been  arrested
    when he was seen getting out of a lorry.  He  had  given  his  name  as
    Mikah Singh born in August  1991.   The  following  year  an  emergency
    travel  document  application  had  been  submitted   to   the   Indian
    authorities   who had refused to issue  the  same.  The  appellant  had
    absconded.  In November 2008 he had been encountered  by  chance  while
    travelling in a vehicle which had been stopped by the  police.  He  had
    given  his  identity  as  Munish  Kumar,  born  in  August  1989.    An
    application for emergency travel documentation had been made in October
    2011 but as the appellant had not given the correct details the  Indian
    authorities rejected that  application.   The  appellant  had  made  an
    application for leave to remain as an unmarried partner under the  name
    of Munish Kumar in 2011 but that application was refused, reasons being
    given in a letter dated 23 December 2011.  The appellant did not  leave
    the country but remained in Britain.  He married his sponsor, Ms  Afsha
    Ladha in March 2013 and the following month he and the sponsor left for
    India where they married.  On 26 April  2013  the  appellant  made  the
    application to return to Britain.

3.   The respondent considered that the appellant could  not  succeed  under
    the provisions of Appendix FM:  paragraph EC-P.1.1(c)  -  Section  S-EC
    1.5: suitability - entry  clearance  requirements  of  because  of  his
    immigration history and, because of that history,  considered  that  it
    was not appropriate to exercise  discretion  in  his  favour.   It  was
    stated that during the interview he had stated that if his  application
    for settlement failed his sponsor could come to India to live with him.
     The Entry Clearance Officer stated that he noted that there was no bar
    to the sponsor returning to India either permanently or temporarily  in
    the  future  and  said  that  family  life   could   continue   without
    interference.

4.   In his determination the judge set out his  findings  in  paragraphs  9
    onwards of the determination.  He took  into  account  the  appellant's
    immigration history and the various attempts he had made to deceive the
    British authorities when apprehended as well as the fact  that  he  had
    not left Britain when  his  application  for  leave  to  remain  as  an
    unmarried partner was refused.  The Judge concluded that the  appellant
    was caught by the provisions  of  paragraph  320(11)  of  HC  395.   He
    considered  that  the  decision  not  to  exercise  discretion  in  the
    appellant's favour was well-founded,  indicating  that  this  case  was
    distinguishable from that of the appellant  in  PS  (paragraph  320(11)
    discretion: care needed) India [2010] UKUT 440.  He went  on  to  state
    that the finding of the Entry Clearance Officer that the  marriage  was
    not genuine or subsisting was based on a reason -  that  the  appellant
    and the sponsor  had married just a month before the appellant left for
    India - which was insufficient  to  show  that  the  marriage  was  not
    genuine.  He noted that, when interviewed, the appellant had said  that
    the sponsor would be able to come and live with him in India.   He  did
    not accept as credible the sponsor's assertion at  the  interview  that
    the appellant had not said that or that  what  he  had  said  had  been
    recorded incorrectly.

5.   In paragraph 26 the Judge went on to say:-

         "In my view, even if there is a genuine and subsisting relationship
         between the appellant and the sponsor they can enjoy 'family  life'
         in India.  I note that the sponsor is a British national; she works
         for a firm of solicitors in the UK; she  has  her  mother  and  her
         stepfather in the UK; she has her social and family ties in the UK.
          I note that when she started her relationship with  the  appellant
         she knew that he was an illegal entrant;  she  knew  the  appellant
         used identities; he absconded.   As  against  that  is  the  public
         interest  in  maintaining  proper  immigration  control.   On   the
         evidence before me I find that there is nothing  to  indicate  that
         the sponsor cannot join the appellant in India  and  enjoy  "family
         life" with him there.  She may not prefer to but it was her  choice
         to commence and continue with a  relationship  with  the  appellant
         whom  she  knew  to  be  an  illegal  entrant,  an  absconder   who
         frustrated,  in  a  significant  way,  the   enforcement   of   the
         Immigration Rules in the UK."


6.   The judge then went on to set out case law relating to  the  rights  of
    the appellant under Article 8 of the ECHR  and  then  in  paragraph  29
    stated:-

         "In  analysing  the  jurisprudence  in  this  field  I   find   the
         'suitability      requirement'      replicates/duplicates       the
         'proportionality' assessment under Razgar v Secretary of State  for
         the Home Department [2004] UKHL 27.  I find that Appendix FM  is  a
         complete [sic]  in  so  far  as  this  appeal  is  concerned.   The
         'suitability requirement' asks whether the appellant is a  suitable
         person  to  be  granted  leave  to   remain   in   the   UK.    The
         'proportionality'  asks  whether  removal  of  the   appellant   is
         proportionate to the legitimate aims of the  state,  namely  proper
         immigration control and prevention of crime.  It is the flipside of
         the 'suitability requirement'.  In this regard the determination by
         the Upper Tribunal in Shahzad, Article 8:  legitimate  aim)  [2014]
         UKUT 00085 (IAC) namely, "It follows from this that any other  rule
         which has a similar  provision  will  also  constitute  a  complete
         code;" Consequently I find the appellant has not demonstrated  that
         I should go on to consider this appeal under Article 8 of the Human
         Rights Convention."


7.   The grounds of appeal firstly asserted that the judge  had  been  wrong
    to state that there was not a  genuine  subsisting  relationship.  They
    referred to relevant case law and then went on to assert that the judge
    had erred in his conclusions regarding  the  issue  of  the  Article  8
    rights of the appellant.  The referred to the judgement in MF (Nigeria)
    [2013] EWCA Civ 1192  and  the  determination  in  Shazad  (Article  8:
    legitimate aim) [2014] UKUT 00085 (IAC) arguing that the  rules  should
    not be considered to be a complete code. They referred to the terms  of
    Appendix FM which had stated that leave could be granted  "outside  the
    Rules on Article 8 grounds".

8.   The grounds went on  to  refer  to  paragraph  320(11)  of  the  Rules,
    arguing that extra care should be taken on the application of paragraph
    320(11) given that the public interest was involved  as  those  in  the
    United Kingdom unlawfully should  be  encouraged  to  return  to  their
    country of origin  in  order  to  apply  for  lawful  entry  under  the
    Immigration Rules.

9.   Judge Cox granted permission on the basis that  the  second  ground  of
    appeal had arguable merit on the basis  that  the  judge  had  arguably
    erred in failing to consider  and  apply  MM  (Lebanon)  and  therefore
    disqualified himself from a full Article 8 proportionality  assessment.
    He added that he was "less sanguine" about the other grounds but  would
    not rule them out.

10.  At the hearing of the appeal before me Ms Tiku stated  that  she  would
    concentrate on the issue of the proportionality  of  the  decision  and
    argued that the Entry Clearance Officer and indeed the  judge  had  not
    properly taken into account the fact  that  the  appellant's  wife  was
    British. She then asserted that if the appellant's wife had  to  go  to
    India she would have to give up her British nationality.  Moreover, his
    wife had not only a career here, but  she was also in  the  process  of
    buying a property here and had a settled life here with her family  and
    siblings. Ms Tiku stated that the judge had not taken into account  all
    relevant factors in the balancing exercise.

11.  Ms Isherwood asked me to find there was no material  error  of  law  in
    the determination.  The issue which had been raised in the  grounds  of
    appeal that the appellant had not stated that  his  wife  could  go  to
    India did not match with the interview record and she pointed out  that
    the judge had found that the sponsor was not credible  on  that  point.
    She stated that the difficulties which the sponsor would face were  not
    material.  The issue was  whether  or  not  there  were  insurmountable
    obstacles which could stop family life being  enjoyed  in  India.   She
    argued that the actions of both parties should not be disregarded.  She
    stated  that  the  judge  had  applied  relevant  case   law   to   the
    proportionality exercise and reached conclusions  which  were  open  to
    him.

Discussion

12.  I considered first whether or not the judge was correct to decide  that
    the appellant's exclusion was justified by the provisions of  paragraph
    320(11).  I consider that the Entry Clearance Officer was  entitled  to
    refuse the application on that basis.  This is not merely the  case  of
    an appellant who had entered Britain illegally but one who clearly  had
    made various attempts to subvert immigration control.

13.  The lack of a finding by  the  judge  as  to  the  subsistence  of  the
    marriage was criticised in the grounds of  appeal.   I  consider  that,
    reading the determination as a whole, the judge, who made it clear that
    he did not consider the fact that the appellant had made  the  marriage
    application  shortly  after  returning  to  India  indicated  that  the
    marriage was not genuine and subsisting was not a  good  enough  reason
    for that conclusion,  found  after  consideration  of  various  factors
    including that the sponsor had attended the hearing  that  this  was  a
    genuine and subsisting marriage.  On all the evidence before the  judge
    I consider that that is a finding which was made  or,  if  not  clearly
    made, was the appropriate finding in this case.

14.  However the appellant has to deal with the  issue  of  the  suitability
    requirement of the Rules and clearly these reflect the same matters  as
    were raised  in  the  consideration  of  the  refusal  under  paragraph
    320(11).  The question remains as to whether  or  not  the  appellant's
    rights to private and family life are infringed by the decision and  if
    they are infringed whether or not the infringement is disproportionate.
     In considering this I turn to the Rules at Section  EX:  exception  of
    Appendix FM that these refer to a situation at "B" where:-

         "The applicant has a genuine and subsisting with a partner  who  is
         in the UK and is a British citizen, settled in the UK or in the  UK
         with  refugee  leave  or  humanitarian  protection  and  there  are
         insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life   with   that   partner
         continuing outside the UK."

15.  It is of note that neither the Entry Clearance Officer  nor  the  judge
    appear to have taken on board the fact that the appellant's sponsor  is
    a British citizen who indeed was born here.  The judge did in paragraph
    26 of the determination  set  out  relevant  factors  relating  to  the
    private and family life of the sponsor.   They  are  indeed  persuasive
    given that not only was she born here and is a British citizen but that
    she works here, is in the process  of  buying  property  here  and  her
    parents and siblings are her.  She has never lived in India.  However I
    consider that the judge was correct to consider the  necessity  of  the
    public  interest  in  maintaining  proper  immigration  control.    The
    appellant's own behaviour militates very strongly against  any  finding
    that the decision is disproportionate but the reality is that,  in  any
    event, there was no evidence that there were  insurmountable  obstacles
    to the appellant's wife living with him in India.  Where  husbands  and
    wives come from different countries and  have  different  nationalities
    there is nothing to indicate that  the  country  of  residence  of  one
    should take precedence over the country of residence of the  other.   I
    consider that the  lack  of  evidence  that  there  are  insurmountable
    obstacles to  the  sponsor  living  in  India  can  only  lead  to  the
    conclusion that the  decision  is  not  disproportionate,  taking  into
    account all relevant factors in this case.

16.  I therefore consider that there is no material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination of the Immigration Judge and that his decision dismissing
    this appeal on both immigration and human rights grounds shall stand.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

