

                                    [pic]



The Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal number: OA/18406/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester              |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On November 10, 2014             |On November 11, 2014             |
|                                 |                                 |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                  MISS NL M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Dr Mynott (Legal Representative)
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, born April 23,  2001  is  a  citizen  of  Zimbabwe.  She
    applied for entry clearance as a dependant child. As  her  mother  only
    has limited leave to remain  the  respondent  refused  her  application
    under the Immigration Rules on August 30, 2013.

 2. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal under  Section  82(1)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  on  September  25,
    2013 although Section 84(1) (c) of the 2002 Act limited her  rights  of
    appeal to human rights grounds.

 3. The respondent reviewed the decision on December 20, 2013. On  June  9,
    2014 Judge of the First Tier Tribunal Birrell (hereinafter referred  to
    as the "FtTJ")  heard  her  appeal  and  refused  it  in  determination
    promulgated on June 17, 2014.

 4. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on June 23, 2014 and  on  August
    1, 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Plumptre granted permission to
    appeal finding it arguable  the  FtTJ  had  possibly  erred  by  making
    inconsistent findings and by raising a new issue in  her  determination
    without affording the parties an opportunity to address her on it.

 5. The respondent filed a Rule 24 response dated August 11, 2014 in  which
    she opposed the appeal and submitted the FtTJ had made findings open to
    her.

 6. The matter was listed on the above date and the appellant's mother  and
    stepfather were both in attendance.

    SUBMISSIONS


 7. Dr Mynott submitted the determination was flawed because of the finding
    made at paragraph [26] of the FtTJ's determination. He argued:


     a. That finding (on the  child's  wishes)  was  made  firstly  without
        having regard to other evidence that was before  her  and  secondly
        without raising the issue with the witnesses in court.


     b. Although it was accepted the appellant's mother had  submitted  the
        application, signed it and completed appendix  2  nevertheless  the
        child had had to attend at the Embassy for  biometric  reasons  and
        her views were contained within the witness statements of both  her
        mother and stepfather.

     c. The FtTJ should have regard to the decision of Zoumbas [2013]  UKSC
        74 and in particular paragraph [13] where the Courts stated-

             "13. We  would  seek  to  add  to  the  seven  principles  the
             following comments. First, the decision-maker is  required  to
             assess the proportionality of the  interference  with  private
             and family life in the particular circumstances in  which  the
             decision is made. The evaluative  exercise  in  assessing  the
             proportionality of a measure under article 8 ECHR excludes any
             "hard-edged  or  bright-line  rule  to  be  applied   to   the
             generality of cases": EB (Kosovo) v Secretary of State for the
             Home Department [2009] AC 1159, per Lord Bingham at  para  12.
             Secondly, as Lord Mance pointed out in H(H) (at para  98)  the
             decision-maker must evaluate the child's best interests and in
             some cases they may point only marginally in one, rather  than
             another, direction. Thirdly, as the case of H(H) shows in  the
             context of extradition, there may be  circumstances  in  which
             the weight  of  another  primary  consideration  can  tip  the
             balance and make the interference proportionate even where  it
             has very severe consequences for children.  In  that  case  an
             Italian prosecutor issued a European  arrest  warrant  seeking
             the surrender of a person who  had  earlier  broken  his  bail
             conditions by leaving Italy and ultimately seeking safe  haven
             in the United Kingdom and had been convicted of  very  serious
             crimes. This court held that the  treaty  obligations  of  the
             United Kingdom to extradite him prevailed over his  children's
             best interests. The  third  principle  in  para  10  above  is
             subject to  the  first  and  second  qualifications  and  may,
             depending on the circumstances, be subject to the  third.  But
             in our view, it is not likely that a court would reach in  the
             context of an immigration decision what Lord Wilson  described
             in H(H) (at para 172) as the "firm  if  bleak"  conclusion  in
             that case, which separated young children from their parents."


        Dr Mynott submitted the FtTJ had not followed this approach.

     d. The FtTJ had acted unfairly by not  raising  the  issue  about  the
        child's wishes. The Tribunal in  MM  (unfairness  E  and  R)  Sudan
        [2014] UKUT 105 (IAC) at paragraph [15] stated-

             "The law reports and texts are replete with  formulations  and
             manifestations  of  this  right.  For  present  purposes,  and
             bearing in mind the doctrine of precedent, we focus  upon  two
             of the leading decisions of the superior courts. The first  of
             these is R - v - Chief Constable of Thames Valley  Police,  ex
             parte Cotton [1990] IRLR 344. It may be observed that, in both
             the reported cases and the leading text books,  this  decision
             has not received the prominence it plainly merits. This  might
             be attributable to its  appearance  in  one  of  the  minority
             series of law reports.  Having  said  that,  Cotton  has  been
             recently quoted with approval  and  applied  by  Moses  LJ  in
             McCarthy v Visitors to Inns of Court and Bar  Standards  Board
             [2013] EWHC 3253 (Admin) and by Underhill  J  in  R  (Hill)  v
             Institute of Chartered Accountants [2013]  EWCA  Civ  555.  In
             Cotton, the issue, in a nutshell, was whether the decision  of
             the Chief Constable to dismiss a police officer  was  vitiated
             by procedural unfairness on account of  inadequate  disclosure
             to the officer  of  the  case  against  him.  We  distill  the
             following principles from Cotton:


              i) The defect, or impropriety, must be procedural  in  nature.
                 Cases of this kind are not concerned with the merits of the
                 decision under  review  or  appeal.  Rather,  the  superior
                 court's enquiry  focuses  on  the  process,  or  procedure,
                 whereby the impugned decision was reached.


             ii) It is doctrinally incorrect to adopt the two stage  process
                 of asking whether there was a  procedural  irregularity  or
                 impropriety giving rise to unfairness and, if  so,  whether
                 this had any material bearing on the  outcome.  These  are,
                 rather, two elements of a single question,  namely  whether
                 there was procedural unfairness.

            iii) Thus, if the reviewing  or  appellate  Court  identifies  a
                 procedural irregularity or impropriety, which, in its view,
                 made  no  difference  to  the  outcome,   the   appropriate
                 conclusion is that there was no  unfairness  to  the  party
                 concerned.

             iv) The reviewing or appellate Court should exercise caution in
                 concluding that the outcome would have been the same if the
                 diagnosed procedural irregularity or  impropriety  had  not
                 occurred."


     e. By refusing the appeal on an issue not raised either in the refusal
        letter or at the hearing the FtTJ had acted unfairly and failed  to
        have regard to the UN Convention on the Rights of a Child.
     f. The FtTJ also failed to consider in her proportionality  assessment
        that the stepfather was a refugee and  her  siblings  were  British
        citizens.

 8. Mr McVeety acknowledged that the main reason  given  by  the  FtTJ  for
    rejecting the decision was not a matter raised in the refusal letter or
    at the hearing but submitted that as  the  FtTJ  made  a  finding  that
    possibly was open to her but he accepted there was an argument that she
    should have raised it at the hearing or brought the case  back  if  the
    issue troubled her so much.

    MY FINDINGS ON ERROR IN LAW

 9. This was an appeal outside of the Immigration Rules.  For  the  reasons
    properly set out by the FtTJ in her determination  the  appellant  only
    had a limited right of appeal. At paragraph [18] of  her  determination
    she took the correct decision to deal with this appeal outside  of  the
    provisions of Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules
    and from paragraph [19] onwards of her determination she considered the
    evidence and carried out the article 8  "Razgar" approach.

10. The FtTJ was unable to find it was  disproportionate  to  refuse  entry
    because there was no statement from the appellant and  in  her  opinion
    this was necessary in light of the fact she was thirteen years  of  age
    at the date of hearing albeit she was twelve  years  of  age  when  she
    submitted her application.

11. A review of the hearing notes (the FtTJ and respondent's file) suggests
    it was an extremely short hearing in which the witness  was  not  asked
    any questions and the representatives relied on brief submissions only.
    At no time prior to the issuing of the determination had the respondent
    suggested the child did not wish to live with her mother and stepfather
    and siblings in the  United  Kingdom  or  that  this  was  a  potential
    trafficking scenario.

12. This application was refused for the reason contained in paragraph [26]
    of the determination namely because the  FtTJ  did  not  feel  able  to
    assume the views expressed in  the  witness  statements  were  actually
    those of the appellant herself.

13. I am satisfied that if she had raised this at the hearing or it was  an
    argument being relied on by the respondent then this is something  that
    could have been addressed in the evidence or at the hearing itself. The
    respondent  had  never  suggested  this  was  anything  but  a  genuine
    application. The challenge had been simply that the  Immigration  Rules
    did not cover her because her mother only had limited leave  to  remain
    at the date of application.

14. The appellant was not on notice that  this  was  to  be  an  issue  and
    consequently there had been no need for a statement to be obtained from
    her.

15. Whilst the Tribunal has to be conscious of trafficking risks there  was
    no suggestion that this was such a case. If the respondent had any such
    concerns or had been of the opinion the  appellant  did  not  genuinely
    want to come and live here then the time  for  such  a  submission  was
    either in the refusal letter, review letter or at the hearing.

16. In the absence of any evidence that this was raised or discussed at the
    hearing I am satisfied that there has been some unfairness and an error
    in law based on the fact is established as neither  the  appellant  nor
    the respondent were given an opportunity to address her concern.

17. I therefore set aside the decision and I will proceed to remake it.

    PRELIMINARY ISSUES

18. Mr McVeety did not object to two further statements from the  appellant
    and the legal representative. The appellant's statement reiterated  her
    wish to live with her mother  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  legal
    representative's letter confirmed the process by  which  the  statement
    had been obtained.

    FINDINGS AND REASONS

19. The FtTJ's only concern was the lack of a statement of intent from  the
    appellant.


20. The appellant in her recent statement made clear


     a. She wanted to join her family in the United Kingdom.
     b. She wanted to get to know her siblings better.
     c. She loved seeing her mother, stepfather and siblings  on  a  recent
        visit and it was very hard for her when they left her behind.
     d. She wanted the refusal decision to  be  altered  to  give  her  the
        chance to be with her family.




21. The recent statement confirms her wish to live with her mother  and  in
    light of the FtTJ's other positive findings in paragraphs [25] to  [29]
    I am satisfied that the FtTJ would have allowed  this  appeal  if  this
    statement had been before her because in paragraph [29] she stated-


             "...  Whilst  I  accept  that  the  Appellant's   mother   and
             stepfather  want  her  to  come  to  the  United  Kingdom   in
             determining what is in the best interests of the Appellant and
             indeed  whether  refusal  would   have   unjustifiably   harsh
             consequences I find that I am unable to  conclude  that  there
             would  be  such  consequences  and  the  decision   would   be
             disproportionate in the complete absence  of  direct  evidence
             from the Appellant that this is something she wants and it  is
             not a decision being imposed on her."

22. I agree with the FtTJ's approach that this  decision  should  be  dealt
    with outside of the  Rules  and  I  follow  the  approach  set  out  in
    paragraphs [19] to [22] of the FtTJ's determination.


23. I am satisfied that refusing her entry would  be  disproportionate.  In
    reaching this decision I have had regard to:


     a. The decision of Zoumbas.
     b. The age of the child.
     c. The appellant's mother  is  settled  in  the  United  Kingdom  with
        limited leave  and  likely  to  be  entitled  to  indefinite  leave
        shortly.
     d. Her stepfather has indefinite leave to remain as  a  result  of  an
        asylum application) and cannot return to Zimbabwe.
     e. She has two siblings who are classed as British.
     f. The appellant's stated wishes.

24. I allow the appeal under article 8 ECHR.

    DECISION


25. There was a material error of law. The original decision is  set  aside
    and I allow the appeal under article 8 ECHR.

26. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended) the  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    order was made in the First-tier Tribunal as  the  FtTJ  indicated  the
    appellant was a non-vulnerable adult. Clearly this is incorrect because
    the appellant is thirteen years of age and I therefore  make  an  order
    prohibiting the disclosure of any information that would make it likely
    that the public would be able to identify the appellant.

Signed:                           Dated: November 10, 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis


TO THE RESPONDENT

No fee award request was made and I do not make one in those circumstances.


Signed:                           Dated: November 10, 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
