
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/18610/2012
     OA/18620/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham, Sheldon Court              |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 4th July 2014                                |On 14th July 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                        (1) Mr Luther Tungamirai Jape
                             (2) Miss Dinai Jape
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - PRETORIA

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    No legal representation
For the Respondent:    Mr Neville Smart (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Grimmett promulgated on 7th January 2014 following a  hearing  at
    Birmingham Sheldon Court on 31st December 2013.  In the  determination,
    the judge dismissed the  appeal  of  Luther  Tungamirai  Jape  and  his
    sibling sister Dinai  Jape.   The  Appellants  applied  for,  and  were
    granted, permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  and  thus  the
    matter comes before me.

The Appellants

 2.  The  Appellants  are  brother  and  sister  respectively.   The  first
    Appellant, the brother, was born on 26th  November  1987.   The  second
    Appellant, the sister,  was  born  on  24th  October  1989.   Both  are
    citizens of Zimbabwe.  Both had originally applied for entry  clearance
    to join their sponsoring mother, Mrs Beauty Jape, together  with  their
    two younger siblings, namely, Theodore Davis Jape, who was born on 29th
    April 1995, and Keith O'Brian Tadiwa Jape, who was born on 8th  October
    1999.  Since the latter were of minor age, their appeals  were  allowed
    and they have now joined their sponsoring mother, Mrs  Beauty  Jape  in
    the UK.  The Appellants' appeals, however, were dismissed by the  judge
    under paragraph 319V of HC 395 because both of them were over  the  age
    of 18 years, and had to show that they were "living alone  outside  the
    United Kingdom in the most  exceptional  compassionate  circumstances",
    which the judge held they could not do.

The Judge's Findings

 3. In coming to her conclusions, the judge had regard to the fact that the
    sponsoring mother, who gave evidence, was "an honest witness"  who  had
    left Zimbabwe in 2001, leaving behind her four children, together  with
    "their older half-sisters who at the time she left were  about  15  and
    18" but "they were her daughters and they continued to  live  with  the
    Appellants  in  South  Africa"  where  they   had   moved   afterwards.
    Subsequently, one of her older daughters  had  a  child  "and  was  now
    living apart from the family and Luther had found a job and was shortly
    to move in with his girlfriend" although "at the time of  the  decision
    they were still living as a family unit together" (paragraph 8).

 4. The judge was clear that the Sponsor had been  working  in  the  United
    Kingdom soon after her arrival in 2001 and "there is evidence that  she
    took out policies for them as long ago as 2002 shortly after  she  left
    and evidence, which is accepted, of contacts since  2009  although  "it
    was difficult to obtain evidence prior to that because of the  children
    leaving Zimbabwe and moving to  South  Africa."   (Paragraph  9).   The
    judge had regard to the existence of school reports  for  the  children
    "who all bear their mother's name and their letters to  her  from  them
    included in the bundle together with some antenatal records" (paragraph
    9).

 5. However, the two older children, namely, the Appellants in this appeal,
    could  not  show  that  they  are  living  in  the   most   exceptional
    compassionate circumstances.  Moreover, they were  adults,  and  Luther
    had been looking after himself for some time and he  was  working  "and
    helping to support them and has clearly been living with them  for  the
    vast majority of the time his mother has been away" but was not  living
    in the most exceptional compassionate circumstances nor  is  he  living
    alone" (paragraph 10).

 6. As for the second Appellant, Dinai, the judge found that  the  evidence
    was that she "has the burden of caring for the children as she  is  not
    working and has to do all the work and they are living in a two bedroom
    flat which clearly would be very difficult  for  them  all"  (paragraph
    10), but the judge still found that this did not show the existence  of
    the most  exceptional  compassionate  circumstances.   Accordingly  the
    appeals of the first and second Appellants were dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application state that the family existed  as  a  single
    family unit and they were desperate to remain  so.   The  grounds  also
    state that although Luther is working,  he  "works  part-time  to  make
    extra  money.....,  but  I  pay  for  his  rent  and  general  upkeep".
    Furthermore, now that the younger two siblings have come to the UK this
    "will be the first time they are separated from each other and  I  fear
    how this will affect the two younger ones" and that  Dinai,  "has  been
    taking care of them" but that "Luther...has been like a  father  figure
    to them" to that "the separation will be so  traumatic  for  my  kids".
    The Grounds of Appeal were plainly written by the Sponsor in the UK.

 8. On 1st April 2014, permission to appeal was granted on the basis  that,
    although Article 8 ECHR was specifically raised in the original Grounds
    of Appeal, the judge had failed to make any findings on  the  issue  of
    human rights.

The Hearing

 9. At the hearing before me, the Sponsor, Miss Beauty  Jape,  attended  as
    she had previously attended, entirely unrepresented legally.  On behalf
    of the Respondent, Mr Nigel Smart was the Senior Home Office Presenting
    Officer.  The Sponsor, Miss Jape stated that Luther  had  always  lived
    with the rest of the family.  She had left him behind when he was  just
    14.  He had been a father figure to them.  Although  there  were  older
    half-sisters, he together  with  them  managed  the  house,  doing  the
    cleaning, the washing up, and then working as  well.   He  had  been  a
    father figure to the children.  They had not been separated.  In  2008,
    he had to go to South Africa and they all went with him.  Subsequently,
    the half-sisters have got married and have settled in South Africa.  He
    has been working there.  He still needs support from the UK so that his
    sponsoring mother sends money because on a work permit in South  Africa
    he is simply working as a waiter and living off the tips.   Dinai,  his
    sister, however, is not working as she still continues  to  look  after
    the children as she has done before.

10. For his part, Mr Smart submitted that at the date of the decision  they
    were all living together in South Africa.  The family  had  voluntarily
    been broken up by the Sponsor choosing to come to the UK in  2001,  and
    subsequently it has been broken up again by  the  two  younger  sibling
    brothers coming to the  UK  leaving  behind  the  Appellants  in  South
    Africa.  This was a matter of their choice.  The Immigration Rules were
    a complete code  and  there  were  no  exceptional  circumstances  here
    necessitating  a  different  decision  under  freestanding  Article   8
    jurisprudence.  He asked me to dismiss the appeal.  In reply Miss Jape,
    became evermore emotional and submitted that the two  younger  siblings
    only came to the UK this year on 4th February 2014, and they had  never
    been separated before from Luther who had been looking after them  ever
    since she had left them all behind, when Luther was 14 years of age.

Error of Law

11. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (Section 12(1) of  TCEA  2007)
    such that I should set aside  this  decision  and  to  remake  it  (see
    Section 12(2) of TCEA 2007).  The reason for this is quite  simply  the
    oversight of the judge below in not considering the  situation  on  the
    same facts under Article 8 of the  ECHR.   This  omission  is  entirely
    understandable given that, as before this Tribunal, the Appellants were
    unrepresented, and simply had their sponsoring mother, Mrs Jape, making
    representations in as best a way as she could.   Although  she  did  so
    truthfully then, as she has done before me today, she was not  able  to
    address legal questions, such as the position  under  Article  8  ECHR.
    However, it was a matter in the Grounds of Appeal and given that it was
    not dealt with, the decision now has to be set aside and remade.

Remaking the Decision

12. In remaking the decision, I have had regard  to  the  findings  of  the
    original judge, the evidence before her, and  the  submissions  that  I
    have heard today.  I am allowing this appeal for the following reasons.
     First, this is a  case  where  the  Appellants  cannot  succeed  under
    paragraph 319V(i)(f) because both Appellants have  to  show  both  that
    they are  living  alone  and  that  they  are  doing  so  in  the  most
    exceptional compassionate circumstances.  The judge at  first  instance
    found that Luther had been "working and helping to support the  family"
    (paragraph 10).  There is no evidence of  his  ill-health  or  lack  of
    wellbeing.  The second Appellant, Dinai, was found by the  first  judge
    to be "living in a family unit with other adults...."  (paragraph  10).
    In neither of their cases can it be said that they are  living  in  the
    most exceptional compassionate circumstances.

13. Second, there is a question as to whether the position can  be  treated
    any differently under Article 8  ECHR.   Before  this  step  is  taken,
    regard must be given to the judgment in MF (Nigeria)  [2013]  EWCA  Civ
    1192, where the Master of the Rolls decided that the Immigration  Rules
    provided a "complete code" to the consideration of  Article  8  claims.
    The word "exceptional" meant  compelling  reasons.   In  the  balancing
    exercise, the "exceptional circumstances" which should  be  considered,
    involves the application of proportionality tests as  required  by  the
    Strasbourg jurisprudence (see paragraphs 43 to  44  of  the  judgment).
    That was a deportation case,  but  the  judgment  applies  equally,  as
    confirmed in the case of Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640, to  non-deportation
    cases.  Gulshan confirmed that exceptional is  an  application  of  the
    consideration of the Strasbourg jurisprudence to assess why,  if  there
    are any reasons at all, that the  usual  result  contained  within  the
    Immigration Rules, should not follow.

14. I find that "exceptional circumstances" exist in this sense because the
    Appellants, Luther and Dinai, lived as a family unit together, both  in
    Zimbabwe when their mother left them in 2001, and then again  in  South
    Africa, where they followed Luther, until this year when  the  youngest
    two sibling children have come to the UK in  February  2014.   At  this
    stage, their family unit has been disrupted.

15. Their relationship is that of father and son, between  Luther  and  the
    remaining children.  This is clear from the Grounds  of  Appeal  before
    this Tribunal.  In addition, two important  pieces  of  evidence  which
    were before the First-tier Tribunal Judge, are relevant.

16. First, the Sponsor, Mrs Beauty Jape, has never broken contact with  her
    children, and has always been desirous of having them reunited with her
    since their arrival in the UK.  There is evidence from as long  ago  as
    2002 that she had taken out policies for them (see paragraph 9  of  the
    determination).  Thereafter, Luther, who was only aged 14 at the  time,
    and looked after the remaining family members,  left  to  go  to  South
    Africa where he worked, but he did so "working and helping  to  support
    them" (see paragraph 10), and the judge had found that he "has  clearly
    been living with them for the vast majority of the time his mother  has
    been away" (paragraph 10).   In  addition  to  this,  the  Sponsor  has
    "continued to support us emotionally and financially" according to  the
    statement before this Tribunal by Luther, so much so that  the  Sponsor
    stated in evidence that she still sends him money  because  he  has  to
    live off his waiter's tips.  The  Sponsor's  statement  also  makes  it
    clear that the arrival of the youngest sibling children now  mean  that
    this "will be the first time they are separated from  each  other"  and
    this is likely to affect Keith and Theo adversely.  It is in their best
    interests that this family is kept together so that a father figure  is
    in the house and one who can act as a role model to them.

17. Second the same applies in relation to the second Appellant, where  the
    finding of the original judge was that Dinai "has the burden of  caring
    for the children as she is not working and has to do all the work"  (at
    paragraph 10), and this is a role that she has  performed  consistently
    and constantly ever since the Sponsor came to the UK.  The statement by
    the Sponsor before this Tribunal that this is the first time  they  had
    been separated applies equally to the second Appellant as  it  does  to
    the first Appellant.  In short, once the appeals  of  the  younger  two
    siblings were allowed, there was bound to be a disruptive impact on the
    family life of the remaining members.  The  question  is  whether  that
    impact is disproportionate to the legitimate public ends that  have  to
    be achieved by virtue of immigration controls.

18. The decision clearly interferes with the right to family  life  of  the
    two Appellants.  The interference has consequences of such  gravity  as
    to  engage  the  operation  of  Article  8.   The  interference  is  in
    accordance with the law because paragraph 319V is not satisfied by  the
    Appellants.  However, as to the question whether it is necessary  in  a
    democratic society in the interests of the protection of the rights and
    freedoms of others, this is a more difficult question, and I find  that
    is not.

19. Similarly, I find that the interference is not legitimate to the public
    end that is sought to be  achieved.   There  are  positive  obligations
    inherent in effective "respect"  for  family  life:  see  Kroon  v  The
    Netherlands [1995] EHRR 263.  The youngest  of  the  siblings  in  this
    family, Keith, who was born on 8th October 1999, was only two years  of
    age when his mother, the Sponsor, left him behind in Zimbabwe and  came
    to the UK, although it is clear she had not abandoned him, because  the
    following year she took out policies in their name,  and  continued  to
    support them with financial remittances from the UK.

20. During that time, however, it was the  first  Appellant,  Luther,  then
    aged 14, who became a father  figure  to  the  youngest  siblings,  and
    brought them up, and he has continued to do so, to such an extent  that
    he took them to South Africa with him, where he continue to provide for
    them, and the entire family lived together  until  February  2014  this
    year, when the younger two siblings came to the  UK.   The  impact,  in
    Article 8 terms, where there is a positive obligation on the  state  to
    respect family life, on the separation of this family, is not one  that
    can be regarded as proportionate, because the effect of the decision of
    the state is to prevent the union of these two  Appellants  with  their
    remaining sibling brothers in the UK.

21. This was to say nothing of the mother, Beauty Jape, who  has  continued
    to maintain and support them, even when the older two  Appellants  have
    reached the age of majority.  In these circumstances, I find that  this
    appeal must be allowed.

Decision

22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    allowed under Article 8 of the Human Rights Act.

23. No anonymity order is made.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 12th July 2014


