
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/18309/2012
     OA/18310/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 24th February 2014                           |On 04th April 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                 HAJAH TOWER
                                WAGEDA TOWER
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr A Williams of Andrew Williams Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellants' appeal against the decision  of  Judge  Hindson
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 25th October 2013.

Background

 2. The first Appellant was born on 21st March 1967  and  the  second,  her
    daughter, was born 16th October 1992.  They are citizens of the  Sudan.
    Both applied to come to the UK to join the Sponsor, Mr Musa Tower,  who
    is present and settled here.  They were refused on the grounds that, so
    far as the first Appellant is concerned, it was not accepted  that  she
    and the Sponsor were in a genuine and subsisting relationship nor  that
    she could be adequately maintained and  accommodated.  Furthermore  she
    had failed to provide  the  required  evidence  of  her  competence  in
    English and is not exempt from the English language requirement.

 3. The second Appellant was refused on the grounds that she was not living
    alone  outside  the  UK   in   the   most   exceptional   compassionate
    circumstances.

 4. There is no challenge to the decision of the judge in  respect  of  the
    second Appellant whose appeal was also dismissed.

 5. So far as the first Appellant is concerned, the judge  found  that  she
    was in a subsisting relationship with her husband and that she could be
    adequately maintained and accommodated here.

 6. He dismissed the appeal on the grounds that she had  not  achieved  the
    necessary competence in the English language.  She said  that  she  was
    exempt from the test on the basis that she had

         "A physical or mental condition which prevents her from meeting the
         requirement"

    or in the alternative

         "that there are exceptional compassionate circumstances which would
         prevent her from meeting the requirement".

 7. She relied  on  the  medical  report  provided  by  a  senior  clinical
    psychologist at Gazera University dated 7th February 2013.

 8. The judge wrote as follows:

         "I have given careful consideration to that document and find  that
         it is of little help.  It is very short and the  relevant  part  is
         the second paragraph which I here recite in full.

             'Miss Hajah was known as illiterate  person  originating  from
             war-torn area and as war  trauma  survivor.  Several  sessions
             were conducted to determine the  best  course  of  action  for
             fostering her educational abilities. Miss Hajah was  subjected
             to Social Maturity Test (SMT) where clearly  showed,  evidence
             points in her concentration skills.  I can  certify  that  her
             chances for success  in  achieving  that  aim  currently  non-
             existent.'"

 9. The judge recorded that he had also been provided with  an  email  from
    the author of the report but it did not clarify the report in any  way.
    He had also been shown a print out of  the  "Vineland  Social  Maturity
    Skills" which did not assist either.  It describes the  format  of  the
    test as consisting of eight subscales which measure a list  of  skills.
    "Only one, communication skills, is remotely relevant  and  the  report
    which had been provided does not show how the  Appellant  performed  on
    this or any of the other scales."

10. The judge did not find the report sufficient  to  bring  the  Appellant
    within the exemption  to  the  need  to  provide  an  English  language
    certificate and on that basis dismissed the appeal.

11. He considered whether the appeal ought  to  be  allowed  on  Article  8
    grounds, addressed himself to the relevant case law and  dismissed  the
    appeal on human rights grounds.

The Grounds of Application

12. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that  although
    the judge had made a number of positive findings he had erred in law in
    assessing the evidence of the psychologist and failed to attach  proper
    weight to his findings.  He did not find that the report was fabricated
    and as he is not an expert psychologist even if the results were before
    him it is difficult to see how he could interpret or  understand  them.
    Moreover the judge had  failed  to  properly  consider  the  matter  of
    proportionality given that  he  accepted  that  the  Appellants  had  a
    genuine relationship to the first Appellant which commenced  before  he
    fled Sudan to claim asylum.

13. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Bird in respect of  ground  1
    only.  She specifically stated that there was no arguable error of  law
    in the judge's consideration of Article 8.  However, she said that  the
    judge's failure to give reasons as to why  the  psychologist's  opinion
    should be disregarded gave rise to an arguable error of law.

14. On 6th January  2014  the  Respondent  served  a   reply  defining  the
    determination.

Submissions

15. Mr Williams relied on his grounds  and  on  the  case  of  JL  (Medical
    reports - credibility) China [2013] UKUT 145 which held that "a judge's
    decision not to accept expert evidence does not involve an error of law
    on his part provided he approaches that evidence with appropriate  care
    and gives good reasons for  his decision."

16. Mr Williams submitted that the judge had not given  proper  reasons  in
    this case.  The psychologist stated in his report that he had conducted
    a rigorous psychological assessment. The Appellant  was  an  illiterate
    person who was a war trauma survivor.  It was  clear  from   his  email
    that the psychologist was presently working with victims of war  trauma
    and therefore had some expertise in this area.  He was therefore in the
    best position to assess the Appellant's abilities.   It  was  his  view
    that she suffered from difficulties which could  not  be  overcome  and
    therefore she ought to be exempt from the English language requirement.



17. Mr Diwnycz submitted that there was no clear  correlation  between  the
    Appellant's condition and her inability to  pass  the  test  which  had
    three different elements,  speaking,  understanding  and  writing,  and
    whilst her illiteracy would be a bar to  her  being  able  to  properly
    complete the written requirement of the test there was  no  reason  why
    the other elements could not be satisfactorily completed.  She did  not
    suffer from any physical disability  such  as  deafness,  for  example,
    which would prevent her meeting the requirement.

 Findings and Conclusions

18. The sole issue here is whether the judge erred in his assessment of the
    expert evidence and as  a  consequence  should   have  found  that  the
    Appellant was exempt from the English language requirement.

19. I consider that he did not.  He did the best that  he  could  with  the
    material which was before him.  He was right to state that the document
    was short and did not address the issue as to whether she could  be  in
    a position to pass some of the  elements  of  the   test  if  not  all.
    Illiteracy would not be a  bar  to  her  being  able  to  speak  or  to
    understand English.

20. The psychologist clarified his report with an email dated 17th  October
    2013 but it was considered by the judge, who was entitled to point  out
    the shortcomings of the report so  far  its  relevance  to  a  possible
    exemption from meeting the English language requirement is concerned.

21. The judge reached a decision  which  was  open  to  him,  supported  by
    adequate reasons. The grounds disclose no arguable error of law.

Decision

22. Appeal dismissed.




Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


