
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: oa/18500/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 19 September 2014                            |On 3 October 2014          |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE E B GRANT

                                   Between

                                     YA
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Nelson-Iye
For the Respondent:    Mr Jarvis, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a 39 year old citizen of Jamaica who  has  been  given
    permission to appeal  a  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Buckwell promulgated on 13 May 2014.



The Background to this Appeal

 2. On 12 September 2013 the respondent made a decision to refuse to revoke
    a deportation order with reference to the Immigration  Act  1971.   The
    appellant exercised her right of appeal against that decision  and  her
    appeal became before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Buckwell  on  24  April
    2014.  In a determination promulgated on 13 May 2014 he  dismissed  her
    appeal.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

 3. On 30  July  2014  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  P  J  G  White  granted
    permission to appeal in the following terms:

         "1.  The Appellant seeks permission to appeal, in time,  against  a
             decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Buckwell  who,  in  a
             determination  promulgated  on  13  May  2014,  dismissed  the
             Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision to refuse
             to revoke a deportation order.

         2.   Having had regard to the grounds for permission to appeal  and
             the  determination,  I  am  satisfied  that  in  reaching  his
             decision the judge arguably made  an  error  of  law  for  the
             following reasons:-

             a.   The judge arguably in regard to the considerations  under
                  paragraph  390  and  391  of  the  Rules  failed  to  give
                  sufficient weight to the influence  that  the  Appellant's
                  husband may have on the Appellant's  future  conduct  (the
                  judge  having  praised  the  reformed  character  of   the
                  Appellant's husband at paragraph 46 of the determination).

             b.   It is arguable that in assessing the  best  interests  of
                  the child the judge failed to  engage  properly  with  the
                  fact that at present the child is in private  foster  care
                  as a result of the Appellant's inability to return to  the
                  United  Kingdom,  and  the  recommendation  of  the  Local
                  Authority  that  the  child  should  live  with  both  his
                  parents.

         3.   Accordingly I am satisfied that the grounds and  determination
             disclose an arguable error of law."

The Evidence and Submissions

 4. Mr Nelson-Iye made submissions based on the application for  permission
    to appeal which I set out in full below:

         "Preface:  The  Appellant  and  her  husband  were  part   of   the
         conspiracy.  The husband, who is a British citizen,  was  described
         by the Sentencing Judge as one of a senior  manager;  the  head  of
         transport and trusted with  over  �100,000  (see  page  B6  of  the
         Respondent's bundle, page 9 of the Appellant's main  bundle).   For
         this he sentenced the Appellant's husband to 10 years in prison. He
         described the Appellant's role as that oa a temp who stepped in  to
         assist whenever  anyone  member  of  the  conspiracy  was  away  or
         unavailable and right at the bottom of the company (see page B7  of
         the Respondent's bundle and page 10 - 11 of  the  Appellant's  main
         bundle). He then sentenced the Appellant to 6  years  imprisonment.
         The Appellant's husband continued to remain in the  United  Kingdom
         (UK) because he is a British citizen.  The  Appellant  however  was
         deported from the UK after an unsuccessful appeal; in  this  appeal
         her husband wrote to the UKBA informing them that he was no  longer
         with the Appellant.

         The Appellant appeals against the decision  of  the  Respondent  to
         refuse her application for the deportation order  in  place  to  be
         revoked so that she can rejoin her family in the UK.

         It is contended that the Immigration Judge (IJ) erred in law on the
         following grounds:

             1.   The IJ made irrational findings  on  a  matter  that  was
                  material to the outcome of  the  appeal;  that  being  the
                  possibility of the appellant re-offending and or remaining
                  a risk to the public here in the UK  and  the  society  at
                  large.

         The IJ found the Appellant's husband to be a  sincere  witness  who
         has not exaggerated his evidence but had presented it honestly (see
         paragraph 46 of the determination).  He found that the  Appellant's
         husband had accepted his previous criminal activities;  served  his
         prison sentence and has done remarkably well since his  release  to
         from open prison in re-establishing himself with the community; and
         is in gainful employment and even purchased his own flat.  He found
         the Appellant's husband to be a credible witness.  He also  accepts
         that  the  relationship  between  the  couple  to  be  genuine  and
         subsisting as well as acknowledging that the said relationship like
         many others experienced  difficulties  (see  paragraph  51  of  the
         determination).  He also found that the Appellant's husband  should
         not be criticized for not going to Jamaica as he could  not  afford
         it because he only recently put himself on a path  towards  a  more
         secure future, which behaviour  the  IJ  mentioned  was  worthy  of
         respect.  The Appellant's husband had  been  rehabilitated  and  is
         back into the community; posing no threat to the public and society
         at large.

         The IJ fails to note, take in to account and to  make  findings  in
         relation to the impact of the Appellant's husband's  new  behaviour
         on her, which he described as worthy of  respect,  as  a  means  of
         encouraging her to change and thus directing her towards the  right
         path.  He does not consider that the Appellant can benefit from her
         husband and can be encouraged by the remarkable progress  that  her
         husband has made; after all  his  whole  effort  is  geared  toward
         putting his family together.  The  IJ's  reasoning  on  this  point
         which is material to the outcome of this appeal is irrational.

         The IJ noted that the consideration of the effects of the  decision
         to refuse to revoke the deportation order on her  son,  A,  was  an
         important point of consideration in his mind (paragraph 47  of  the
         determination).  He goes on to find that he was  satisfied  that  A
         was being cared for and that there  is  appropriate  local  Borough
         support (paragraph 52 of the determination. The IJ  fails  to  give
         weight to the plan and  or  recommendation  of  the  local  Borough
         assessment with his God parents were only temporary because it  was
         in A's best interest that he grows up with his parents (see page 28
         of the Appellant's supplementary bundle); if there was going to  be
         delay in his mothers return to the UK then his father  should  take
         him.  The IJ fails to make a finding as  to  why  it  is  A's  best
         interest for him to be continually separated from his mother or why
         it is in A's best interest that he be raised by only his father.

             2.   The IJ failed  to  give  adequate  explanations  for  his
                  findings on material matters

         The IJ fails to give reasons and or adequate explanation as to  why
         the Appellant cannot benefit from the same process her husband went
         through; she had served her sentence  just  like  he  did  and  had
         accepted responsibility for her actions (see page A7  paragraphs  3
         to 6) she would no doubt be encouraged positively by the remarkable
         progress that her husband has made; after all his whole  effort  is
         geared toward putting his family together.

         The IJ fails to explain why recommendation  of  the  local  Borough
         assessment team, that he be rejoined with his parents  as  soon  as
         possible, as  the  arrangement  with  his  God  parents  were  only
         temporary, were not in A's best interest, and why it is not in  his
         best interest for him to grow up with his parents and why it is A's
         best interest for him to be continually separated from  his  mother
         or that he be raised by only his father.

         The IJ fails to explain and or give reasons as to why  taking  into
         account A's needs together with the progress his father  has  made,
         his mother would not turn a new leaf and be reformed just like  her
         husband.

             3.   In light of grounds 1 and 2 above it  is  contended  that
                  the article 8 point is fundamentally flawed."

 5. Mr Nelson-Iye submitted that at the  time  the  deportation  order  was
    served the appellant was guilty of conspiracy to import drugs.  She had
    served six years in prison and her husband  had  also  served  time  in
    prison.  The relationship between them had broken down.  At the time of
    the appeal against deportation there was no family life.  However it is
    now known that the parties did not divorce  and  they  remain  married.
    There have been difficulties between  the  husband  and  wife  but  the
    marriage is genuine and subsisting.  The appellant's husband is out  on
    licence and supports the appeal and appeared in court before me.

 6.  It  is  the  appellant's  case  that  the  circumstances   today   are
    significantly different from those  in  place  at  the  time  when  the
    deportation order was signed.

 7. In a further change of circumstances the best interests of A  were  not
    taken into account.  This  amounts  to  exceptional  circumstances  and
    requires the appeal to be allowed on Article 8 grounds.

 8. The respondent served a Rule 24 response to the Grounds  of  Appeal  by
    letter dated 8 August 2014 in which the respondent submitted that  "the
    judge was not obliged to  speculate  as  to  what  effect  if  any  the
    appellant's husband might have on her future character  and  behaviour.
    The judge noted the appellant's husband appeared to have mode  progress
    since his release from prison. The appellant's child is in foster  care
    as a result of a private arrangement which it  appears  was  undertaken
    when the appellant and her husband were imprisoned for  their  part  in
    the illegal importation of cocaine. The child was 3 years  old  at  the
    time. He is 11 years old now. The appellant's child remains within  the
    foster arrangement because his father has chosen to not have  him  live
    with him. The theoretical view of the Borough is but one aspect of  the
    appellant's case. The appellant's child has spent the majority  of  his
    life with his godparents and is secure  and  supported  there/.  It  is
    clear the appellant's husband has put his home purchase and  employment
    before being reunited under the same roof as his son. The grounds are a
    disagreement with the determination and an attempt to reargue the case.
    The judge was entitled to rely on AD Lee and dismiss the appeal"

 9. Mr Jarvis relied upon the Rule  24  response  and  submitted  that  the
    Grounds of Appeal were  nothing  more  than  a  disagreement  with  the
    determination. The grounds speculate  about  the  potential  beneficial
    effects on the appellant by her husband  but  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge dealt with that not only in relation to the  husband's  behaviour
    and accepted they were still on good terms (paragraph 31).

10. Judge Buckwell did take into account all the submissions  and  properly
    found that the circumstances presented did not  constitute  changes  of
    such significance from  the  circumstances  which  subsisted  when  the
    original order was made and  they  did  not  in  any  event  constitute
    exceptional circumstances.

11. The appellant and her husband are serious criminals.  He could  not  be
    removed from the United Kingdom because  he  has  British  citizenship.
    This is a case where a six year  sentence  for  a  peripheral  role  in
    relation to class A drugs was a very serious sentence and six times the
    minimum requirement for automatic deportation.  The appellant's husband
    may be better at advising her now but that is a minimal and  irrelevant
    point.

12. The point of paragraph 390 and 390A of the Immigration Rules  are  that
    she has been deported and the public interest was justified.  The point
    of paragraph 391 of the Immigration Rules is not to re-argue  the  case
    of deportation but to show that the circumstances are exceptional  that
    the normal course of exclusion should not be met in any case.  The risk
    of the appellant reoffending  now  would  make  no  difference  to  the
    deportation action that was taken against her.

13. The judge plainly took into account the best interests  of  the  child.
    The best interests of the child have not been best served  by  his  own
    parents and their behaviour.  The judge did not have  to  speculate  on
    what the effects of his decision would be and who the child would  stay
    with.  He was plainly aware of the consequences of his  decision  which
    were that the mother would stay outside  the  United  Kingdom  and  the
    child with foster parents.  The findings he reached  at  paragraphs  47
    and 52 were properly open to him.

14. Mr Jarvis submitted that the judge arguably gave  less  weight  to  the
    public interest in reaching his decision but still found it  outweighed
    the appellant's case. The appellant's  conviction  is  not  capable  of
    being spent and so if anything the judge underestimated the  length  of
    exclusion from the United Kingdom. In respect  of  the  length  of  her
    sentence her exclusion is indefinite.   But  this  does  not  mean  she
    cannot apply and show human  rights  grounds  why  she  should  not  be
    excluded.

15. Finally Mr Jarvis submitted that the determination does not contain any
    error of law.

16. In reply Mr Nelson-Iye re-emphasised the point that there  had  been  a
    significant  change  between  the  deportation  of  the  appellant  and
    circumstances now such that they amounted to exceptional  circumstances
    and she should be permitted to return to the United Kingdom so that the
    child could be reunited with both of his parents.

The Immigration Rules

17. The requirements relevant to revocation of a deportation order are  set
    out in paragraph 390 of HC 395 (as amended) as follows:

         "390.    An application for revocation of a deportation order  will
                be  considered  in  the  light  of  all  the   circumstances
                including the following:

                (i)    the grounds on which the order was made;

                (ii)   any representations made in support of revocation;

                (iii)   the  interests  of  the  community,  including   any
                    compassionate circumstances."

         "390A.   Where paragraph 398 applies the Secretary  of  State  will
                consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies  and,  if  it
                does not, it will only be in exceptional circumstances  that
                the public interest in  maintaining  the  deportation  order
                will be outweighed by other factors."

         "391.    In the case of a person who has  been  deported  following
                conviction for a criminal offence,  the  continuation  of  a
                deportation order against that person  will  be  the  proper
                course:

                (a)    in the case of a conviction of an offence  for  which
                    the person was sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
                    less than 4 years, unless 10 years  have  elapsed  since
                    the making of the deportation order, or

                (b)    in the case of a conviction for an offence for  which
                    the person was sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
                    at least 4 years, at any time,

                Unless, in either case, the continuation would  be  contrary
                to  the  Human  Rights  Convention  or  the  Convention  and
                Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees,  or  there  are
                other exceptional circumstances that mean  the  continuation
                is outweighed by compelling factors."

         "391A.   In other cases, revocation of the order will not  normally
                be authorised  unless  the  situation  has  been  materially
                altered, either by a change of circumstances since the order
                was made, or by fresh information coming to light which  was
                not before the appellate authorities  or  the  Secretary  of
                State.  The passage of time since the  person  was  deported
                may also in itself amount to such a change of  circumstances
                as to warrant revocation of the order."

Discussion and Decision

18.  Paragraph 391 is a helpful indicator of the kind of factors  that  the
    Secretary of State would expect to see before agreeing to revocation of
    a deportation order.

19. I have had regard to the judgments to  which  I  was  referred  by  the
    parties and, additionally I have considered the  principles  enunciated
    in N (Kenya) 2004 EWCA Civ 1094.   The gist of the court's decision  in
    N (Kenya) was that the Adjudicator's analysis of  the  public  interest
    had  been  inadequate.  The  importance  of  the  public  interest   is
    reiterated in OH (Serbia) [2008] EWCA Civ 694. Despite sympathy for the
    appellant who had his parents and siblings in the  United  Kingdom  and
    who had sought to rehabilitate himself the court found itself unable to
    allow the appeal. In DS  (India)  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  544  a  compulsive
    gambler who had  attempted to rob a betting shop whilst  armed  with  a
    knife  resulting in a sentence of imprisonment of 4 years and 3  months
    was reconciled with his wife and wanted to formally adopt the five year
    old son of his  wife's  nephew.  The  court  considered  the  issue  of
    relocation for the wife and child. It found that:

    If it would be reasonable for a wife to accompany her husband, then the
    interference in family life is that much  the  less.  If  it  would  be
    unreasonable, then the  interference  would  be  that  much  the  more.
    However, where the scales ultimately fall will depend  on  the  overall
    evaluation of every factor in the  balance.  In  the  present  case,  a
    critical factor is the serious offence of which DS  was  convicted  (at
    paragraph 30).

20. It also found that:

    The public interest in deportation of those who commit  serious  crimes
    goes well beyond depriving the offender in question from the chance  to
    re-offend in this country:  it  extends  to  deterring  and  preventing
    serious crime generally and to  upholding  public  abhorrence  of  such
    offending (at paragraph 37).

21. In AD Lee [2011] EWCA Civ 348, Mr  Lee  was  a  32  year  old  Jamaican
    national who had been  deported  and  who  had  appealed  from  Jamaica
    against the refusal of the Home Secretary  to  revoke  the  deportation
    order. He initially entered the United Kingdom as a visitor in 1996 but
    was granted a variation to enable him to remain as a student. When this
    leave expired at the end of October 1999 he  overstayed,  but  at  some
    point  thereafter  left  the  country,  returning  in  April  2002  and
    absconding after securing temporary admission. He was however  arrested
    within three months for  having  a  forged  insurance  certificate.  In
    January 2003, having been removed to Jamaica, he re-entered the  United
    Kingdom on a false passport and within a  few  months  had  again  been
    arrested, this time for possession of class  A  drugs  with  intent  to
    supply. On pleas of guilty to ten counts he was sentenced on 3  October
    2003 to 7 years' imprisonment. In April 2006, while  still  in  prison,
    the appellant was served with notice of intention  to  deport  him.  He
    completed his sentence and following the final dismissal of his  appeal
    he was deported in November 2008. Whilst in prison  he  married  Rachel
    Lee with whom he had two daughters. It appears from the  evidence  that
    his relationship with his first  daughter  only  took  root  after  his
    release from prison. The younger child was unaffected by his departure.
    The wife established a small cleaning business when the  appellant  was
    in prison and his presence as a child-minder upon release  enabled  her
    to keep it going. The issue before the  Tribunal  was  whether  it  was
    proportionate to break the family up. The judge considered that despite
    the distress deportation would cause the  family,  it  was  appropriate
    because of the appellant's bad immigration history and his  criminality
    and because his wife was  aware  of  both  when  she  married  him.  In
    upholding his determination, the court found:

    27. The tragic consequence is that this family, short-lived as  it  has
    been, will be broken  up  for  ever  because  of  the  appellant's  bad
    behaviour. That is what deportation does. Sometimes the balance between
    its justification and its consequences falls the other way, but whether
    it does so is a question for an immigration judge.

22.  In SS (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 550 the  court  had  to  consider  the
    appeal against deportation of an appellant who had a relationship  with
    a British national and a young son. SS was convicted on three counts of
    supplying crack cocaine sentenced to three concurrent  terms  of  three
    years  imprisonment.  He  had  been  a  street  dealer.  An  antisocial
    behaviour order was imposed prohibiting him from entering Walsall  Town
    centre. In dismissing his case, the court took  note  of  Parliamentary
    endorsement of the new rules on deportation with the result  that  this
    gave the proportionality scales a markedly greater weight than in other
    cases and meant that only a very strong claim indeed could override the
    pressing nature of the public interest in the criminal's deportation.

23. While the interests of children whose lives will  be  affected  by  the
    deportation of a parent must be a primary consideration and  this  must
    also  be  so  when  the  Tribunal  considers  a  refusal  to  revoke  a
    deportation decision, I have had regard to  the  observations  of  Lady
    Hale in ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4 that  there  can  be  circumstances
    where  the  best   interests   of   children,   although   of   primary
    consideration, are not necessarily determinative.

24.  In making my findings I have had full regard to  the  evidence  before
    me, the submissions made, the applicable rules  and  the  law  and  the
    relevant jurisprudence.

25. At the time of the appellant's deportation the impact of her removal on
    A was considered; the appellant had been separated from her son by  her
    prison sentence as had her husband, the marriage had  seemingly  broken
    down, the child was in the care of foster parents and the appellant  as
    a foreign criminal who had committed a serious offence was deported.

26. The appeal before Judge Buckwell following on from  a  request  to  the
    Secretary of State to revoke the deportation order was  an  attempt  to
    reunite the family.  It was said much had changed. The father  was  now
    out of prison and had not reoffended. He would be a good  influence  on
    the appellant in ensuring she did not reoffend and the  best  interests
    of A required him to live with  both  of  his  parents  in  the  United
    Kingdom. The same arguments have been placed before me.

27. A has now spent 8 of his 11  years  in  foster  care.  The  appellant's
    husband has shown no interest in removing the child from foster care to
    live with him a decision undoubtedly in the best interests  of  A,  who
    will be settled where he is. It is submitted before me that  the  judge
    failed to take into account A's best interests where he is  continually
    separated from his mother or brought up by  his  father  alone  if  the
    originally temporary arrangement with the Godparents ceases.

28. Judge Buckwell had in mind the determination in the deportation  appeal
    in DA/00608/2009.   At  paragraphs  16-23  the  judge  in  that  appeal
    considered the interests of the Secretary of State in  the  appellant's
    deportation in the context of her relationship with her young son (then
    aged 6). Although the determination does not specifically  mention  the
    phrase "best interests" it is clear the judge had them in mind and gave
    careful consideration to the arrangements for the  care  of  A  or  the
    alternative choice of taking A to Jamaica by his mother (his father was
    still in prison at the time of the appeal).

29. Judge Buckwell carefully considered the best interests  of  A  and  was
    satisfied that he was properly cared  for  and  there  was  appropriate
    local  government  support.  The  judge   noted   that   human   rights
    considerations were taken into account when the appellant was  deported
    and that it would only be in exceptional circumstances that the  public
    interest in maintaining the deportation order would  be  outweighed  by
    other factors.

30. Judge Buckwell properly found on  the  evidence  before  him  that  the
    circumstances presented did not constitute changes of such significance
    from the circumstances which subsisted when the original order was made
    and they did not in any event constitute exceptional circumstances.

31. Overall the findings reached by Judge Buckwell were open to him on  the
    evidence before him and the Grounds  of  Appeal  do  not  disclose  any
    arguable error of law. I am in agreement  with  the  submission  of  Mr
    Jarvis that the Grounds are a disagreement with  the  findings  of  the
    judge and an attempt to reargue the appeal.







Conclusions


    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

     I do not set aside the decision


Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.  However
    as this determination refers to  a  young  child  and  the  appellant's
    husband I make an order for  anonymity  pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal() Rules 2008.




Signed                              2 October 2014


Judge E B Grant

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

