
IAC-YW-LM-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/18317/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 January 2015                             |On 29 January 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GIBB


                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - Nigeria
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Emmanuel Bashiru
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    None (neither the sponsor nor the representative
attended)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an entry clearance appeal that was allowed at  the  First-tier.
    For clarity and convenience, however, I will refer to  the  parties  as
    they were before the First-tier.

2.   The appellant had been refused entry clearance to join his wife in  the
    UK.  By the time of  the  appeal  hearing  all  aspects  of  the  entry
    clearance refusal had been conceded  apart  from  one,  which  was  the
    requirement for the appellant to show that he  had  passed  an  English
    language test, to the Common  European  Framework  level A1,  with  an
    approved provider.  Following a hearing at Taylor House on 18 September
    2014, at which both parties were represented, the appeal was allowed on
    Article 8 grounds by First-tier Tribunal Judge Abebrese.  Permission to
    appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lambert, on 3  December
    2014.

3.   On the day of the hearing before me there was  no  appearance  for  the
    appellant and the sponsor.   An  attempt  was  made  to  telephone  the
    representatives, Obadiah Rose Solicitors, but there was no answer.  The
    file showed that notice of hearing had been sent to the sponsor at  her
    home address, and to the solicitors (by first class post on 10 December
    2014).  There was nothing on the file to indicate  that  these  notices
    had not arrived.  The parties were also  sent  standard  directions  in
    advance of the hearing.

4.   Being satisfied that notices of hearing had been properly  served,  and
    also being satisfied that the grant of permission to  appeal  had  been
    properly served, along with directions, I decided to proceed  with  the
    hearing in the absence of the appellant's representative,  there  being
    no explanation for this absence.

5.   At the start of the hearing I indicated to Mr Avery that I  had  formed
    the view that there were clear errors of law in the  judge's  decision,
    and that it would have to be set aside.   The  judge  had  allowed  the
    appeal on Article 8 grounds, but at paragraph 6 of  the  decision,  had
    referred to the appellant as if he were in the  UK,  despite  the  fact
    that this was an entry clearance appeal.  It was also  clear  that  the
    judge  had  considered  submissions   from   both   sides   about   the
    admissibility of the second  English  language  test,  but  instead  of
    deciding this issue, he had for some reason  proceeded  directly  to  a
    consideration of Article 8.

6.   In relation to a remaking  of  the  decision  in  the  appeal  I  heard
    submissions from Mr Avery.  I raised with him the question of whether a
    later English language test, said to comply with the requirements,  was
    admissible, and whether there was any reason that it could not lead  to
    the appeal being allowed.  His submissions were as follows.  There  was
    a six month gap between the decision and the later English test.  As  a
    result it could not be taken  to  show  what  the  appellant's  English
    ability had been at the date of decision.  Six months was a long  time,
    and it was not possible to extend back to the date  of  decision.   The
    requirements had been set out  initially.   The  appellant  could  have
    obtained the correct test the first time round.   They  should  now  be
    required to put in a further application.  At the time of the  decision
    their application was clearly deficient.

Decision and Reasons

7.   In remaking the decision I have decided to allow the appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules.

8.   The decision was made on 2 September  2013.   In  the  refusal  various
    points were made, but in relation to the English language test  it  was
    suggested that the actual certificate, referred to in the  application,
    had not been submitted.  This appears to have been  contested,  but  in
    any event  it  was  subsequently  submitted.   This  first  certificate
    related to an ESOL English language test by Edexcel, which  was  passed
    in February 2013, some months before the decision, at  entry  level  3.
    According to the Home Office guidance this equates to  CEFR  level  B2,
    significantly above the A1 level required  for  entry  clearance  by  a
    partner.

9.   The review conducted by an Entry Clearance Manager on 6  December  2013
    rejected this certificate on the basis that Edexcel did not feature  as
    one of the approved providers on the relevant list.

10.  The second English language certificate was an IELTS  test,  passed  at
    an overall band score of 5.5.  This was issued by the  British  Council
    in Abuja, Nigeria, and the certificate also refers to Cambridge English
    Language Assessment.  It has been accepted that this meets all  of  the
    requirements, and that the provider was on the relevant list.   In  the
    guidance the 5.5 overall band score is equivalent to CEFR B2, the  same
    level as was achieved in the Edexcel test, and well above the A1  level
    required.

11.   This  was  not  a  points-based  appeal.   There  was   therefore   no
    restriction on considering evidence that was  not  submitted  with  the
    application.   In  remaking  the  decision  I  can  therefore  consider
    evidence if it relates to the circumstances appertaining at the time of
    the decision.  This is set out as Exception 1 within section 85A of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

12.  There is some unresolved tension between Appendix FM-SE, which  appears
    to introduce an element in entry clearance appeals not  unlike  points-
    based  appeals,  with  the   additional   evidential   restriction   on
    considering anything not submitted with the application, and  the  2002
    Act; but if there is some tension it appears to me that  the  statutory
    provision  at  section  85A  of  the  2002  Act  must   prevail.    The
    consequence, it seems to  me,  is  that  the  second  English  language
    certificate is admissible evidence in the appeal.  It  further  appears
    to me that it does relate to the  circumstances  at  the  time  of  the
    decision.  The main argument to the contrary by Mr Avery rested on  the
    idea  that  the  appellant's  English  ability   could   have   changed
    significantly in a six month period.

13.  I have considered this point, which might be a  sound  one  in  certain
    cases, but on the evidence in this case it does not  appear  to  me  to
    hold good.  The only challenge to the first test was that it was not on
    the relevant list, and the test is not challenged  in  any  other  way.
    There does not  therefore  appear  to  be  any  reason  to  reject  the
    information contained in it, namely that the appellant  achieved  entry
    level 3 in ESOL.  As I have said above, this is well above the required
    CEFR level.  It is also the same CEFR level as the  IELTS  score.   The
    available evidence therefore indicates that there was no change in  the
    appellant's English language ability between February 2013, some months
    before the decision, and March 2014, a few  months  after  the  review.
    Even if the first certificate is disregarded entirely  it  is  unlikely
    that the appellant could have progressed in six  months  from  a  level
    below CEFR A1 to CEFR B2.

14.  For these reasons I can see no proper basis to  require  the  appellant
    to submit a further application.  It may well be that the  restrictions
    on providers are entirely justified, but it  appears  to  me  that  the
    second  test  is  admissible  evidence  showing  not  only   that   the
    appellant's English language ability was well above that required,  and
    that this was, on balance, also the case at the date of  decision;  but
    also that he has now complied with the detailed  requirements  that  he
    should provide a certificate from an approved  provider.   Requiring  a
    further application in these circumstances does not appear to me to  be
    justified, because the second certificate is admissible  evidence  that
    meets the requirements, and is concerned with the situation at the date
    of decision. If the submissions on this point at the First-tier hearing
    had been properly addressed this may have been the outcome, but  it  is
    unfortunate  that  they  were  not,  through  jumping  directly  to   a
    consideration of Article 8.  Since this error has caused a  significant
    delay it would not be an attractive prospect,  in  fairness  terms,  to
    have to require a further application, leading to yet  more  delay,  in
    any event.

15.  It has not been suggested that there is any need for anonymity in  this
    appeal.  I have decided, despite allowing the appeal  in  remaking  it,
    not to make a fee award, on the basis that the correct certificate  was
    not provided until after the Entry Clearance Manager's review.

Notice of Decision

The judge's decision allowing the appeal on Article 8 grounds is set  aside,
it having been found to contain material  errors  on  points  of  law.   The
decision is remade as follows.

The appeal is allowed under the Immigration Rules.



Signed        Date 29 January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Gibb


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Despite having allowed the appeal I have  decided,  for  the  reasons  given
above, not to make any fee award.



Signed        Date 29 January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Gibb
