
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/18627/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 July 2015                      |On 25 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

               DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL K DRABU CBE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                             MRS RUKSHANA BEGUM
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Fujiwala, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr I Islam of Citylink, Solicitors.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Judge Quinn of the First Tier Tribunal following a  hearing  at  Hatton
    Cross on 17 March 2015  allowed  the  appeal  of  the  respondent.  The
    respondent is a citizen of Bangladesh whose date of birth is  given  as
    12 June 1991. On 18 June 2014 her  application  for  a  Certificate  of
    Entitlement to the Right of Abode in UK as child of the late Mosrab Ali
    was refused by the appellant for reasons given in the  letter  of  that
    date. Judge  Quinn  gave  reasons  for  allowing  the  appeal  and  his
    determination was promulgated on 7 April 2015. He heard  oral  evidence
    and also received documentary evidence.

 2. In a detailed and comprehensive determination the Judge  explained  why
    he had allowed the appeal despite his doubts about genuineness  of  the
    respondent's birth certificate.  On  4  June  2015  the  appellant  was
    granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal by Judge Ransley,  a
    Judge of the First Tier Tribunal who  concluded  upon  the  grounds  of
    appeal tendered by the appellant that owing to the  doubts  that  Judge
    Quinn  expressed  about  the  genuineness  of  the  respondent's  birth
    certificate, his decision to allow the appeal was arguably in  material
    error of law.

 3. At the hearing before me, Ms Fujiwala representing the appellant argued
    that an applicant for Certificate of Entitlement to the Right of  Abode
    was required to produce a "genuine" certificate of  birth  and  without
    the production of such document the application could not get  off  the
    ground. She argued that the production of  DNA  evidence  to  establish
    relationship was not enough especially since the DNA report, which  had
    been submitted, was not a complete document since  a  page  of  it  was
    missing.  Upon  further  examination  of  the  documents,  Ms  Fujiwala
    accepted that the DNA Report was full and no page thereof was missing.

 4. Mr Islam representing the respondent argued that the First  Tier  Judge
    had carried out a full and fair review of the facts and had come to the
    conclusion that he was entitled to.  He  submitted  that  the  relevant
    regulation required production of  birth  certificate.  The  regulation
    does not require the birth certificate to be  "genuine".  Whilst  Judge
    Quinn had  expressed  his  doubts  about  the  veracity  of  the  birth
    certificate, he had not found the birth certificate to be  a  false  or
    fabricated document. He  argued  that  the  grounds  submitted  by  the
    appellant as well as the oral arguments advanced by Ms Fujiwala had not
    established a material error of law and the appeal  must  therefore  be
    dismissed.

 5. I have given careful consideration to the determination of Judge Quinn.
    I note that the Judge has carried out a detailed analysis  of  all  the
    relevant facts. The Judge has taken account of the history of the  case
    as is evident from paragraphs 15 and 16 of his determination. The Judge
    noted that the appellant's previous application had been refused on  26
    October 2010 as "doubts had been expressed about the birth  certificate
    produced on that occasion. The relationship to Mosrab Ali was doubted."
    The Judge noted his concerns about the birth  certificate  produced  to
    support the application in  the  case  before  him  and  correctly  and
    properly referred to the decision in the  case  of  Tanveer  Ahmed  IAT
    [2002] UKIAT. He also noted that in  the  application  which  had  been
    refused and which  was  the  subject  of  the  appeal  before  him  was
    supported by a report on DNA tests.

 6. The Judge carried out a full  analysis  of  the  DNA  test  report  and
    concluded that although "the DNA evidence was not as clear and complete
    as it could have been but applying the balance of probabilities test  I
    make the finding that Shezlu and Appellant are half siblings and  share
    the same father Mosrab Ali." This finding was perfectly legitimate  and
    was open to the Judge Quinn to make.

 7. The argument that an application for Certificate of Entitlement  cannot
    succeed unless it is accompanied by a "genuine" birth  certificate  has
    no basis in law or indeed common sense. It is a  mandatory  requirement
    that an application should be accompanied by a full  birth  certificate
    of the applicant. There is no mention of the word  "genuine".  In  this
    case a birth certificate was submitted with the application setting out
    the requisite particulars.  The Judge did not rule out that document as
    not being non compliant with the requirement.

 8. I should like to note that there are countries whose nationals are  not
    able to produce birth certificates because the  local  requirements  do
    not require such documents  to  be  made.  There  are  countries  where
    registration of births and deaths is by comparative analysis  a  recent
    phenomenon and is not enforced as diligently as one would expect in the
    western world. Bangladesh is or certainly was one of such countries.

 9. If the requirement were to prove that a  supporting  birth  certificate
    was "genuine" it would lead to difficult  and  unfairly  discriminatory
    consequences for the nationals of countries like  Bangladesh.  In  this
    particular case the Judge did not find the birth certificate  to  be  a
    false document. He noted the  features  that  made  the  document  less
    reliable but at the same time the Judge  correctly  and  lawfully  took
    account  of  the  DNA  results,  which   supported   the   respondent's
    application. I should also note that at the hearing before  me  it  was
    accepted by  Ms  Fujiwala  that  the  DNA  report  submitted  with  the
    application had not been incomplete as had been  previously  suggested.
    No page of the report  had  been  missing.  The  DNA  results  provided
    compelling evidence of relationship of the respondent to  her  deceased
    British citizen father.

10. I find that the decision of Judge Quinn to  allow  the  appeal  of  Mrs
    Rukhsana Begum was not in material error  of  law  and  must  therefore
    stand. As a consequence so must his order on award of fees.


Judge K Drabu CBE
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal.
21 August 2015

