
IAC-AH-KEW-V2
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/18641/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 19th February 2015                         |On 15th May 2015              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                       MRS THARGIKA DENI MOWLEETHARAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Sharma, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born  on  30th  November  1981.
    The Appellant had applied  for  entry  clearance  as  a  partner  under
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.  Her application was  refused  by
    the Secretary of State on 5th September 2013.  The  Appellant  appealed
    and the appeal came before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Cohen
    sitting at Taylor House  on  2nd  October  2014.   In  a  determination
    promulgated on 7th October 2014  the  Appellant's  appeal  was  allowed
    under the Immigration Rules.  The Secretary of State lodged Grounds  of
    Appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  on  7th  October  2014.   Those  grounds
    submitted that the  Tribunal  had  erred  by  finding  that  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer was wrong to  consider  the  Appellant's  application
    under paragraph EC-P1.1 and E-ECP4.5 of Appendix FM of the  Immigration
    Rules and should have considered the application under  the  provisions
    of the family reunion requirements.  It was submitted that the Tribunal
    was incorrect in this  assessment  as  was  the  Secretary  of  State's
    Presenting Officer and that the  application  was  assessed  under  the
    correct Immigration Rules as  the  Sponsor  had  been  granted  refugee
    status in March 2010 but the Sponsor and the Appellant had not  married
    until 23rd May 2012 in India.  The  Grounds  of  Appeal  make  detailed
    reference to paragraph  352A  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  it  was
    submitted that the Tribunal had consequently erred as the Appellant and
    Sponsor did not marry until after the Sponsor left to seek  asylum  and
    therefore the findings of fact were flawed.

 2. On 12th January 2015 Upper Tribunal Judge Deans granted  permission  to
    appeal.  Judge Deans noted  that  the  application  for  permission  to
    appeal contended that the application  was  properly  considered  under
    Appendix FM and that the application did not  fall  within  the  family
    reunion provisions in paragraph  352A  for  the  reasons  stated  above
    namely that the Appellant and Sponsor were married  after  the  Sponsor
    left his country of former habitual residence to seek asylum.

 3. It is on that basis that the appeal comes before me.  This is an appeal
    by the Secretary of State.  For  the  purpose  of  ensuring  continuity
    within the proceedings Mrs Mowleetharan is referred to  herein  as  the
    Appellant and the Secretary of State as the Respondent.  The  Appellant
    appears by her instructed Counsel Mr Sharma.   Mr  Sharma  is  familiar
    with this matter having appeared before the First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    Secretary of State appears by her Home Office Presenting  Officer  Miss
    Pal.

Submissions/Discussion

 4. I am greatly assisted in this matter  by  the  concession  made  by  Mr
    Sharma that the Grounds of Appeal which I have recited in  some  detail
    above are made out and that the Appellant  accepts  that  there  is  an
    error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  However
    he indicates he is not instructed to concede the appeal and  that  that
    must be left to the Tribunal but that he has nothing further to add.

 5. Miss Pal does no more than rely on the  Grounds  of  Appeal  indicating
    that they set out clearly the Secretary of State's position.

The Law

 6.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

 7. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

 8. To a certain extent the First-tier Judge  was  led  down  a  course  of
    action for which he cannot in any way be criticised.  It is clear  from
    paragraph 8 of his decision that due to the error of  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer, which Mr Sharma acknowledges that he  supported  at
    that time, that the judge was  invited  to  allow  the  appeal  to  the
    limited  extent  of  remitting  the  decision  to  the  Respondent  for
    reconsideration under the family reunion provisions.

 9. Paragraph 352A of the Immigration Rules requires that

    (a)  The requirements be met by a person  seeking  leave  to  enter  or
         remain in the United Kingdom as the spouse or civil  partner  of  a
         refugee are that:

         (b)(i)   the applicant is married to or  the  civil  partner  of  a
             person who currently holds  refugee  granted  status  as  such
             under the Immigration Rules in the United Kingdom; and

         (ii) the marriage or civil partnership did not take place after the
             person granted asylum left the country of his former  habitual
             residence in order to seek asylum.

10. It is clear from the factual matrix in this matter that  the  Appellant
    and Sponsor were married after the Sponsor left his country  of  former
    habitual residence to seek asylum and consequently the correct approach
    in this matter which both parties agree to is to find that there  is  a
    material error of law in the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal,  to
    set aside that decision and to remit the matter to be re-heard.  It  is
    agreed with the parties and the court administration  that  that  remit
    will take place at Taylor  House  on  14th  August  2014  with  a  time
    estimate of two hours.

Decision and Directions

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of  law
and is set aside.   The  matter  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
sitting at Taylor House on Friday 14th  August  2015  with  an  ELH  of  two
hours.

None of the findings of fact are to  stand.   Leave  is  granted  to  either
party to file and serve an up-to-date bundle of evidence  and  any  skeleton
arguments and/or authorities upon which they intend to rely at  least  seven
days pre-hearing.  A Tamil interpreter is required.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
