

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/18769/2012



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Laganside Courts Centre, Belfast     |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10 January 2014                            |On 30 January 2014           |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |...........                  |


                                   Before

                  The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey, President

                                   Between

                               MR YUNME KISMET
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ISTANBUL

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Mrs O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1.     This appeal was listed for hearing at  Laganside  Courts  Complex,
      Belfast on 10th January 2014.  The Appellant did not  appear,  he  was
      unrepresented (in contrast with the hearing  at  first  instance)  and
      there was no communication of any kind to the Tribunal on his  behalf.
      Telephone  enquiries  undertaken  by  the  Tribunal's   administrative
      personnel yielded no information.  Having stood  the  appeal  over  on
      10th January 2014, I received the representations of the  Respondent's
      representative, Mrs O'Brien, on  the  second  of  the  two  successive
      arranged days of hearing at this centre, on 13 January  2014.   I  now
      proceed to determine the appeal on its merits.

   2.     This appeal originates in an unsuccessful application for an entry
      clearance visa by Yunme Kismet  (hereinafter  "the  Appellant").   The
      Appellant is, according to the evidence, married  to  Margaret  Ingrid
      Crawford (hereinafter "the sponsor"). The application for a settlement
      visa was made on 28th June 2012.  This resulted in a refusal  decision
      of the Entry Clearance Officer ("the ECO"), dated 3rd September  2012.
      This decision was subsequently  affirmed,  on  review,  by  the  Entry
      Clearance Manager, on 26th February 2013.

   3.     The gist of the ECO's refusal was that  the  application  did  not
      satisfy the requirements of paragraph 281 of  the  Immigration  Rules.
      On appeal, the First-tier Tribunal  ("the  FtT")  made  the  following
      material findings:

        a)    The Appellant and the sponsor are validly married.


        b)    The marriage is subsisting.


        c)    The Northern Ireland Housing Executive ("NIHE"), landlord  of
           the dwelling house in which the sponsor resides  with  her  four
           children, would probably permit the Appellant to reside there.


        d)     However,  there  is  no  evidence  that  this  property   is
           "certified  to  be  suitable  and  would  not  be   subject   to
           overcrowding", given particularly the absence  of  a  surveyor's
           report.


        e)    The Appellant will require recourse to public funds in  order
           to be maintained.


        f)    There is a job available to the Appellant in  Leicestershire,
           England, in a Turkish fast food business.


        g)    However, if the Appellant were to take up this job, he  would
           not have the financial means to visit the sponsor.

    Having made these findings,  the  Judge  then  expressed  the  following
    conclusion:


         "For these reasons I am satisfied that the  Appellant  cannot  meet
         the requirements under the Immigration Rules to be admitted to join
         his spouse for settlement."

4.   This was followed by the Judge's assessment of  the  Appellant's  claim
      under Article 8 ECHR, which was thus:

        a) The impugned decision of the ECO interferes with the exercise of
           the Appellant's right to respect for his family life.

   b) This interference is in accordance with the law.

        c) The interference is proportionate, having regard to the  Judge's
           earlier finding of the projected reality of family life for  the
           Appellant and his spouse in the event of him being  admitted  to
           the United Kingdom.  Quite simply, he would not be a present  or
           active family member.  Thus the interference is proportionate to
           the legitimate aim of immigration control.

     The Judge expanded on his reasoning in the following passage:


           "....  If a secure and valid job and employment could  be  found
           for the Appellant in Northern Ireland close in proximity to  the
           proposed accommodation (that) a fresh application would, in  all
           probability, succeed."

   5.     In granting permission to appeal,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Rintoul
      identified two arguable errors of law on the part of the Judge:

      (a) Misdirection regarding the suitability of accommodation in failing
           to have due regard to the statutory over crowding provisions  of
           the Housing Act 1986.


      (b) Misdirection in finding that the  Appellant  would  not  have  the
           funds to visit the sponsor, rather than determining the issue of
           whether the Appellant  could  be  supported  adequately  without
           recourse to public funds.

   6.     As regards the first of the two permitted grounds of appeal,  this
      Tribunal would observe that the Housing Act 1986  does  not  apply  to
      Northern Ireland.   In  this  jurisdiction,  housing  has,  since  the
      creation  of  the  state  of  Northern  Ireland,  consistently   been,
      constitutionally, a so-called "transferred" matter.   Accordingly, the
      competent legislature is the devolved one and Northern Ireland has its
      own separate body of housing legislation. While this  is  the  correct
      legal  and  constitutional  position,  this   Tribunal   received   no
      considered argument from either party on the  relevant  provisions  of
      Northern Irish legislation.  Given my evaluation of the second  ground
      of appeal, and taking into account  the  absence  of  any  adversarial
      argument, I decline to explore this discrete ground further.

   7.     By virtue of the requirements contained in the Immigration  Rules,
      it was incumbent on the Judge to consider the question of whether  the
      Appellant could be supported adequately  without  recourse  to  public
      funds and to make findings accordingly.  My analysis  of  the  Judge's
      findings in this respect is set out in paragraph [3] above.

   8.     The Judge is to be commended for the demonstrable  care  which  he
      exercised in compiling his determination.  However,  I  consider  that
      there  is  a  significant  incompatibility  between  the  finding,  in
      paragraph [16], that the Appellant "could only be  maintained  without
      recourse to further public funds" and the finding, albeit expressed in
      less cogent terms, but readily implicit  in  paragraph  [17]  -  [26],
      considered in their entirety, that if admitted to the  United  Kingdom
      the Appellant will be employed at the minimum wage level and will have
      meals provided to him free of charge.  I further consider  that  these
      incompatible findings  give  rise  to  the  conclusion  that  the  FTT
      determination, in this important respect, is infected by an  error  of
      law  the materiality whereof is incontestable.

   9.     There is also a demonstrable incompatibility between  the  Judge's
      finding that the Appellant "could only be maintained without  recourse
      to further public funds" (on the one hand) and his  separate  finding,
      in the  Article  8  ECHR  assessment  which  he  conducted,  that  the
      Appellant would be living apart from  his  family,  elsewhere  in  the
      United Kingdom: where, on the basis of another  separate  finding,  he
      would be self sufficient by virtue of his employment  and  subsistence
      arrangements.




  10.     Mrs O'Brien, representing the ECO, was disposed to acknowledge the
      shortcomings in the decision of the FtT outlined above.   Mrs  O'Brien
      further drew attention to the absence of any specific  finding  as  to
      whether the marriage between the parties was subsisting.

  11.     There is a further aspect of the FTT determination which  must  be
      highlighted.  In paragraph [29] the Judge stated:

           "Also of concern but to a lesser extent was  the  imposition  of
           potential overcrowding at the proposed accommodation.  This  may
           have a  detrimental  effect  upon  the  health  and  educational
           wellbeing of the minor children.   Although  not  a  determining
           factor, it was one that I took into account."

      This assessment, with respect,  is  irreconcilable  with  the  Judge's
      earlier clear finding that the Appellant, in  the  event  of  securing
      settlement to enter the United  Kingdom,  would  work  and  reside  in
      Leicestershire and would not have the  means  to  travel  to  Northern
      Ireland, where the relevant accommodation is situated.


DECISION

  12.     For the reasons elaborated above this is, therefore, one of  those
      cases falling within the compass of the principles enunciated  by  the
      House of Lords in Edwards -v - Bairstow [1956] AC 15.  Errors  of  law
      have been demonstrated and the decision of the FtT cannot, accordingly
      be sustained.   It must, therefore, be set aside and remade.

  13.     Bearing in mind that, on appeal, decisions of this  kind  must  be
      made on the basis of the information  available  to  the  ECO  at  the
      material time, I proceed to remake the decision.  Having regard to the
      errors of law in the Determination of the  FtT  outlined  above  I  am
      satisfied that the Appellant's initial appeal should have been allowed
      under the Immigration Rules.  This, accordingly, is my decision.

  14.     I allow the Appellant's appeal under the  Immigration  Rules.   It
      follows that, subject to anything of an unexpected or novel nature, it
      will be incumbent  on  the  ECO  to  grant  the  Appellant  the  entry
      clearance for settlement visa for which he originally applied.




                                                 [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                                                     Dated:  30 January 2014















