

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/19819/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination issued                 |
|On 20 January 2015                   |On 21 January 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            PONNUTHURAI SIVANTHAN
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr T D Ruddy, of Jain, Neil & Ruddy, Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are as described above, but the rest of this  determination
    refers to them as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka and a refugee in  Germany.   He
    applied to enter the UK as the spouse of a refugee under Part 11 of the
    Immigration Rules.  The ECO refused that application for the  following
    reasons:

         (i) his wife is a UK citizen and does not have refugee status;

         (ii) there was insufficient evidence of maintaining a  family  unit
         with his wife and two children (both also lawfully in the UK),  and
         the children are adults;

         (iii) there were doubts whether marriage is subsisting;

         (iv) there is no provision under  the  European  Agreement  on  the
         Transfer of Responsibility for Refugees  (EATRR)  for  transfer  of
         status;

         (v) the appellant sought exercise of discretion in his favour,  but
         had not applied under the Immigration Rules as a spouse; and

         (vi) the outcome was proportionate under Article 8 of the ECHR.

 3. The findings made on appeal by First-tier Tribunal Judge Quigley in her
    determination promulgated on 17 July 2014 may be summarised thus:

         (i) despite some problems with the evidence, the appellant did have
         an ongoing relationship with his wife and children;

         (ii) he was left in limbo;

         (iii) he had made a spouse application;

         (iv) the respondent always had a discretion outside the Rules;

         (v) there was a good arguable case outside the Rules;

         (vi) the family was broken up for reasons outside its control; and

         (vii)  the  interference  for  purposes  of  effective  immigration
         control was disproportionate.

    She dismissed the appeal under the Rules but allowed it under Article 8
    of the ECHR.

 4. The ECO's grounds of appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  are  along  these
    lines:

         (i) the Judge  erred  by  allowing  the  appeal  on  an  Article  8
         standalone basis and failing to  have  regard  to  the  Rules  when
         making the Article 8 assessment;

         (ii) there were no arguably good  grounds  for  leave  outside  the
         Rules, and no compelling circumstances not sufficiently  recognised
         under the Rules;

         (iii) there was no family life for Article  8  purposes  among  the
         appellant and his adult sons, there being no evidence  of  anything
         more than the normal emotional ties;

         (iv) the appellant could apply for  entry  clearance  as  a  spouse
         under Appendix FM of the Rules;

         (v) the appellant's wife could travel between the UK and Germany as
         she wishes;

         (vi) if the Judge had properly directed  herself,  she  would  have
         dismissed the appeal.

 5.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Chohan  granted  permission  to   appeal,
    observing that the Judge did not appear  to  have  considered  why  the
    appellant could not apply as a spouse under the Rules.

 6. Submissions for ECO.  The application under paragraph 352A of the Rules
    was bound to fail on the simple point that the  appellant's  wife  does
    not have refugee status.  It is  now  trite  law  that  examination  of
    Article 8 must begin with the Rules, which in this case means the Rules
    for admission of spouses [Appendix FM, not Part 11].  Those  provisions
    are compliant with Article 8 for almost all cases.   The  determination
    ignores those provisions entirely.  The Judge was bound to examine that
    before she could even consider going outside the Rules.  In  the  light
    of ground (i), the Judge had no reason to embark  upon  a  freestanding
    proportionality assessment, and ground (ii) was not just  disagreement.
    There was also a lack of reasoning for taking relations  with  the  two
    adult sons into account.  The ECO's decision did not interfere with the
    status quo of family life between husband and wife.  As an  EU  citizen
    she could spend as much time with him in Germany as she chose. It would
    not have been possible for the Judge to apply the correct Rule  to  the
    facts because the appellant did not  bring  evidence  of  the  relevant
    facts.  It seemed likely there would be difficulties over the financial
    tests.   There  was  no  information   about   the   English   language
    requirement.  The case had sympathetic aspects but even at  highest  it
    did not justify going outside the Rules, as  compared  with  MM  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 985.  The determination should be reversed.

 7. Submissions for appellant.  It was (correctly) acknowledged  that  Part
    11 of the Rules and the EATRR had been incorrectly pursued by  previous
    agents, and offered no assistance to the appellant.  However, the Judge
    did refer to the Rules, for example at paragraphs 14  -15.   The  Judge
    had not been concerned only with the sympathetic aspects  of  the  case
    but had dealt with the facts before her.  Although the ECO had  doubted
    the subsistence of the  marriage  the  Judge  found  overwhelmingly  in
    favour  of  the  appellant,  for  good  reasons  which  were  not   now
    criticised.  Paragraphs 24 and 25 of Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31 (which
    underlies the ECO's ground (ii) ) should be read together:
         24. There is no presumption that a person has a family  life,  even
         with the members of a person's immediate family. The court  has  to
         scrutinise the relevant factors. Such factors  include  identifying
         who are the near relatives of the  appellant,  the  nature  of  the
         links between them and the appellant, the  age  of  the  appellant,
         where and with whom he has resided in the past, and  the  forms  of
         contact he has maintained with the other members of the family with
         whom he claims to have a family life.
         25. Because there is no presumption of family life, in my  judgment
         a family life is not established between an  adult  child  and  his
         surviving parent or other siblings  unless  something  more  exists
         than normal emotional ties: see S v United Kingdom [1984] 40 DR 196
         and Abdulaziz, Cabales and Balkandali v  United  Kingdom  [1985]  7
         EHRR 471. Such ties might exist if the appellant were dependent  on
         his family or vice versa. It is not, however,  essential  that  the
         members of the family should be in the same country. The  Secretary
         of State accepts that that possibility may exist,  although  in  my
         judgment it will probably be exceptional. Accordingly there  is  no
         absolute rule that there must be family life in the United Kingdom,
         as the Immigration Appeal Tribunal held.

    This case showed a stronger set of circumstances  than  Kugathas.   The
    Presenting Officer in the First-tier Tribunal had not argued  that  the
    Judge should not assess the case according to the criteria  of  Article
    8.   While the requirements of Appendix FM had not been addressed,  the
    appellant's wife works only part-time and it does  not  seem  that  the
    financial requirements could be met.  The lack of  reference  to  those
    requirements in the determination was not significant to  the  outcome.
    All the findings were in the appellant's favour so there was nothing to
    weigh against him.  The determination should stand.

 8. I reserved my determination.

 9. Appendix FM of the Rules begins with this:

         Purpose

         GEN.1.1. This route is for those seeking to enter or remain in  the
         UK on the basis of their family life with a person who is a British
         Citizen, is settled in the UK, or is in the UK with  limited  leave
         as a refugee or person granted  humanitarian  protection  (and  the
         applicant cannot seek leave to enter or remain in the UK  as  their
         family member under Part 11  of  these  rules).  It  sets  out  the
         requirements to be met and, in considering applications under  this
         route, it reflects  how,  under  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
         Convention, the balance will be struck between the right to respect
         for private and family life and the legitimate aims  of  protecting
         national security, public safety and the economic well-being of the
         UK; the prevention of disorder and crime; the protection of  health
         or morals; and the protection of the rights and freedoms of  others
         (and in  doing  so  also  reflects  the  relevant  public  interest
         considerations  as  set  out  in  Part  5A  of   the   Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002). ...

10. That general provision has to  be  read  in  light  of  the  subsequent
    jurisprudence.  Perhaps most pertinent in this case is that in  MM  the
    Court of Appeal held that the financial requirements in the  Rules  did
    interfere significantly with Article  8  rights,  but  that  the  Rules
    struck a fair balance in that respect, with which  the  Court  was  not
    entitled to interfere.

11. In this case the Judge appears to have thought that the  appellant  had
    applied as a spouse, rather than for refugee  family  reunion,  and  to
    have failed to appreciate clearly that there are distinct provisions in
    the Rules (see paragraphs 28 - 29).  The appellant does not now contend
    that he should have succeeded based on the Rule under which he applied.
     The Judge appears also to have  become  confused  between  matters  of
    discretion outside the Rules (over which the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    Upper Tribunal have  no  jurisdiction;  s.  86(6)  2002  Act)  and  the
    interaction of Article  8  of  the  ECHR  with  the  Rules  (see  again
    paragraph 29).  The grounds of appeal are correct to point out that any
    Article 8 assessment must begin with the Rules.  The appellant had  not
    made the relevant application, although that option was pointed out  by
    the ECO, and he did not try to bring his  case  on  appeal  within  the
    Rules for entry of spouses.  That omission is key.  Unless and until he
    has measured his case according to the Rules, the appellant cannot  say
    why he ought to succeed notwithstanding the  Rules.   Once  he  reaches
    that stage, he has to show  why  notwithstanding  the  Rules  including
    GEN.1.1 and in light of subsequent jurisprudence his case is one  where
    the Rules do not lawfully strike the balance.

12. The Judge erred in her legal approach.  Although Mr Ruddy did his  best
    to argue that the Article 8 consideration could stand on its  own,  the
    errors were material.  For example, the determination does not look  at
    the question of why the financial and English language requirements  of
    the Rules might be ignored.

13. In remaking the decision, this is not a case  where  relations  between
    the appellant and his adult children go  beyond  those  usually  to  be
    expected.  The relationship which is involved for Article 8 purposes is
    between husband and wife.  The decision means  that  they  cannot  live
    together permanently in the UK  but  it  does  not  alter  the  present
    situation, does not prevent visits and does not prevent the  wife  from
    spending as much time with her husband in Germany as she chooses.   The
    case has a sympathetic aspect but so do  all  situations  where  family
    members live apart wholly or partly because of the Rules.  However  the
    test is expressed, and whether it presents one or two stages, the facts
    of this case are not such that Article 8 requires the  grant  of  entry
    clearance to settle as a spouse notwithstanding the provisions  of  the
    Rules established to govern such situations.

14. The determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.   The
    following determination is  substituted:  the  appellant's  appeal,  as
    originally brought to the First-tier Tribunal, is dismissed.

15. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


         [pic]




         21 January 2015
         Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman

