
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/19134/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28 August 2013                             |On 23 September 2013         |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

                    ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ADDIS ABABA

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 OSMAN FARAH

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms H Horsley, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Gilbert instructed by Camden Community Law
Centre


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the Entry Clearance Officer, Addis  Ababa  against
    a decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing an appeal by Osman Farah
    against a decision made on 30 August 2012 refusing his application  for
    entry clearance as a spouse. In this determination I will refer to  the
    parties as they were the First-tier Tribunal, Mr Farah as the appellant
    and the Entry Clearance Officer as the respondent.

Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen  of  Somalia  born  on  10  June  1943.   He
    married his wife, the sponsor, in November 1972.  She has  been  living
    in the UK since July 2005.   She  joined  her  daughter  who  had  been
    granted refugee status in the UK under the family reunion  policy.   At
    that stage no application was made on behalf of the  appellant  as  her
    daughter did not have adequate accommodation for both  parents.   There
    are other children living in Somalia but they are now independent.  His
    daughter and son-in-law seek to sponsor the appellant so  that  he  can
    now be reunited with his wife.

3.   The appellant submitted an application for entry clearance online on  3
    July 2012.  He attended the visa application centre in Addis Ababa on 4
    July 2012 to complete his application but was told he needed to book an
    appointment online.  He paid someone to do this for him and  was  given
    an appointment on 20 July 2012.  When he attended that appointment,  he
    paid the specified fee.  The respondent treated the application as made
    on 20 July 2012 and determined it under HC395 as  amended  with  effect
    from 9 July 2012.  It was accepted at the hearing before the First-tier
    Tribunal that the appellant could not  meet  those  rules  but  it  was
    argued that his application had been  made  or  should  be  treated  as
    having been made on 3 July 2012  and,  in  the  light  of  transitional
    provisions, should have been considered under the  provisions  of  para
    281 of HC 395, which otherwise ceased to have effect from 9 July 2013.

4.   The date of application is determinative of the outcome of this  appeal
    under the rules because the First-tier Tribunal Judge  found  that  the
    appellant could meet the requirements of para 281 and that finding  has
    not been challenged.

5.   The judge dealt with the issue of when the application  had  been  made
    as follows:

         "30. An application is normally treated as having  been  'made'  at
             the time when  the  application  fee  is  paid.   Counsel  was
             unaware of any legal authority concerning a case such as this,
             where there is no facility for payment of the application  fee
             at the time when the  application  is  lodged  electronically.
             The respondent maintained that the application  was  not  made
             until 20 July 2012 when the appellant attended an  appointment
             to enrol his biometrics.


         31.   A  copy  of  the  application  form,  which  appears  in  the
             respondent's bundle  states  that  application  was  submitted
             online on 3 July 2012.  It contains the appellant's  signature
             at the end. This is dated '03/07/2012' but '03' is crossed out
             and replaced by '20'.  There is no evidence before  me  as  to
             who changed the dates or when either date  was  written.   The
             appellant claims that he was offered an appointment on 20 July
             2012, which he attended.  However, the respondent claimed that
             there were no delays at the visa  processing  centre  at  that
             time and that the appellant chose not to enrol his  biometrics
             until after 9 July 2012.


         32.  In the absence of any specific authority on this issue, I find
             that the application was made on 3 July  2012.   There  is  no
             evidence to support the respondent's claim that the  appellant
             could have attended and enrolled his  biometrics  prior  to  9
             July 2012.  Indeed the sponsor's evidence is that she and  her
             husband went to the visa processing centre on 4 July  2012  to
             confirm that the application had been received.  I accept this
             evidence  and  find  that  it   potentially   undermines   the
             respondent's claim that it was the appellant's choice  not  to
             enrol his biometrics (and pay the  application  fee)  after  9
             July 2012.  I agree with the appellant, that it is unfair  for
             his application to be treated as having been lodged on 20 July
             2012 when he had submitted online on 3 July 2012 and there was
             no opportunity for him  to  pay  a  fee  at  that  stage.   He
             attended on the date  and  time  appointed  and  there  is  no
             dispute that he paid  the  fee  and  provided  other  relevant
             information on that date and without delay."

6.   In the light of her findings that the requirements  of  para  281  were
    met, the judge went on to allow the appeal and having  found  that  the
    appellant met the requirements of the relevant rules  said  that  there
    was no need to go on and consider the appeal under article 8.

The Grounds and Submissions

7.   In the grounds it is argued that according to para  30  of  HC  395  an
    application for entry clearance is not made until any fee  required  to
    be paid under the Consular Fees Act has been paid;  that  the  position
    regarding the payment of fees and the validity  of  an  application  is
    clarified at [16]  of  BE  (application  fee:  effect  of  non-payment)
    Mauritius [2008] UKAIT 0089; that the judge erred in law  by  accepting
    that the application was made on 3 July 2012 when the fee was not  paid
    until 20  July  2012  and  consequentially  erred  by  considering  the
    application on the basis of rules which were only in place until 9 July
    2012.  The grounds further  argue  that  the  judge  erred  in  law  in
    accepting an offer of third party support from the appellant's  sponsor
    as  third  party  support  was  not  permitted  under   the   financial
    requirements of E-ECP 3.2 unless the  specified  evidence  set  out  in
    Appendix FM-SE was submitted.  However, that  ground  was  not  pursued
    before me as it relates to the provisions of Appendix  FM  and  in  any
    event it was conceded at the hearing that the appellant could not  meet
    the requirements of the rules in force from 9 July 2012 [29].

8.   Ms Horsley adopted the grounds.  She relied on  the  Tribunal  decision
    in Kaur (Entry Clearance - date of application) [2013] UKUT 00381 which
    confirmed that for an entry clearance application where there had  been
    an online application and a later delivery of  payment,  it  could  not
    reasonably be said that  the  online  application  was  accompanied  by
    payment: [36].  She further relied on BE which had held that except  in
    the case of cash payments, an application was accompanied by a fee  for
    the purpose of  the  relevant  regulation  if  it  was  accompanied  by
    authorisation as would  enable the respondent to receive the entire fee
    in  question  without  further  recourse  having  to  be  made  by  the
    respondent to the payer and relied at [16] on the  comment  that  there
    would in practice be a wide range of reasons  why  an  application  was
    unaccompanied by a fee, ranging from deliberate deceit or  omission  to
    innocent inadvertence and that any system  which  expressly  sought  to
    distinguish   between   various   kinds   of   failure   risked   being
    administratively unworkable.  She submitted that it could not be argued
    that there had been any procedural unfairness.  The appellant had  been
    advised to apply for an appointment, had done so and then  attended  on
    the given date of 20 July 2013.

9.   Mr Gilbert submitted that the determination in Kaur had to be  read  in
    the light of the determination in Basnet  (validity  of  application  -
    respondent) [2012] UKUT 00113, QB v Secretary of State [2010] EWHC  483
    (Admin) and Secretary of State v Raju [2013] EWCA Civ 754.   He  argued
    that the judge had been entitled to find that an unfair  procedure  had
    been followed.  The application had been submitted  online  on  3  July
    2012 but there was no procedure enabling him to make a  payment  online
    with the application.  He had gone the next day to the visa centre  and
    had been told that he should obtain an appointment.  The  only  one  he
    was offered fell after 9 July 2012.  He submitted that  the  respondent
    had failed to put into place a procedure enabling the appellant to make
    his payment with his application.  The Tribunal in Kaur had not had the
    benefit of the Court of Appeal's judgment in Raju, which held that  the
    rules made it clear that there was a specific date when an  application
    was made for the purposes of the rules.  He  submitted  that  Kaur  had
    been wrong to hold that an application not accompanied by a fee  was  a
    nullity  when  the  rules  made  specific  provision  about   when   an
    application was made.

Discussion

10.  The issue I must consider is whether the judge erred in law by  finding
    that the application had been made on 3 July 2012.  It is  provided  by
    para 30 of HC 395 that:

         "30. An application for an entry clearance is not  made  until  any
         fee required to be paid under the Consular Fees Act 1980 (including
         any regulations or orders made under that Act) has been paid."


    As pointed out in Kaur the date of application is defined in para 6  as
    follows:


         "Date of application means the date of the  application  determined
         in  accordance  with  paragraph  30  or  34G  of   the   rules   as
         appropriate".


    Kaur also refers to the Fees Order and the  Fees  Regulations  made  in
    2011.  In particular reg 37 of the Fees Regulation provides as follows:


         "37. Where an application to which these regulations refer is to be
        accompanied by a specified fee, the application is not validly made
        unless it has been accompanied by that fee."


11.  The Tribunal said at [36] -

         "In contrast where there has been an online application and a later
         delivery of payment, it cannot reasonably be said that  the  online
         application  is  accompanied  by  payment;  there  is  insufficient
         proximity in time.  It follows that in  this  scenario  the  online
         application is not accompanied by a payment, and so is  not  valid.
         An application which does not comply with a  statutory  requirement
         necessary for it to be valid is a nullity unless otherwise provided
         for.  That said an online application once printed out and  signed,
         then lodged with a payment would be accompanied by  a  fee  and  so
         would be a valid application."


12.  The Tribunal rejected an argument than an application could, where  the
    fee is paid later, be deemed to have been made when the form  was  sent
    as was a submission that para 34G (iv) could be  construed  to  include
    applications made overseas.  The position was summarised as follows  in
    [40]:

         "...i.   The date on which an application for  entry  clearance  is
             made is not effectively established by  paragraph  30  or  any
             other provisions of the Immigration Rules, and  has  therefore
             to be  established  by  reference  to  statute  and  secondary
             legislation;


          ii. An application for entry clearance that does not  comply  with
             the requirement  in  regulation  37  of  the  Immigration  and
             Nationality (Fees)  Regulations  2011  (SI  2011/1055)  to  be
             accompanied by payment of a fee is a nullity - it  is  not  an
             application for the purpose of the Immigration  Rules  or  any
             statutory provisions;


         iii. An application for entry clearance is  made  on  the  date  on
             which payment of the relevant fee is made.  If the application
             is made online, and payment of the relevant fee is  also  made
             online,  contemporaneously  with  submission  of  the   online
             application,  the  date  of  application  is   the   date   of
             submission.  If payment of the relevant fee is not made  until
             the  printed  application  form  is  submitted,  the  date  of
             application is the date on which those are handed over."

13.   The  basic  position  is  clear  from  para  30  of  HC  395  and  the
    determination in Kaur that an application for entry  clearance  is  not
    made until any fee required to be  paid  has  been  paid.   Mr  Gilbert
    argued that in the  light  of  the  Tribunal  decision  in  Basnet  the
    appellant had been a victim of  procedural  unfairness  as  he  had  in
    effect lost the opportunity of paying the fee before 9 July 2012.

14.  However, the appeal  in  Basnet  concerned  an  in-country  application
    where it was asserted that the relevant application fee  had  not  been
    paid and that there was therefore no valid appeal.  The  Tribunal  held
    that the judge in that case had erred by considering  that  non-payment
    for whatever reason even if the fault of the respondent  was  fatal  to
    the validity of the application and the subsequent appeal. It  was  the
    applicant's contention that he had submitted details  enabling  payment
    to be obtained by the respondent who said that the details provided did
    not match the information held by the bank.  The Tribunal was concerned
    about why the payment had failed.  It noted that payment might fail for
    many  reasons  and  that,  although  the  burden  of  proving  that  an
    application had been validly made would normally fall on  an  applicant
    in these circumstances, when the application was received in  time  the
    question of whether it was accompanied by accurate billing  data  could
    only be answered by the respondent.  For  this  reason  the  evidential
    burden of demonstrating that the application  was  not  accompanied  by
    such authorisation of the applicant or other person purporting  to  pay
    to enable the respondent to receive the fee in question  must  fall  on
    the respondent.

15.  The Tribunal then went on to consider what measures should  be  adopted
    to prevent similar disputes in the future.  It held that the absence of
    such measures or cogent reasons why they could  not  be  adopted  might
    well result in a decision that the consideration of the application had
    been unfair and therefore not in accordance with the law. The  judgment
    in QB does not take the  matter  any  further  as  it  deals  with  the
    application of a policy nor does Raju as this appeal concerns  para  30
    not para 34 of the rules.

16.  In the present case there is no  dispute  about  why  payment  was  not
    made.  The argument of unfairness is based on the assertion that  there
    was no method of sending an authorisation  to  take  payment  with  the
    online application and no opportunity of making payment before  9  July
    2012.  Although the application was made online on 3 July  2012,  there
    was no provision in the form enabling  payment  to  be  made  with  the
    application.   That  without  more  does  not  amount   to   procedural
    unfairness. The judge accepted that the appellant and the  sponsor  had
    attended the visa application centre the following  day  but  had  been
    advised to make an appointment.  This is not an unreasonable  procedure
    to follow.  The appellant then paid someone to do this for him but  the
    appointment given was 20 July 2013.  The appellant's grounds of  appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal say in ground 1  that  the  application  was
    submitted online and at the  same  time  he  was  obliged  to  make  an
    appointment to submit the fee and supporting  documents  to  enrol  his
    biometrics.  The earliest appointment that was offered was 20 July 2012
    which he attended.

17.  The only  evidence  about  what  other  appointments  might  have  been
    available come from the Entry Clearance Manager's comments. She said:

         "While  I  note  the  appellant's  comments  in  respect  that  his
         application should have been considered under the  old  Immigration
         Rules, he has provided no evidence to confirm he was not  given  an
         appointment to enrol his biometrics until 20 July 2012.  There were
         no known delays at that point  in  time  at  the  visa  application
         centre and it is considered it was the appellant's  choice  not  to
         enrol his biometrics until after 9 July".

18.  This really does  not  take  the  matter  any  further.   There  is  no
    indication of the usual waiting time for an appointment.  The most that
    can be  inferred  is  that  an  earlier  appointment  might  have  been
    available but on the other hand, if that was the case, there is  no  is
    no obvious reason why it was not offered. There is no reason to believe
    the appellant was deliberately given an appointment after 9  July  2012
    so the matter would be covered by the new rules  rather  than  the  old
    ones.  Generally, it does not seem unreasonable when  applying  for  an
    appointment on or after 4 July 2012 to be offered one on 20 July  2012.
    That is not suggestive of any unreasonable delay.  There is no evidence
    to suggest that when applying for his appointment any specific  request
    was made for an appointment before 9 July 2012 or that it was  refused.
    The judge's comment it was unfair for his application to be treated  as
    having been lodged on 20 July 2012 when he had submitted it online on 3
    July 2012 and that there was no opportunity for  him  to  pay  at  that
    stage would only be arguable  if  there  was  some  evidence  that  the
    appellant had in fact been deprived  of  an  opportunity  of  making  a
    payment before 9 July 2012 having specifically sought to do so.


19.  I am not  therefore  satisfied  that  there  has  been  any  procedural
    unfairness capable of supporting  an  argument  that  the  respondent's
    decision on when the application was made was not  in  accordance  with
    the law.  I am satisfied that the judge  erred  in  law  and  that  her
    decision should be set aside.  In the light of the concession  made  at
    the hearing that the appellant's claim  could  not  succeed  under  the
    amended rules the appeal must be dismissed on that ground.


Further Submissions

20.  In the light of the fact that  the  appeal  cannot  succeed  under  the
    rules, I heard further  submissions  in  relation  to  article  8.   Ms
    Horsley submitted that that refusal of entry clearance would not amount
    to a breach. Although the judge  accepted  that  there  was  a  genuine
    relationship between the appellant and the sponsor, there would  be  no
    interference with their specific family life as they had been living in
    different countries.  The family life they had enjoyed would  continue.
    This was a situation, so she argued, where the  appellant  and  sponsor
    were seeking to choose to reside in the UK but article 8 could  not  be
    used simply to give effect to a personal choice.  Financial  thresholds
    were set out in the rules which it  was  accepted  that  the  appellant
    could not meet.

21.  Mr Gilbert submitted that proper weight should be  given  to  the  fact
    that the  judge  had  found  that  the  maintenance  and  accommodation
    requirements of the previous rules were met.  To succeed under  article
    8  it  was  not  necessary  to  show  that   there   were   exceptional
    circumstances.  However in this case there were  features  which  could
    properly be described as exceptional: the sponsor had come  to  the  UK
    because their daughter needed help [25] when their child had meningitis
    [26].  He submitted that to require the sponsor to  return  to  Somalia
    for  family  life  to  be  continued   was    neither   necessary   nor
    proportionate to a legitimate aim.

Discussion

22.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge  accepted  that  the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor have been married since 1972 and that they have three children.
     The sponsor came to the UK in 2005 in order to help her daughter  look
    after her children.  In her witness statement dated 6  June  2013   the
    sponsor explains that her daughter gave birth to  her  first  child  in
    1998 but sadly when he was 2,  he  suffered  from  meningitis  and  had
    serious mental and physical disabilities as  a  result.   Subsequently,
    her daughter she had four more children and contacted  her  to  explain
    the difficulties she was having coping with the children and  for  this
    reason she applied to come to the UK.   She  also  explained  that  the
    appellant would soon be 70 and she was increasingly worried  about  his
    health and, as she got older, it was more difficult for her  to  travel
    to see him. She suffers from diabetes and has high  cholesterol.   When
    she does visit, she can only take two months' worth of medication  with
    her.

23.  I am satisfied that family life is engaged  and  that  the  refusal  of
    entry clearance amounts to an interference within  article  8(1).   The
    refusal of entry clearance is in accordance with  the  law  and  for  a
    legitimate aim within article 8(2).  The issue therefore is whether the
    refusal is necessary and proportionate to a legitimate aim.

24.  When assessing proportionality proper account  must  be  taken  of  the
    requirements of the rules  as  at  the  date  of  decision.   In  MS  v
    Secretary of State [2003] CSOH 81, Lord Brodie said that there could be
    no real doubt but that the respondent by securing that the  changes  to
    the rules were debated in both Houses of Parliament without any  formal
    expressions of disapproval must be taken to have  the  support  of  the
    legislature  for  her  approach  to  the  question  of   when   it   is
    proportionate to remove from the UK someone with no  right  to  remain.
    The position must be the same when assessing the  position  of  someone
    seeking to challenge a refusal of entry clearance as being in breach of
    article 8.

25.  Lord Brodie noted that in Huang [2007] 2 AC 167,  the  House  of  Lords
    had commented that those who would be entitled to succeed under article
    8 would be a very small minority  and  that  it  must  follow  now  the
    respondent had specifically  addressed  the  impact  of  article  8  in
    drafting changes to the rules  and  had  obtained  the  endorsement  of
    Parliament as to the proportionality of the way she had  done  so  that
    those who might now be expected to succeed under article 8 would  be  a
    very small minority indeed.

26.  The appellant is unable to meet the financial requirements of  the  new
    rules and cannot rely on third  party  support  save  in  circumstances
    prescribed in Appendix SM-SE.  I accept that  there  are  compassionate
    circumstances but  I  am  not  satisfied  that  they  are  sufficiently
    compelling to make the refusal  of  entry  clearance  disproportionate.
    The appellant and the sponsor have been living apart  since  July  2005
    and are unable to meet the  requirements  of  the  current  rules.  The
    refusal  of  entry  clearance  cannot  properly   be   categorised   as
    disproportionate to a legitimate  aim  and  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    refusal  of  entry  clearance  is  necessary  and  proportionate  to  a
    legitimate aim.

Decision

27.  The First-tier Tribunal erred in law. I set aside the decision.  I  re-
    make it by dismissing the appeal both under the immigration  rules  and
    under article 8.


Signed                                  Date: 20 September 2013
Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
