
[pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/19738/2013
                                                               OA/19851/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22nd July 2015                    |On 4th August 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                             MR JUSTICE KNOWLES
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                                   W U N A
                                   M F U A
                          (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISLAMABAD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E. W. Fripp and Ms A Nizami, counsel (pro bono)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.    The  central  question  that  came  substantively  before   First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Bradshaw on 10th September 2014 was whether two  of  the
    older children of Dr A, at that point aged 23 and 24, were  still  part
    of the family unit headed by Dr A and his wife and  comprising  also  a
    younger child.

2.   Dr A has refugee status and his wife and the younger child have  joined
    him in this country.  The  proceedings  concerned,  fundamentally,  the
    question whether the two older children are entitled to  join  them  as
    well. The family  were  originally  resident  in  Pakistan.  They  were
    Ahmadis.  Things developed to a point when Dr A was  required  to  flee
    the country and at that stage in circumstances to which I will  return,
    and the chronology here is not wholly clear, but the  position  of  the
    two elder children was that  they  were  still  studying  full-time  at
    colleges, one of medicine, one of computing, in Pakistan. This  was  an
    arrangement that saw them attending their place of study but  returning
    home at weekends and during the holidays.

3.   In the course of appropriately succinct  and  at  the  same  time  very
    helpful submissions from Ms Holmes for the Secretary of State,  it  was
    emphasised, rightly,  that  the  nub  of  the  matter  focuses  on  the
    relationships between the parents and the children. The submission made
    most shortly in reply by Mr Fripp, who appears with Ms Nazami  for  the
    two elder children as appellants, was that it was  impossible  to  tell
    from the reasoning of the Judge how he had  dealt  with  the  issue  of
    family life or whether there was still a family unit.  That is  not  to
    say that of course this was an  issue  untouched  by  the  reasons.  In
    particular paragraphs 39 and 40 of the reasons  address  very  sensibly
    the subject of financial support and pose the question whether the ties
    between the two adult children and their father or mother  went  beyond
    the normal ties that you would expect to see between parents on the one
    hand and adult children on the other hand, meaning there I think  adult
    children in any circumstances and of any age.

4.   However, the required treatment of the issue of family life is  on  the
    face of it  in  the  present  case  rather  more  involved  than  those
    paragraphs or indeed the totality of the decision would reveal.  It may
    be that some of the difficulty began when the Judge noted at  paragraph
    8 of his decision that at the outset of the  hearing  before  him  both
    representatives agreed that it  was  not  necessary  for  him  to  hear
    evidence but that this was described as being on  the  basis  that  the
    representative then appearing for  the  Secretary  of  State  "was  not
    accepting the position  of  the  appellants  [that  is  the  two  older
    children] not living independent lives in terms of the Rules".

5.   The documentation, none of which was tested by the hearing of  evidence
    in the case, includes material that suggests that the period  of  study
    of the two adult children began respectively in 2010 and 2007. For  the
    period of study beginning in 2007 the term of study  was  one  of  four
    years and thus on the face of it would have come to  an  end  in  2011.
    That is the year before Dr A had to leave Pakistan and two years before
    the decision of the Respondent and three years before the  decision  of
    the Judge.

6.   On examination of the statement of the  elder  child  who  was  on  the
    course beginning in 2007, it appears that she was  unable  to  continue
    with her studies in Pakistan - that being due to a threat to  her  life
    and from certain parties in Pakistan. That was a circumstance that  was
    not confined to her. The threat, in one form or another, was also faced
    by  her  brother.   It  is  not  clear  whether  by  the  date  of  the
    Respondent's decision she was still a student or was not,  and  if  she
    was still a student how that extended term of study came  about.   And,
    if she was not still a student, then what is also not clear is how this
    case could be examined successfully by the Judge in the way in which it
    was originally opened on this hearing before us by Mr Fripp, which  was
    as though it was a case about two adult children based at the  parental
    home but studying away from home and receiving financial and  emotional
    support from their parents and, on that continuing footing, claiming to
    be part of the family unit at the date of the Respondent's decision.

7.   We say a little bit more about the evidence of "oppression" to use  the
    term used  in  submissions  to  describe  the  environment  experienced
    initially by Dr A and now, on the face of their statements, experienced
    by the two children.  The Judge had, amongst other things, this to  say
    in that connection at paragraph 46 of his decision:

         "However  it  does  not  seem  to  me  that  the  Appellants   have
         established the claimed difficulties which they may  be  having  in
         Pakistan are relevant to the issue of an Article  8  claim  on  the
         basis of the adult children's relationship  which  they  have  with
         their father and with their mother."

8.    The  reference  to  difficulties  was,  it  appears,  a  reference  to
    paragraph 45 where there is a reference  to  persecution,  but  also  a
    cross-reference to paragraph 19 of  a  skeleton  argument,  which  also
    contained a cross-reference to witness statements before the Judge.  It
    is possible to argue that the oppression is a separate matter from  the
    central question which is whether there is a continuing family unit  or
    family life embracing the two elder adult  children.  But  it  is  also
    possible that this context of oppression is  relevant  to  the  central
    question, not least because of the potential impact in relation to  the
    study arrangements and behind those the support that  was  or  was  not
    being given to the children depending on whether they were or were  not
    studying.

9.   In the present case, Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb  recorded  when  giving
    permission to appeal that it did seem arguable  that  adequate  reasons
    were not being given as to why the circumstances of oppression faced in
    Pakistan were not relevant.  Interestingly Upper Tribunal  Judge  Grubb
    went on to say when giving permission that he had less  enthusiasm  for
    the success of that ground because, having read the judgment,  the  two
    adult children "had no personal problems as far as I can see".  That is
    revealing not as any criticism of Judge Grubb but as demonstrating  the
    extent to which the reasoning of the judge below,  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Bradshaw did not disclose that in  fact  there  was  evidence  of
    "personal problems" in this context.  It most certainly can be said  by
    reference to some of the material we have seen, including  the  witness
    statements albeit that they are expressed at a high level of generality
    (and that too is not helpful in the present case).

10.  Fundamentally, the challenge  on  this  appeal  has  centred,  and  the
    reasons for granting permission have centred, across the board  on  the
    question whether the Judge gave adequate reasons for  the  findings  he
    had reached.  Fundamentally, we think that the adequacy of the  reasons
    is compromised by the fact that the  evidence  before  him  was  in  no
    respect subject to any oral questioning.  For  practical  reasons  that
    might have been confined to Dr A but  even  that  did  not  happen.  In
    addition, the discrepancies between the written materials are not fully
    resolved and in addition still, as I have said,  some  of  the  written
    materials are at a high level of generality making it  even  harder  to
    resolve the questions that arise.

11.  We do not propose to enter into further of the facts of the  case.   It
    does not seem it will be appropriate for us to do so. We feel compelled
    to treat this case as one that must go back to the First-Tier  Tribunal
    for a re-hearing and we strongly encourage, without  prejudice  to  any
    areas of objection, the contribution - as far as possible on both sides
    but particularly on the part of the sponsor and  the  two  older  adult
    children - of greater specificity and clarity about the facts  so  that
    the First-tier Tribunal will be able to resolve that facts one  way  or
    another and do so transparently so that both sides can know the  reason
    for the outcome.

12.  The overall assessment of the present case is that, without  any  undue
    criticism,  because  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Bradshaw  was  in   a
    difficult situation, the reasons and therefore his determination of the
    First-tier Tribunal could lead an objective reader who had had sight of
    the underlying materials to feel that  not  all  of  the  matters  that
    needed to be addressed had been addressed and not all the conflicts  of
    fact that surround the  key  issue  had  been  resolved.  That  is  our
    decision subject to any further observation from the parties.

Notice of Decision

13.  Accordingly, we have decided in accordance with paragraph  7.2  of  the
      Practice Statements of  25th  September  2012  that  the  decision  to
      dismiss the appeal on human rights grounds should be set aside and the
      appeal remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   Date

Mr Justice Knowles


                                 DIRECTIONS

(i)  The Tribunal is directed pursuant to section 12(3)  of  the  Tribunals,
    Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 to reconsider the appeal at  a  hearing
    before a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Bradshaw.

(ii) The parties to serve all further documentary  material  on  which  they
    intend to rely not later than 7 days before the date of hearing.

(iii)    The appeal is adjourned to 25th August 2015 at Harmondsworth.



Signed   Date

Mr Justice Knowles

