
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/19511/2010
     OA/19515/2010
     OA/19518/2010


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16 July 2013                               |On 24 July 2013              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN



                                   Between

                        begum mussammat bilkis begum
                             khanom saima khanom
                            begum mahmudda begum

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Khan of Immigration4U
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is the appeal of Mrs  Begum against  the  decision  of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer which  was  taken  on  6  June  2010  refusing  entry
    clearance.  She is the wife of the sponsor Mr Miah and the  second  and
    third appellants are their children.  There was an appeal to  a  First-
    tier Judge who allowed the appeal but this decision was  challenged  by
    the Entry Clearance Officer who argued that  the  judge  had  erred  in
    respect of the validity of the marriage.  The appeal had  been  allowed
    under paragraph 290 of HC 395.

2.   Permission was granted to the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  to  challenge
    that decision and the matter came before me in August 2011 and I  found
    that the judge had erred in law.  The marriage of the  sponsor  to  the
    first appellant was a polygamous marriage and therefore  not  valid  in
    English law since it was clear that Mr Miah was domiciled in the United
    Kingdom and could not therefore enter into a polygamous marriage.

3.   The issue therefore essentially came down to the question of  intention
    under  paragraph 290 of HC 395.  This is concerned with a person coming
    to the United Kingdom to marry or enter into a  civil  partnership.  At
    that stage the appellant's argument was that she was validly married to
    Mr Miah and therefore she could not properly be said at that  stage  to
    have demonstrated an intention to marry him since in her eyes that  had
    already taken place.  So that issue had  not  been   addressed  by  the
    judge.  Article 8 had not been properly considered and so errors of law
    were found.

4.   It is unfortunately the case that nearly two years have  elapsed  since
    then due to adjournments in relation to which a number of  points  have
    arisen and essentially fallen away, I think it is probably fair to say.
     There was an issue about the visits made by Mr Miah to Bangladesh at a
    hearing when he did not have his passport with him.  There was an issue
    raised by the Presenting Officer at  the  last  hearing  about  another
    person sponsored by the sponsor but any follow up to  that  has  proved
    unsuccessful.  There  was  an  issue  raised  last   time   about   the
    relationships between the various parties but they have been  satisfied
    by a DNA report which establishes clearly the relationship between  the
    relevant parties. It is clear that both the sponsor and  the  appellant
    are the parents of the two children.

5.   So it comes to the matter  of  intention  therefore  and  we  have  had
    documentation put forward by Mr Miah attesting to visits he has made to
    Bangladesh in recent times and also documentation about money transfers
    that have been  made.

6.   It emerged that as regards the documents produced in  2011  he  was  in
    fact in Bangladesh during that time and that matter has  properly  been
    explored before me. As Mr  Norton  says,  although  it  is  a  slightly
    complicated business, there is  nothing  inherently  implausible  in  a
    system that enables transfers to be  made  by  anybody  on  a  person's
    behalf once the initial ID has been established and an  ID  number  has
    been given and it also makes perfect sense for the transfers to be made
    to the appellant rather than the sponsor while  he  was  in  Bangladesh
    because she has the necessary ID to facilitate an effective transfer.

7.   The evidence is clearly of a marriage that subsists in  its  polygamous
    state with the very lengthy regular visits made by Mr Miah.  There  are
    statements of intention to marry when the appellant comes to the United
    Kingdom and there is no  reason  to  doubt  the  credibility  of  those
    statements.  Consequently the outstanding issue in this case,  that  of
    the intention of the respective parties to marry, is in  my  view  made
    out and as a consequence the appeal is allowed  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
