
IAC-AH-CJ-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/19662/2013
     OA/19665/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 18th November 2014                           |On 28th November 2014      |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                      Entry Clearance Officer - beijing
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     XL
                                     XL
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr S Levine, of Counsel instructed by Lloyds Law
Limited


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) appeals against the determination  of
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal J S  Law  promulgated  on  6th  August
    2014.

 2. The Respondents before the Upper Tribunal were  the  Appellants  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.  I will refer to them as the Claimants.

 3. The Claimants are Chinese citizens born 20th  November  1998  and  18th
    July 2000 respectively.   They  are  siblings  who  applied  for  entry
    clearance to join their mother (the Sponsor)  who  is  settled  in  the
    United Kingdom.

 4. The applications were refused on 14th October 2013  with  reference  to
    paragraph 297(i)(e) of the Immigration Rules,  the  ECO  not  accepting
    that the  Sponsor  had  had  sole  responsibility  for  the  Claimants'
    upbringing.

 5. The Claimants lodged appeals, and the appeals were  heard  together  by
    Judge Law (the judge) on 22nd July 2014.  The judge heard evidence from
    the Sponsor who he found to be a credible  and  reliable  witness,  and
    found that the Sponsor had had sole responsibility for  the  upbringing
    of her children and allowed the appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules.
    The judge did not go on to consider human rights, although indicated in
    paragraph 25 of his decision that he would also  allow  the  appeal  on
    human rights grounds.

 6. The ECO applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   In
    summary two grounds were relied upon.  Firstly it  was  contended  that
    the judge had erred in law by finding the  Sponsor  to  have  had  sole
    responsibility for the Claimants.  The ECO noted that in  paragraph  12
    of the determination the judge recorded the Sponsor's  evidence,  taken
    from her witness statement, that she "did not  apply  earlier  for  the
    children to come to her as her ex-husband was not happy with this".

 7. The ECO contended that the fact that the Sponsor's ex-husband prevented
    her from taking the children out of China demonstrated that he  had  an
    element of continuing control over their lives, and therefore it  could
    not be said that the Sponsor made all the important decisions in  their
    lives  and  therefore   did   not   have   sole   responsibility,   but
    responsibility was shared with her ex-husband.

 8. The second ground contended that the judge misdirected himself  in  law
    by reversing the burden of proof as to  the  question  of  whether  the
    Claimants' father was  still  in  their  life.   The  ECO  referred  to
    paragraph 19 of the determination in which  the  judge  referred  to  a
    visit by ECO staff to the Claimants' home, and stated  "which  I  found
    not to be providing conclusive evidence that the father  lived  there".
    It was contended that the judge erred in requiring conclusive  evidence
    that the father lived with the children, and that the evidence  of  the
    ECO staff met an evidential burden.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Parkes who found the grounds arguable.

10. Following the grant of  permission  the  Claimants  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 contending in summary that the judge directed himself properly and
    did not err in law.

11. Directions were subsequently issued making provision for there to be  a
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal  to  decide  whether  the  First-tier
    Tribunal determination should be set aside.

The ECO's Submissions

12. Miss Johnstone relied upon the grounds contained within the application
    for permission to appeal.  I was reminded that the burden of  proof  is
    on the Claimants and to take into account that the Sponsor had been  in
    the United Kingdom since 2008, and the Claimants had been  living  with
    their paternal grandparents.  There was no  corroborative  evidence  to
    prove that the Sponsor had been visiting China  as  claimed,  and  Miss
    Johnstone submitted that  there  were  discrepancies  in  the  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal,  and  the  evidence  was  not  properly
    considered by the judge.  In particular he should have given weight  to
    the visit by ECO staff to the Claimants' home  and  to  the  fact  that
    there was a locked door in that home  occupied  by  an  individual  who
    refused to communicate with the ECO staff.

The Claimants' Submissions

13. Mr Levine relied upon the rule 24 response.  I was asked to  find  that
    there was an abundance of evidence before the First-tier Tribunal which
    clearly  indicated  that  the  Sponsor   had   been   exercising   sole
    responsibility for the children.  Mr  Levine  submitted  that  on  that
    basis the judge had not erred in law.  The evidence indicated that  the
    Sponsor had visited the Appellants, and  had  maintained  contact  with
    them and financially supported them.

14. I was asked to note that there was a custody agreement drawn up between
    the Sponsor and the father of the Claimants, before  the  Sponsor  left
    China that confirmed the Sponsor had custody, and the Claimants' father
    did not even ask for rights to visit.

15. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusion and Reasons

16. I find the first ground contained within the application for permission
    to appeal to be misconceived.   Miss  Johnstone  very  fairly  accepted
    before me, that the reference in  the  determination  at  paragraph  12
    could be to the Sponsor's ex-husband in  the  United  Kingdom,  as  the
    Sponsor had never married the Claimants' father,  and  therefore  would
    not describe him as her ex-husband.

17. In my view the author of the grounds has erred in  believing  that  the
    reference to the ex-husband, was a  reference  to  the  father  of  the
    Claimants.  Reading the determination as a whole, and  considering  the
    Sponsor's witness statement which contains the evidence, I find that it
    is clear that the Sponsor was explaining that she had not  applied  for
    her children to join her earlier, because her husband who is a  British
    citizen, and from whom she is now divorced, did not wish  her  to  make
    such an application.  Paragraph 20 of the determination makes the point
    that the Sponsor received indefinite leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom in 2010 as the spouse  of  a  British  citizen,  but  that  her
    marriage did not last, and that her husband had been reluctant to allow
    her to seek settlement for the children that she had in China.  As soon
    as the marriage came to an end she tried to make arrangements  for  the
    children to come and live with  her.   She  refers  to  the  Claimants'
    father as their natural father, not as her ex or former husband.

18. I therefore conclude that there is no merit in the first ground, as  it
    was not the father of the Claimants that  prevented  the  Sponsor  from
    taking the children out of China, so this did not demonstrate  that  he
    had an element of continuing control over their lives.

19. The second ground contends that the judge reversed the burden of  proof
    and thus erred in law.  I do not accept that the judge erred materially
    on this issue.  At paragraph 19 of  the  determination  the  judge  was
    considering the visit that had been made  to  the  Claimants'  home  in
    China, by ECO staff.  The judge was making findings, as he was required
    to do, as it was contended that during that visit some  admissions  had
    been made to the effect that the Claimants' father was in the home.

20. The judge found the visit "not to be providing conclusive evidence that
    the father lived there".  I do not find that the  judge  was  reversing
    the burden of proof, but he was  making  a  finding  on  an  evidential
    matter, to the effect that it had not been proved that  the  Claimants'
    father lived with them.  There was no need for  the  judge  to  make  a
    reference to conclusive proof, but I do not find this to be a  material
    error.  The judge in paragraph 4  of  the  determination  set  out  the
    correct burden and standard of proof, in that  the  burden  is  on  the
    Appellants, and the standard is a balance of probabilities.

21.  I  therefore  conclude  that  the  second  ground  contained  in   the
    application for permission to appeal does not disclose a material error
    of law.  In my view the grounds  amount  to  a  disagreement  with  the
    findings made by the Immigration Judge but  they  do  not  disclose  an
    error of law.  The judge considered all the evidence  that  was  placed
    before him, and found  the  Sponsor  to  be  a  credible  and  reliable
    witness.  The judge made findings that were open to him on the evidence
    and gave adequate reasons for those findings.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.  The appeal of the ECO is  dismissed.   The
determination of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

Anonymity

I was not asked to make an anonymity order but because  the  Appellants  are
minors, it is appropriate that an anonymity  order  is  made.   Pursuant  to
rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 no  report  of
these proceedings shall directly or indirectly  identify  the  Claimants  or
any members of their family.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could
lead to a contempt of court.



Signed        Date 24th November 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



FEE AWARD

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands not to make a fee award.



Signed        Date 24th November 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


