
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/19148/2011

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 13 June 2013                               |On 24 June 2013              |
|Prepared 14 June 2013                         |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                                 LORD BURNS
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

                          Faridoon Zazai Kandahari
                                                                   Appellant



                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Lee, Counsel, instructed by Malik & Malik
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with  permission  against  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Lobo promulgated on 6 June  2012,  dismissing
    his appeal against the decision of the respondent made on 9 March  2010
    to refuse him indefinite leave to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  as  the
    dependent relative of a person present and settled here.

 2. The appellant was born on 10 May 1978 and is a citizen of  Afghanistan.
    His case is that he suffers from various  mental  conditions  including
    depression and cannot live on his own  satisfactorily.   His  financial
    needs are met by his family which includes his parents who live in  the
    United Kingdom and two of his brothers who live in the United  Kingdom.
    Until relatively recently the sponsor and  his  family  in  the  United
    Kingdom have relied on neighbours both in Afghanistan and  Pakistan  to
    look after the appellant and for some years his parents have  travelled
    to Afghanistan to spend six months a year with him.  It is claimed that
    he meets the requirements of paragraph 317  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    and, in the alternative, that  it  would  be  contrary  to  the  United
    Kingdom's obligations  pursuant  to  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention to refuse him entry clearance to the United Kingdom.

 3. The respondent refused the application on the basis that the  appellant
    had failed to provide evidence that he was wholly or mainly financially
    dependent on relatives in the United Kingdom, that he would  be  living
    alone in the most exceptional compassionate circumstances, or,  had  no
    other close relatives in his own country to  whom  he  could  turn  for
    financial support.

 4. On appeal, the  matter  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lobo
    sitting at Taylor  House  on  9  May  2012.   The  respondent  was  not
    represented but the appellant was represented by Mr Jaisri of  Counsel.
    The judge heard evidence from  the  appellant's  brother  the  sponsor,
    finding:

      i) that there was no verifiable evidence  as  to  what  the  financial
         requirements had been since 2005 and now or that  the  sponsor  has
         supported the appellant nor is  there  any  evidence  of  the  sums
         claimed to be transferred [18(d) and (e)];

     ii) that although the sponsor said that he sends money when his parents
         travel to see the appellant in Afghanistan and Pakistan that  there
         was no evidence of this from the parents [18(f)];

    iii) that although there was  evidence  that  the  sponsor  sends  money
         regularly every two months to the appellant the relevant letter did
         not state the specified period for which the money  had  been  sent
         nor the amount and the letter postdates the decision [18(g)];

     iv)  that  although  the  sponsor  claims  that  the  parents  stay  in
         Afghanistan to look after the  appellant  because  he  cannot  look
         after himself this was not evidence that could be readily  accepted
         in the absence of evidence from the parents [18(h)], that there was
         no evidence that the appellant lives in properties  rented  by  the
         sponsor or from  the  neighbours  to  show  that  they  assist  the
         appellant [18(i) and (j)];

      v) that there were significant difficulties with the medical  evidence
         adduced from Dr Mufti, Dr I Ahmed and Professor Sultan saying  that
         there were discrepancies between  them  as  to  the  treatment  the
         appellant is receiving;

     vi) that it could not be said  that  the  appellant  was  living  alone
         outside the United Kingdom in the  most  exceptional  compassionate
         circumstances or was financially wholly or mainly  dependent  on  a
         relative present and settled in the United Kingdom;

    vii) that whilst there  may  be  a  family  life  existing  between  the
         appellant and his  brothers  and  parents  [21]  but  although  the
         appellant has significant health  problems  [25]  any  interference
         with  the  right  to  respect  for  private  and  family  life   is
         proportionate [26].

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal against this decision on  the
    grounds:

      i) that the decision that the appellant was not financially wholly  or
         mainly dependent on the sponsor was perverse given that he accepted
         the core of the appellant's evidence [2];

     ii) that the judge had applied a higher standard  of  proof  than  that
         applicable by implying that there should be evidence available  for
         "each limb for each account given by the sponsor" [3];

    iii) that the judge had erred in finding that it would be  proportionate
         to refuse the application and that the judge had failed to consider
         the principles of  Beoku-Betts  and  had  failed  to  consider  the
         proportionality exercise following Huang.

Does the determination of the First-tier Tribunal involve the making  of  an
error of law?

 6. As a preliminary matter Mr Lee sought to persuade  us  that  we  should
    permit him to amend the grounds of appeal to include a challenge to the
    judge's finding that the appellant was not living  alone  in  the  most
    compelling  compassionate  circumstances.   Mr  Melvin   opposed   this
    application.

 7. We were not satisfied that it would be in the interests of  justice  to
    permit the grounds of appeal to be amended in such a fundamental way at
    this late stage.  As Mr Lee accepted, there had been no prior notice of
    this to the Tribunal or to the respondent.   Further,  the  application
    for permission to appeal had been pending before  the  Tribunal  for  a
    substantial period and the matter had been  listed  for  hearing  by  a
    notice issued 16 May 2013.  We have no reason to doubt that Mr Lee  was
    only instructed relatively recently but the point  regarding  the  most
    compelling compassionate  circumstances  could  and  should  have  been
    evident to the appellant's solicitors.  It should have been obvious  to
    them that, absent any challenge to that finding,  any  submission  that
    the judge had erred materially with respect to the  finding  of  wholly
    and financially responsible could not succeed.

 8. We do not accept that the grant of permission  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Macdonald  [4]  could  properly  be  construed  as  a  grant  of
    permission expanded to include a challenge to a  finding  with  regards
    the most compelling compassionate circumstances.

 9. Further, we consider that there is in practice  little  merit  in  this
    proposed additional ground of appeal.  The judge sets out  in  specific
    detail why he had difficulties in accepting the  medical  evidence  put
    before him and gave adequate reasons for  finding  that  the  appellant
    would  not  be  living  alone  in  the  most  compelling  compassionate
    circumstances, noting in particular the difficulties with  the  medical
    evidence, and that the appellant had lived for six  years  on  his  own
    [19] given that the parents had not lived with him for the  six  months
    each year as claimed until May 2011. Having announced our  decision  on
    that matter, we heard further submissions.

10. We do not accept, as Mr Lee submitted, that Ground 3 of the grounds  of
    appeal can be construed as making a challenge to the finding  that  the
    appellant was not living alone in  the  most  compelling  compassionate
    circumstances.  We do not consider that it is  properly  arguable  that
    the judge erred by requiring each limb or element of paragraph  317  to
    be established.  On the contrary, it was for the appellant to show  (i)
    that he was living alone; (ii) that he would  be  living  in  the  most
    compelling compassionate circumstances; and, (iii) that he  was  wholly
    or mainly financially dependent on the sponsor.

11. We do not consider that in referring at [18(d) and (e)] to   verifiable
    evidence that the judge was imposing or could be seen as  imposing  any
    higher standard of proof. Further, given the unchallenged finding  that
    the appellant was not living alone in the most compelling compassionate
    circumstances, any error made in assessing whether  the  appellant  was
    wholly or mainly financial dependent  on  the  sponsor  in  the  United
    Kingdom could not  be  a  material  error.   Accordingly,  we  are  not
    satisfied that the judge's decision to refuse the application under the
    Immigration Rules was in error.

12. Turning to  the  issue  of  Article  8,  we  consider  that  the  judge
    approached this correctly, having directed himself properly as  to  the
    relevant law.  The respondent has not challenged the finding that there
    exists family life between the appellant and his family in  the  United
    Kingdom and the judge has considered carefully why he  considered  that
    the interference with the appellant's right to respect for  his  family
    life was proportionate.  He  took  into  account  the  appellant's  ill
    health and the fact that he is lonely and depressed and feels at  times
    not wanted by the rest of his family and, for reasons open to him.   He
    undertook the balancing  exercise  and  found  that  the  interests  in
    maintaining  immigration  control  outweighed  the  interests  of   the
    appellant in this case and gave adequate reasons for so finding.   This
    was a conclusion open to him.

13. Accordingly, for the reasons set out above, we do not consider that the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal Judge involved the  making  of
    an error of law and we uphold it.

Signed                                  Date: 21 June 2013

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

