
IAC-fH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/19784/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   | Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|Ex tempore judgment given at hearing   | On 17 April 2015                    |
|On 23 February 2015                    |                                     |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                        MOHAMED RAZEEN MOHAMED RAZEEK
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R. Sharma, Counsel, instructed by Malik Law
                    Chambers Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C. Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 7 October 1995. He made
    an application on 18 July 2013 for entry clearance as a dependant child
    under paragraph 297 of HC 395 (as amended) ("the  Immigration  Rules").
    His application was rejected in  a  decision  by  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer at Chennai on 15 October 2013.  The appellant appealed  against
    the decision to the First-tier Tribunal  and  his  appeal  came  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge K. S. H. Miller at a  hearing  on  3  October
    2014 whereby the appeal was dismissed under the Immigration  Rules  and
    also on human rights grounds.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by a Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    on a point that in fact turns out to be irrelevant for present purposes
    although the issue may arise subsequently for consideration.

 3. In the determination it is recorded that the sponsor, Mr Jainul Razeek,
    gave evidence.  At paragraph 8 of the determination Judge  Miller  said
    that the sponsor gave his evidence in English and went on to  state  as
    follows:

         "an interpreter had been booked but was not available at  the  time
         the case was called on.  I advised that if there was any difficulty
         in answering any question, he should say so.  He proceeded to  give
         his evidence without any apparent problems."

 4. It is now contended in a ground that requires permission to  be  relied
    on by way of  amendment  to  the  grounds  advanced  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal, that there is procedural error in that part  of  the  judge's
    decision.   I  say  that  the  grounds  require  amendment  because  no
    complaint about the lack of interpreter appears to have been raised  in
    the grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Indeed, it does not appear from the determination, nor from what I  can
    see in the judge's manuscript record of proceedings, that  the  sponsor
    had any apparent difficulty giving evidence.

 5. However, Mr Avery quite candidly and  very  fairly  told  me  that  the
    Presenting Officer's notes of the hearing suggest that the sponsor  was
    not in fact entirely competent in answering the questions that  he  was
    asked at the hearing, without an interpreter.  As I  have  said,  there
    was no interpreter.   It  seems  that  a  Tamil  interpreter  had  been
    requested.

 6. In the light of the helpful and candid disclosure by  Mr  Avery,  which
    supports the propositions  advanced  on  behalf  of  the  appellant,  I
    allowed that amendment to be made.

 7. So the question then is what effect could it be said that that apparent
    difficulty with interpretation may have  had  on  the  outcome  of  the
    proceedings.   One of the issues in the appeal, and  perhaps  the  main
    issue, is the question of 'sole responsibility', although the  question
    of  'serious  and  compelling  family  or  other  considerations'  also
    potentially arises.

 8. It is not the appropriate for me at this stage to explore the extent to
    which the issue of sole responsibility was put  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  It is sufficient, I think, to say  that  the  matter  is  at
    least advanced in witness statements from the appellant  and  from  the
    sponsor's wife.

 9. I cannot  be  confident  that  all  issues  were  properly  and  fairly
    canvassed before the First-tier Tribunal in the light of  what  I  have
    been told about the issue of interpretation.

10. It seems to me that in these circumstances it has been established that
    the First-tier Tribunal erred in law, in what could be characterised as
    an error in procedure affecting the fairness of  the  proceedings,  and
    that that error of law requires the decision to be set aside.  Mr Avery
    did not dissent from that proposition and indeed supported it.

11. In those circumstances, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  having
    been set aside and in the light of the reasons for it having  been  set
    aside, the appropriate course is for the matter to be remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a hearing de novo before  a  judge  other  than
    First-tier Tribunal Judge K. S. H. Miller.  No  findings  of  fact  are
    preserved, except as  agreed  between  the  parties,  and  where  those
    findings are not infected by the error of law.

12. My decision and reasons makes  no  assessment  of  the  merits  of  the
    appeal, either on the facts or in terms of  the  legal  arguments  that
    were, initially at least, advanced before the Upper Tribunal.

    Decision

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside
    and the appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing  de
    novo before a judge other than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  K.  S.  H.
    Miller.



Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek  13/03/15
