





Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
OA/19415/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House               |        Decision and Reasons       |
|                                   |Promulgated                        |
|On 6 November 2015                 |        On 18 November 2015        |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                                SONGGOM LIMBU
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:        Mr N O'Brien (counsel) instructed by M KK Gill,
solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge McMahon promulgated on 03 October 2014, which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal.





Background


3. The Appellant was born on 28 April 1991 and is a national  of  Nepal.  He
applied for entry clearance as the dependent son of  his  parents,  who  are
present and settled in the UK.


4. On 17 October  2013  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
application, finding that the appellant could not satisfy  the  requirements
of paragraph E-ECDR.2.1  of  appendix  FM  to  the  immigration  rules.  The
respondent does not accept that the appellant requires  long  term  personal
care as a result of age, illness or disability.


The Judge's Decision

5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge McMahon ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision.


6. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 12 February 2015 Judge  Hollingworth
gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

      "At paragraph 18(iii) the Judge has stated that there is  no  evidence
      as to the appellant's ability in the English language and there was no
      evidence as to the likelihood of  him  being  financially  independent
      upon entry to the UK. It is unclear  whether  the  sponsor  was  asked
      relevant questions in the context of either of these  aspects  of  the
      application of section 117. Where there is no legal representation and
      given the date of the insertion of the new part 5A and the application
      of section 117 it is arguable that the Judge should have made  enquiry
      into the question of the extent of the available evidence."

7. On 11 May 2015 the appellant's  solicitors  sought  leave  to  amend  the
grounds of appeal under  rule  5(3)(c)  of  The  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008. The appellant's  solicitor  argued  that  the  sponsor
(the appellant's father), served in the Gurkha brigade of the  British  army
between 1982 and 1995. His last period of service was in the  UK  from  1993
until discharge in 1995. It is now argued that the appellant should  benefit
from the respondent's policy permitting the  dependent  children  of  former
Ghurkas over the age of 18 to come to the UK (IDI  chapter  15.  Section  2A
Annex K)

8. Mr Walker for the respondent told me that there was no opposition to  the
application to amend the grounds of appeal. I therefore  allow  the  grounds
of appeal to be amended so that there is now an additional ground of  appeal
which proceeds on the basis that there  was  evidence  available  which  was
known to the respondent and would have been before the  First-tier  Tribunal
if either the respondent had considered every aspect  of  this  case  before
the hearing, or if the Judge had made  enquiry  at  the  hearing,  when  the
sponsor and the appellant were without legal representation.

The Hearing

9. (a) Mr O'Brien, counsel for  the  appellant,  moved  his  application  to
adduce further evidence under rule 15 (2A) of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008. He adopted the terms  of  his  skeleton  argument  and
emphasised that at [14] the Judge found that family life within the  meaning
of article 8 ECHR existed between the appellant and his UK-based family.  He
told me that the Judge made a material error of law  in  his  assessment  of
proportionality. Mr O'Brien conceded that  the  appellant  cannot  meet  the
terms of the immigration rules but argued that  the  appellant's  article  8
rights should be considered out-with the immigration rules.  He  noted  that
at [17] the Judge sets out the relevant parts of section 117B  of  the  2002
Act, but that at [18] the Judge's conclusions are flawed because  the  Judge
did not make enquiry about the appellant's ability in the  English  language
and (he argued) the Judge misdirected himself at [18(iii)] and in  so  doing
incorrectly concluded that the appellant is not financially independent.

(b)  Mr  O'Brien  told  me  that  the  Judge  restricted   his   article   8
proportionality assessment to a consideration of  the  factors  set  out  in
section 117B of the 2002 Act when there were other  relevant  factors  which
should have formed part of the balancing exercise. In addition  the  Judge's
findings that there was no  evidence  of  the  appellant's  ability  in  the
English language nor the likelihood of financial independence  on  entry  to
the UK were not findings which were open to the Judge,  because  no  enquiry
had been made of the unrepresented sponsor about those  matters.  He  argued
that there had  been  procedural  unfairness  leading  the  Judge  to  those
conclusions. In any event it was submitted that the Judge had  misunderstood
the term "financially independent" as it is used  in  section  117B  of  the
2002 Act.

(c) In the alternative, Mr O'Brien argued that because section  117  of  the
2002 Act did not come into force until nine months after  the  date  of  the
decision, its provisions  have  no  bearing  on  the  need  for  immigration
control at the date of decision; in any event  the  Judge  should  have  had
regard to the prevailing statutory regime at the date of decision  and  then
to the change in the law between the date of the decision and  the  date  of
appeal hearing, and applied those factors to the proportionality exercise.

(d) The additional  ground  of  appeal  relates  to  an  argument  that  the
appellant has suffered an historic injustice. Evidence is now produced  that
the appellant's father (who  is  the  appellant's  sponsor)  served  in  the
Gurkha brigade of the British Army between 1982 and 1995. It  is  said  that
he would have settled in the UK in 1995 and brought the appellant  (who  was
three years of age at that time) to the UK then. Mr O'Brien  relied  on  the
cases of Ghising and others (Ghurkhas/BOCs: historic wrong;  weight)  [2013]
UKUT 00567 (IAC) and Gurung and others [2013] EWCA Civ 8.

10. Mr Walker for the respondent told me  that  the  circumstances  of  this
case should have made it obvious to anybody looking at the case  that  there
was a real likelihood that the appellant's father had served in  the  Gurkha
brigade, because of the date & place of birth  of  the  appellant's  father,
and because the appellant's mother was born in Hong Kong. He  told  me  that
he could see force in the submissions that had been made by Mr O'Brien,  and
although he could not concede the appeal, the decision contains  a  material
error of law.


Analysis

11. At [9] and [10] the Judge considers the  evidence  and  finds  that  the
sponsor is a reliable and credible witness. At [12]  the  Judge  finds  that
the appellant cannot fulfil the requirements of the  immigration  rules.  At
[13] the Judge  correctly  considers  article  8  out-with  the  immigration
rules, and at [14] the Judge finds that family life within  the  meaning  of
article 8 exists between the appellant and his family in the  UK.   At  [15]
the Judge finds that the  respondent's  decision  is  an  interference  with
family life, and, at [16] the Judge correctly focuses his attention  on  the
question of proportionality.

12. At [17] the Judge refers himself to  section  117B  of  the  Nationality
Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. It is at [18] that the Judge sets  out  his
conclusions. At [18(iii)] the Judge complains  that  there  is  no  evidence
that the appellant submitted about his ability in the English  language  nor
is there evidence of his financial independence. It is there that the  Judge
makes a material error of  law.  It  is  beyond  dispute  that  neither  the
appellant nor his father had the benefit of legal representation before  the
First-tier Tribunal. The Judge correctly  records  that  the  appellant  was
assisted by a McKenzie friend. It is common ground that the  Judge  did  not
seek evidence relating to either the  appellant's  ability  in  the  English
language or to the appellant's financial independence.

13.  The  findings  at  [18(iii)]  clearly  set  out  matters   which   were
determinative of the appeal, but those  findings  relate  to  matters  which
were not put to the sponsor for  comment.  There  has  therefore  been  such
procedural unfairness that a material error of law is created.

14. When the determination is read as a whole as it  is  apparent  that  the
Judge's entire focus on the question of  proportionality  was  dominated  by
the provision of section 117B of the 2002. The Judge does not  consider  any
other relevant factors but limits consideration to section 117B - as if  the
provisions  contained  there  encompass  every  consideration  relevant   to
determining  whether  or  not  interference  with  an  article  8  right  is
proportionate to the pursuit of the legitimate aim.  That  is  an  incorrect
approach and is a material error of law.

15. As the decision contains material errors of law, I set it  aside.  There
is sufficient evidence before me to enable me to remake the decision.

Findings of Fact

16. The appellant is  a  Nepalese  citizen  born  on  28  April  1991.   The
appellant's mother was born in Hong Kong and holds a British passport.   The
appellant's mother, father and sister all live in the  UK.  The  appellant's
father was born in 1963. He is a Nepalese citizen. Between 1982 and 1995  he
served in the Gurkha brigade of the British army. The  final  two  years  of
his service to 1995 were carried out in the UK.

17. After the sponsor was discharged from the British army, the  appellant's
parents moved to Hong Kong. The appellant and his sister remained in  Nepal.
If the appellant's parents had been able to move to the UK they  would  have
done so in 1995, and would have brought the  appellant  and  his  sister  to
join them in the UK.

18. On 15 August 2007 the appellant's  mother  was  issued  with  a  British
passport. She returned to Nepal to look after the appellant and his  sister.
At that time the appellant was in full-time education. In November 2008  the
appellant's father entered the UK. He has lived in the UK since then. On  18
March 2013 the appellant's father was granted indefinite leave to remain  in
the UK.

19. On 25th October 2010 the appellant's mother and sister  entered  the  UK
and joined the appellant's father. The appellant's parents  and  his  sister
have remained in the UK as one family unit since then.

20. The appellant did not apply to come to the UK in 2008 because he  was  a
student, studying in India. The appellant applied to enter the  UK  in  2010
as the child of a British citizen  (his  mother)  and  his  application  was
refused because his British citizen mother  was  with  him  in  Nepal  until
October 2010.

21. The appellant's education in India finished in 2009.  He  then  returned
to Nepal and started studying for a  degree.  He  completed  his  degree  in
2013. In 2015 the appellant travelled to Malaysia to work on  an  internship
programme. The appellant's  education  has  been  provided  in  the  English
language.

22. The appellant's parents support the appellant. They have  paid  for  his
maintenance, accommodation and education  throughout  the  appellant's  life
and continue to do so. Although the appellant has not been able to meet  his
parents since 2010, they remain in close contact, regularly telephoning  and
Internet video calling each other.  If the appellant is allowed to  come  to
the UK, it is his intention to live with his parents  and  his  sister.  The
appellant's parents can  provide  adequate  maintenance  and  accommodation.
There is no real likelihood that the appellant will claim public funds.

Analysis

23.  In Ghising and others (Ghurkhas/BOCs: historic  wrong;  weight)  [2013]
UKUT 00567 (IAC) it was held that (i) In  finding  that  the  weight  to  be
accorded to the historic wrong in Ghurkha ex-servicemen cases was not to  be
regarded as less than that to be accorded the  historic  wrong  suffered  by
British Overseas citizens, the Court of Appeal in Gurung and  others  [2013]
EWCA Civ 8 did not hold that, in either Gurkha or BOC cases, the  effect  of
the historic wrong is to reverse or otherwise  alter  the  burden  of  proof
that  applies  in  Article  8  proportionality  assessments;  (ii)  When  an
Appellant has shown that there is family/private life and the decision  made
by the Respondent amounts to an interference with it, the burden  lies  with
the Respondent to show that a decision to remove is proportionate  (although
Appellants will, in practice, bear the responsibility of  adducing  evidence
that lies  within  their  remit  and  about  which  the  Respondent  may  be
unaware); (iii) What concerned the Court in Gurung and others  was  not  the
burden of proof but, rather,  the  issue  of  weight  in  a  proportionality
assessment. The Court held that, as in the case of BOCs, the historic  wrong
suffered by Gurkha ex-servicemen should be given  substantial  weight;  (iv)
Accordingly, where it is found that Article 8 is engaged and,  but  for  the
historic wrong, the Appellant would have been settled in the  UK  long  ago,
this will ordinarily determine the outcome of the Article 8  proportionality
assessment in an Appellant's favour, where the  matters  relied  on  by  the
SSHD/ ECO consist solely of  the  public  interest  in  maintaining  a  firm
immigration policy; (v) It can therefore be seen that Appellants  in  Gurkha
(and BOC) cases will not necessarily succeed, even though (a)  their  family
life engages Article 8(1); and (b) the evidence shows they would  have  come
to the United  Kingdom  with  their  father,  but  for  the  injustice  that
prevented the latter from settling here  earlier.   If  the  Respondent  can
point to matters over and above the public interest in  maintaining  a  firm
immigration policy, which argue in favour  of  removal  or  the  refusal  of
leave to enter, these matters  must  be  given  appropriate  weight  in  the
balance in the Respondent's favour. Thus, a bad immigration  history  and/or
criminal behaviour may still be sufficient to outweigh the powerful  factors
bearing on the Appellant's side of the balance.

24. Counsel for the appellant told me that the appellant cannot  fulfil  the
requirements of the immigration rules. This case turns on an  assessment  of
the proportionality of the respondent's  decision  in  terms  of  article  8
ECHR. It is accepted that family life within the meaning of article  8  ECHR
exists & that  the  respondent's  decision  interferes  with  the  right  to
respect for family life; it is accepted that interference is  in  accordance
with the law and is in pursuit of the legitimate aim.

25. In R (on the application of Esther Ebun Oludoyi & Ors)  v  Secretary  of
State for the Home Department (Article 8  -  MM  (Lebanon)  and  Nagre)  IJR
[2014] UKUT 00539 (IAC) it was held that there is nothing  in  R  (Nagre)  v
SSHD [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin), Gulshan (Article  8  -  new  Rules  -  correct
approach) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC) or Shahzad (Art 8: legitimate  aim)
[2014] UKUT 00085 (IAC) that  suggests  that  a  threshold  test  was  being
suggested as opposed to making it clear that there was a  need  to  look  at
the evidence to see if  there  was  anything  which  has  not  already  been
adequately considered in the context of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  which
could lead to a successful Article 8 claim. These authorities  must  not  be
read as seeking to qualify or fetter the assessment of Article  8.  This  is
consistent with para 128 of R (MM & Others) v  SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  985,
that there is no utility in  imposing  a  further  intermediate  test  as  a
preliminary to a consideration of an Article 8  claim  beyond  the  relevant
criterion-based Rule. As is held in R (Ganesabalan) v SSHD [2014] EWHC  2712
(Admin), there is no prior threshold which dictates whether the exercise  of
discretion should be considered; rather the nature  of  the  assessment  and
the  reasoning  which   are   called   for   are   informed   by   threshold
considerations.

26. Section 117 is  a  factor  to  be  taken  into  account  in  determining
proportionality. I appreciate that as the  public  interest  provisions  are
now contained in  primary  legislation  they  override  existing  case  law,
Section 117A(2) requires me to have regard to the considerations  listed  in
Sections 117B and 117C.  I am conscious of my statutory duty to  take  these
factors into account when coming to my conclusions.  I am  also  aware  that
Section 117A(3) imposes upon  me  the  duty  of  carrying  out  a  balancing
exercise. In so doing I remind  myself  of  the  guidance  contained  within
Razgar.

27.  This case concerns article 8 family life, so that subsections  (4)  (5)
& (6) of s.117B of the 2002 Act are  irrelevant.  The  documentary  evidence
indicates that the appellant speaks English, and that  his  parents  support
him. The appellant's parents are in a financially comfortable  position  and
continue their support. There are therefore more  factors  in  section  117B
which weigh in the appellant's favour than count against the  appellant.  In
addition the appellant's father was deprived of the  opportunity  to  settle
in UK. Had he  done  so  it  is  likely  that  a  significant  part  of  the
appellant's childhood would have been spent in the UK.

28. The respondent's position is simply  that  entry  clearance  is  refused
solely on public interest grounds. Section 117B(1) of the 2002 Act tells  me
that effective immigration control is in the public interest.

29. When I weigh those factors against one another and apply the  guidelines
in the case of Ghising and others (Ghurkhas/BOCs:  historic  wrong;  weight)
[2013] UKUT  00567  (IAC)  (When  an  Appellant  has  shown  that  there  is
family/private life and the decision made by the Respondent  amounts  to  an
interference with it, the burden lies with the Respondent  to  show  that  a
decision to remove is proportionate) I  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the
respondent's decision is a disproportionate interference with the  right  to
respect for family life within the meaning of article 8 ECHR.

Decision

30. The decision of the First-tier tribunal is tainted by a  material  error
of law.

31. I set aside the decision & substitute the following decision.

32. I dismiss the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

33. The appeal is allowed on article 8 ECHR grounds.


Signed                                                              Date 11
November 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

