
[pic]


Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/19536/2013
                                                               OA/19547/2013
                                                               OA/19555/2013
                                                               OA/19560/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 5 June 2015                       |On 10 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before


                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON
                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL KAMARA


                                   Between

                                MRS ZARLASHT
                           MASTER ZIAULLAH KARALOQ
                           MASTER MANSOUR KARALOQ
                        MASTER MOHAMMAD FAHIM KARALOQ
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                   THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ISLAMABAD
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Saini, counsel instructed by Starck Uberoi LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


    1.  The  appellants,  nationals  of  Afghanistan,  appeal   a   decision
       promulgated on 27 January 2015 of First-tier Tribunal Judge Cohen who
       dismissed an appeal against a decision to refuse the appellants leave
       to enter the United Kingdom under Appendix FM. Permission  to  appeal
       was granted on 10 April 2015.

   Background


    2. The sponsor, Mr Abdul Ghayem Karaloq, arrived in the  United  Kingdom
       during the year 2000. He  remained  here  subsequently,  was  granted
       indefinite leave to remain in  2008  and  naturalised  as  a  British
       citizen the following year. On 13  June  2013,  the  appellants  made
       applications for entry clearance in order to join the sponsor in  the
       United Kingdom as his partner and children. Those  applications  were
       refused as the respondent considered that  the  first  appellant  had
       submitted a false English language certificate. In essence, City  and
       Guilds were said to have informed the respondent  that  the  date  of
       birth of the person who had sat the test was 2 May 1991, whereas  the
       first appellant's date of birth is 1 March 1973.

    3. During the course of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal,  the
       appellants relied upon evidence obtained  by  Starck  Uberoi  LLP  on
       their behalf which  indicated  City  and  Guilds  had  amended  their
       records as to the appellant's date of birth at  the  request  of  the
       Test Centre.

    4. Judge Cohen found as follows:

       a. That the English language certificate was not genuine.

       b. Someone had sat the test in the appellant's place.

       c. He preferred the evidence of the respondent to  that  obtained  by
          the appellants' solicitors.

       d. He noted that the first appellant had failed an  English  language
          test twice before, that she signed her name with a thumb print and
          considered these matters undermined the sponsor's claim  that  she
          was well-educated.

       e. He remarked that the sponsor, who had  lived  and  worked  in  the
          United Kingdom for a decade, required an interpreter  and  he  was
          from a similar background and area as the first appellant  and  as
          such she was "highly unlikely" to speak and read  English  to  the
          required level.

       f. That the decisions to refuse entry did not breach the  appellants'
          human rights under Article 8 of the ECHR.

   Error of law


    5. The grounds of appeal submit:

       1. That the judge erred in concluding that the burden of proof in
          relation to an allegation that false documents were used rests on
          the appellant.

       2. That the judge erred in attaching more weight to the respondent's
          evidence than that of the appellant.

       3. That the judge made stereotypical comments regarding the
          appellant's ability to speak English.

    6. Permission was granted in relation to the first ground alone.

    7. We gave Mr Saini leave to argue all three  grounds  of  appeal.  Both
       representatives were in agreement that the FTTJ had erred in  failing
       to set out in his decision that the burden  of  proof  rests  on  the
       respondent where an allegation of falsity is  made  as  is  the  case
       here, AA (Nigeria) v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 773  applies.  However,  Mr
       Tarlow was of the view that it was not a material error  in  view  of
       the judge's other findings, which included that the  first  appellant
       signed her name with a thumbprint and her previous failures to obtain
       the requisite English language qualification.

    8. We found that the FTTJ had erred as stated and that  this  error  was
       material owing to  the  unsatisfactory  nature  of  the  respondent's
       evidence. In essence, the document verification report was based on a
       series of emails between the ECO and City and  Guilds.  There  is  no
       mention, in the incomplete series of emails which were reproduced  in
       the respondent's bundle, of the specific date of birth of 2 May  1991
       for the person who enrolled at the Test Centre  concerned.  From  the
       evidence before us, it is clear that the ECO's  request  of  24  July
       2013 that  City  and  Guilds  recheck  the  certificate  received  no
       response from that body and that a further  request  was  sent  on  2
       August 2013. The respondent's bundle does  not  contain  any  further
       correspondence from City and Guilds  and  thus  it  is  difficult  to
       understand what the ECO took into consideration in order to  conclude
       that  the  test  certificate  was  "not  genuine."  It  is  therefore
       questionable whether the respondent had established that there was an
       anomaly between the date of birth of  the  first  appellant  and  the
       person who was enrolled for the  test.  Had  the  judge  applied  the
       correct burden of proof, the outcome may not have been the same.

    9. Owing to the incomplete nature of the respondent's evidence, we  also
       found there to be some  merit  in  Ground  2,  in  that  the  judge's
       consideration of the evidence obtained by Starck Uberoi LLP may  well
       have been inadequate.

   10. In these circumstances we are satisfied that there are errors of  law
       such that the decision be  set  aside  to  be  remade.  None  of  the
       findings of the FTTJ are to stand.

   11. Further directions are to follow.

   Conclusions


       The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the
       making of an error on a point of law.

       We set aside the decision to be re-made.





   Directions


       This appeal is remitted to be heard de novo in the First-tier
       Tribunal. The hearing will take two hours.

       A Dari interpreter is required.






   Signed  Date: 6 June 2015


   Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
