

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/19543/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7th August 2014                            |On 7 August 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, Accra

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                             MAXWELL DARK PEPRAH
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:     Ms A Heller, counsel, instructed by J R Immigration
Ltd

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The claimant sought  entry  clearance  as  the  spouse  of  a  British
      Citizen, resident and settled in the UK. The application  was  refused
      in a decision that appears to have been taken on 2nd July 2013 but not
      notified to the claimant until 27th September 2013. The ECM review is,
      rather unhelpfully, dated prior to the taking of  the  decision,  21st
      February 2013. The claimant's appeal against the decision was  allowed
      under the Immigration Rules by the First-tier Tribunal subsequent to a
      hearing in the First-tier Tribunal on  16th  May  2014.  The  ECO  was
      granted permission to  appeal  on  the  grounds  that  the  First-tier
      Tribunal judge failed to have regard to the relevant evidence  at  the
      date of application (as oppose to the  date  of  decision);  that  the
      judge failed to have regard to the evidence which  did  not  meet  the
      requirements of the Rules as set out in Appendix FM-SE  and  that  the
      sponsor's annual income was unclear and thus the appeal was  not  made
      out.


      Error of law

   2. The application had originally been refused  on  the  basis  that  the
      claimant did not meet the financial requirements and was thus  refused
      under paragraph EC-P1.1(d) of Appendix FM and that he had contrived in
      a significant way to frustrate the intentions of the Immigration Rules
      and thus the application should be refused  under  paragraph  320(11).
      The First-tier Tribunal judge,  for  cogent  and  sustainable  reasons
      found that that the refusal  did  not  meet  the  terms  of  paragraph
      320(11) and did not uphold the refusal on that ground. That finding is
      not the subject of  challenge  in  this  appeal  and  therefore,  with
      confirmation from Mr Deller, stands.


   3. Before me it was agreed by both parties that the  First-tier  Tribunal
      judge had erred in law in his findings as to finance and I  set  aside
      the determination of the First-tier Tribunal accordingly.

      Re-making the decision

   4. Both representatives agreed that as at the relevant date the  claimant
      did not meet the financial requirements as set out in the  Immigration
      Rules and that on the basis of current jurisprudence the  claim  could
      not succeed on Article 8 grounds.


   5. Accordingly I allow  the  appeal  of  the  ECO,  thus  dismissing  the
      claimant's appeal against the decision to refuse him entry clearance.

   6. For the avoidance of doubt I reiterate that the claimant's  successful
      appeal against the refusal under paragraph 320(11) stands.


          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision and dismiss the claimant's appeal against  the
    decision by the ECO.





                                    Date 7th August 2014
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Coker
