
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/19475/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 October 2015                    |On 21 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM


                                   Between

                           mrs diana akosua yeboah
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER -ACCRA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.   This is an appeal against Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Herlihy
    who, in a determination promulgated  on  15  May  2015,  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal against a decision by the Entry Clearance Officer to
    refuse to grant her entry clearance to the United Kingdom as the spouse
    of Mr C. Boateng, her husband.  The appellant is a  national  of  Ghana
    and her date of birth is 22 February  1981.  She  wished  to  join  her
    partner in the United Kingdom. They were married on 31  December  2011.
    The appellant made an application on 22 July 2013 to enter the UK under
    to Appendix FM and  Appendix  FM-SE  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  This
    application was refused on 17 September 2013.

The refusal of entry clearance

2.   The basis of the refusal was threefold.  The  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    was not satisfied that the relationship between the appellant  and  her
    partner was genuine  and  subsisting.  Secondly,  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer was not satisfied that the appropriate financial  evidence  had
    been provided by the appellant. Reference was made  in  the  Notice  of
    Decision to bank accounts that had been provided  covering  the  period
    from 13 September 2012 to 12 October 2012, then from 13  December  2012
    to 11 January 2013 and then from  22  May  2013  to  9  July  2013.   A
    requirement of Appendix FM-SE was that the bank statements had to cover
    a period of 6  months  prior  to  the  date  of  the  application.  The
    appellant had not provided the six months worth of bank statements  for
    the requisite period and the application was refused on that basis. The
    Entry Clearance Officer also refused the application on the basis  that
    the proposed accommodation would not be adequate.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

3.   The First-tier Tribunal  was  satisfied  that  the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor were in a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  and  that  the
    accommodation would  be  adequate.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  was  not
    however satisfied in respect of the requirements relating to  the  bank
    statements.

4.    It  is  clear  from  paragraph  6.7  of  the  determination  that  the
    appellant's failure to provide six months' worth of bank statements was
    not in dispute. The judge noted the large gap in the provision  of  the
    bank statements from 11 January 2013 to 22 May 2013.  The  judge  noted
    that, at the date of the hearing, the bank  statements  had  still  not
    been submitted by the sponsor. It was therefore clear to the judge that
    the appellant failed to comply with the requirements of Appendix FM-SE.



5.   At 6.8 the judge did consider an argument advanced by  the  Appellant's
    representative that the Entry Clearance  Officer  should  have  made  a
    request to  the  appellant  to  provide  the  missing  bank  statements
    pursuant to paragraph D(b) of Appendix FM-SE.  The judge stated however
    that the Entry Clearance Officer could not be expected  to  assume  the
    failure to provide the bank statements had been  a  mere  oversight  or
    omission as it was clear that some bank statements  had  been  provided
    and, in any event, the respondent  made  the  decision  to  refuse  the
    application  on  a  number  of  other  grounds,  thereby  removing  any
    discretion to make such a request.

6.    The  judge  then  went  on  to  consider  Article  8  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules. At 8.5 of her decision, having  considered  all  the
    evidence  in  the  round,  the  judge  did  not   find   the   decision
    disproportionate as the sponsor  and  the  appellant  shared  a  common
    heritage and culture, both hailing from Ghana. The judge noted that the
    families of the sponsor and the appellant lived in Ghana. The judge was
    of the view that the sponsor clearly had strong links  with  Ghana  and
    there was no reason why family life could not continue in that country.

7.   At 8.6 of her decision the judge noted  that,  although  the  appellant
    was now likely to meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules,  that
    was not a matter that she could take into account as she was  bound  by
    the circumstances existing at the  date  of  the  decision,  even  with
    respect to Article 8.

The Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal and the grant of permission

8.   The grounds, which  appear  to  have  been  settled  by  the  appellant
    without legal assistance, stated that his solicitors had  not  informed
    him of the need to provide six months' worth of bank  statements  prior
    to the application. He claimed the relevant bank statements  were  held
    by him although they were not in his actual possession at the  date  of
    the hearing.  He  requested  a  review  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision.

9.   The grant of leave, dated 23 July 2015, was given by PJM  Hollingworth,
    judge of the First-tier Tribunal. Judge Hollingworth found it  arguable
    that the First-tier Tribunal judge, "...  should  have  approached  the
    matter on the basis of the circumstances existing at the  date  of  the
    hearing insofar as consideration of whether a breach of Article  8  was
    involved".  The judge also stated, "A further  arguable  error  of  law
    arises  in  relation  to  the  absence  of   delineation   within   the
    consideration of proportionality of the effect of the evidence  adduced
    in relation to the Immigration Rules by way of contradistinction to the
    potential effect of the missing documentary evidence in relation to the
    Immigration Rules had that been available." It is not entirely clear to
    me what Judge Hollingworth meant in respect  of  this  second  arguable
    error of law.

The error of law hearing

10.  There was no appearance by the sponsor or a  representative  on  behalf
    of the appellant at the error of law hearing.  The  appellant  and  the
    sponsor were informed of the date, the time and  the  location  of  the
    appeal hearing by a Notice of Hearing sent by first class  post  on  23
    September 2015. having satisfied myself that  the  appellant  had  been
    informed of the hearing I considered that it would be in the  interests
    of justice to proceed with the hearing  pursuant  to  rule  38  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008.  Mr   Duffy   made
    submissions on behalf of the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  which  I  duly
    recorded.

Discussion

11.  The grounds of appeal, as distilled  in  the  grant  of  permission  to
    appeal, take issue with the judge's failure to consider Article 8 as of
    the date of  the  hearing.  It  is  however  perfectly  clear  from  AS
    (Somalia) [2009] UKHL 32 that consideration of Article 8 in respect  of
    an out of country entry clearance appeal is to occur at the date of the
    decision and not the date of the hearing. The judge therefore  did  not
    fall into legal error by restricting her consideration to  the  factual
    matrix existing as of the date of the decision.

12.  The  next  ground  relates  to  the  judge's  assessment  of  the  bank
    statements.  The  appellant  knew  of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's
    concerns with the bank statements, or, at the very least, ought to have
    known of the concerns at the date of the hearing.  He was,  after  all,
    represented by counsel. It was obvious from the Notice of Decision that
    issue had been taken with the absence of  six  months'  worth  of  bank
    statements prior to the date of  the  application,  i.e.  from  January
    until June/July 2013. Those bank statements have now been provided, but
    they were not before the First-tier Tribunal judge. I am not  satisfied
    that the First-tier Tribunal judge erred in law in proceeding with  the
    appeal in circumstances where  she  did  not  have  the  relevant  bank
    statements before her and where it was not reasonably foreseeable  that
    the statements would be provided.  For the reasons given by  the  judge
    at paragraph 6.8 of her decision I am satisfied that the respondent was
    entitled to refuse to make any request for the missing bank statements.
    These bank statements were clearly going to the heart of  the  decision
    and ought to have been provided at the hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. No reasonable explanation has been provided for  the  failure
    to provide the statements at the hearing.

13.  I have considered the possibility  that  the  judge  may  have  made  a
    mistake of  fact  amounting  to  an  error  of  law  in  terms  of  the
    availability or potential availability of the bank statements.  I  have
    considered the case of E & R [2004] EWCA Civ 49 in which the  Court  of
    Appeal considered the circumstances in which  a  mistake  of  fact  can
    amount to an error of law.

14.  At paragraph 66 the Court of  Appeal  indicated,  firstly,  that  there
    must be a mistake as to an existing fact including a mistake as to  the
    availability of evidence on a particular matter. Secondly, the fact  or
    evidence must have been established  in  the  sense  that  it  was  not
    contentious and objectively verifiable. Thirdly, the appellant  or  his
    advisers must not have been responsible for the mistake, and, fourthly,
    the mistake must  have  played  a  material  although  not  necessarily
    decisive part in the Tribunal's reasoning. Applying those principles to
    the present facts I am satisfied that the  appellant  stumbles  at  the
    third leg, i.e. that he  or  his  advisers  were  responsible  for  the
    mistake. The appellant's explanation for the  failure  to  provide  the
    documents as that his solicitors had not advised  him  to  do  so.   In
    these circumstances I am not satisfied that the  judge  has  materially
    erred in law in failing to  adjourn  the  matter  to  enable  the  bank
    statements to be provided or deferring her decision.  I  note  that  no
    adjournment application had, in any event, been made by the appellant's
    representative.

15.  I will briefly deal with the  judge's  assessment  of  Article  8.  The
    judge correctly identified the  proper  approach  to  consideration  of
    Article 8 pursuant to the well-known case of Razgar [2004] 2 AC 368. At
    8.5 the judge took account of a number of relevant factors relating  to
    the sponsor's  links  and  associations  with  Ghana.  The  judge  gave
    sustainable reasons why, in her opinion, it  was  not  unreasonable  to
    expect the sponsor to relocate  to  Ghana  in  order  to  maintain  her
    relationship.  The judge noted at 8.6 that the appellant was now likely
    to meet the Immigration Rules but indicated that she was  not  entitled
    to take into account the evidence that had not been provided to her and
    that there was nothing preventing the appellant from putting in a fresh
    application. I am satisfied that the judge has not erred in law in  her
    consideration of Article 8.  Following the case of  SS  (Congo)  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 387 in the  Court  of  Appeal  the  appellant  would  have  to
    demonstrate that there were compelling  circumstances  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules requiring a grant of leave to enter under Article  8.
    The  appellant  has  not  demonstrated  the  existence  of   compelling
    circumstances and consequently the judge did not materially err in  law
    in her article 8 assessment.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal did not make any material error of law.

The appeal is dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum

