

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: OA 19195-11

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                            |                             |
|                                              |signed:   15.10.2013         |
|on    01.10.2012 and 15.10.2013               |                             |
|                                              |sent out:16.10.2013          |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN

Between:
                                ZILAUR RAHMAN
                                                                   appellant
                                     and

                                    DACCA
                                                                  respondent
Representation:
For the appellant:  Iain Palmer (counsel instructed by Camden Community Law
Centre)
For the respondent: Mr Sebastian Kandola (2012) and Mr Tom Wilding (2013)

                                   RULING

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge John  Blair-Gould),  sitting  at  Taylor  House  on  18
    January, to  a husband's appeal by a citizen of Bangladesh.  Permission
    to appeal was given the entry clearance officer  on  the  basis  of  an
    apparent contradiction between what the judge had said in dealing  with
    the position of the appellant's children with  the  sponsor.  This  had
    arisen first at paragraph 54, where the  judge  was  dealing  with  the
    appeal under the Immigration Rules, on which a visa had been refused on
    the basis of paragraph 320 (18).

   2. This provision raises a discretionary bar to the issue of a visa

     save where the Immigration Officer is satisfied that  admission  would
     be justified for  strong  compassionate  reasons,  conviction  in  any
     country including the United Kingdom of an offence which, if committed
     in the United Kingdom, is punishable with imprisonment for a  term  of
     12 months or any greater  punishment  or,  if  committed  outside  the
     United Kingdom, would be so punishable if the conduct constituting the
     offence had occurred in the United Kingdom

 3. The judge dismissed the appeal on this ground; but he allowed  it,  for
    reasons which included, at paragraph 72, what appeared  to  Judge  Neil
    Froom, who granted the entry clearance officer permission to appeal, in
    the First-tier Tribunal, to have been a treatment of  the  position  of
    the children inconsistent with what the judge had said at paragraph 54.
    Judge Froom also extended time to appeal, for reasons he gave.

 4. I am not however concerned at present with the merits of  this  appeal,
    because Mr Palmer wished to challenge the grant of  permission  itself.
    Again I am not at present concerned with the merits of that  challenge,
    because the first question which arises on it is as to my  jurisdiction
    to deal with it.

 5. It is enough for the moment to say  that  Judge  Froom   had  evidently
    misunderstood (as I had myself till Mr Palmer drew it to my  attention)
    the effect of r. 24 (3) of the Procedure Rules, as it has  stood  since
    before the date of the decision under appeal:

       Where an appellant is outside the UK, the time limit for that  person
       sending or delivering an application under paragraph (1) is 28 days.

    Under the definitions in r. 2,

       "appellant" means a person who has given a notice of  appeal  to  the
       Tribunal against a relevant decision in accordance with these Rules

       "relevant decision" means  a  decision  against  which  there  is  an
       exercisable right of appeal to the Tribunal

 6. It follows that the time for appealing to the Upper Tribunal is set  by
    the location of the person who gave notice of appeal to the  First-tier
    Tribunal, to  whom  for  clarity  I  shall  refer  as  'the  appellant'
    throughout. However, only the appellant has the 28 days given by r.  24
    (3), rather than the five provided by r. 24 (2).  The  entry  clearance
    officer's application for  permission  to  appeal  Judge  Blair-Gould's
    decision in this case was out of time on either reckoning; but,  on  Mr
    Palmer's calculation, by 52 days, rather than the 28 mentioned by Judge
    Froom.

 7. This was not of course a point that affected  the  lawfulness,  or  the
    merits of Judge Blair-Gould's decision;  so  Mr  Palmer  recognized  he
    needed to persuade me that I had jurisdiction to deal  with  it.  Since
    the Procedure Rules provide no means of interlocutory  challenge  to  a
    grant of permission, as for example they now do for a partial  refusal,
    Mr Palmer had to persuade me that the Upper Tribunal  was  entitled  to
    hear an appeal, in the first place not on the basis  of  Judge  Froom's
    grant of permission, but against that grant itself.

 8. Mr Palmer referred me to two relevant decisions of the Upper  Tribunal.
    The first  in  time  was  NA  (Excluded  decision;  identifying  judge)
    Afghanistan [2010], written by Judge Andrew Grubb, sitting with Mr  CMG
    Ockelton, vice-president. The judicial head-note explains the basis for
    it:

       1. There is no right of  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  against  a
       decision not to extend time under rule 10 of the First-tier  Tribunal
       Procedure Rules when a notice of appeal has been given out  of  time.
       It is a "preliminary decision made in relation to an  appeal"  within
       Art 3(m) of the Appeals (Excluded Decisions) Order 2009 (as  amended)
       and consequently is an "excluded decision" for the purposes  of  s.11
       of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

       2. The parties are entitled to know the judge who makes a decision in
       an appeal.  In the case of an appeal  determined  without  a  hearing
       that means that the  determination  or  decision  must  identify  the
       judge.  The absence of the Duty Judge's name identifying the decision-
       maker of the decision not to extend time resulted  in  a  fundamental
       breach of justice which vitiated the decision.

 9. The first-tier decision under appeal in NA had been by  a  duty  judge,
    who failed to give his name on the face of his decision, to  refuse  an
    extension of time for appealing an immigration decision to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. However Mr Palmer conceded that the  decision  to  grant
    permission to appeal in the present case is just as much a "preliminary
    decision made in relation to an appeal" as the decision  to  refuse  an
    extension of time in NA; so prima  facie  it  follows  that  it  is  an
    "excluded decision" for the purposes of the 2009 Order, and there is no
    right of appeal against it under the 2007 Act.

10. The first basis on which Mr Palmer asked me  to  review  the  grant  of
    permission to appeal in the present case was that the Upper Tribunal in
    NA had nevertheless pronounced on the lawfulness  of  the  decision  to
    refuse an extension. That is true; but their reason for saying  it  was
    not lawful was  that  the  first-tier  judge  had  failed  to  identify
    himself. They went on to say, after  exhaustive  consideration  of  the
    statutory wording, that

       22. ... A decision  such  as  the  one  in  this  case  can  only  be
       challenged by way of judicial review.

       23. In our judgment, there was no statutory basis upon which to grant
       permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal in this  case.   The  fact
       that it was granted cannot  confer  a  jurisdiction  upon  the  Upper
       Tribunal which it does not have.  There is no valid appeal before the
       Upper Tribunal.

11. The Upper Tribunal went on to point out that, since there had  been  no
    lawful decision on the extension of time on the part of the  First-tier
    Tribunal, that decision remained to be taken. The position  is  however
    quite different in the present case: Judge Froom granted permission  to
    appeal under a (widely shared) misapprehension as to the relevant  time
    for appealing; but not one which made an extension of time unnecessary.
    He could and did  consider  whether  or  not  to  grant  one,  and  had
    jurisdiction to do so. Whether he was right or wrong in law  to  decide
    as he did is something I could only consider if there were a  right  of
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal against his decision itself, and there  is
    nothing in NA to show that this is so.

12. The other authority relied on by Mr Palmer was Boktor and  Wanis  (late
    application for permission) Egypt [2011] UKUT 442  (IAC).  This  was  a
    case where the judge who  had  granted  permission  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had simply not considered the need, or the application for  an
    extension of time; so there had been no decision on that point at  all.
    However Mr Palmer was quite unable to refer me  to  any  discussion  in
    Boktor of the Upper Tribunal's jurisdiction to consider the time  point
    itself, as Judge David Allen had done in that case: it seems  that  the
    jurisdiction point, as opposed  to  the  merits  or  otherwise  of  the
    application for an extension of time, was  simply  not  raised  by  the
    parties, and so was not dealt with by Judge Allen.

13. The most that Mr Palmer could say was that, as Judge Allen had  assumed
    the necessary jurisdiction, so should I. The basis on which Judge Allen
    dealt  with  the  situation  before  him,  referring  to  the  relevant
    authorities, was that a grant of permission, given without  considering
    the need for an extension of time, was conditional only, and subject to
    reconsideration by the Upper Tribunal at the hearing.

14. The main difference from the present case is that in Boktor  there  had
    never been a decision on the time point at all;  so  neither  the  need
    for, nor the jurisdiction to consider an appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    against such a decision arose. It was possible for Judge  Allen  simply
    to do what had so far not been done, and needed to be done by the Upper
    Tribunal, and  consider  the  application  for  an  extension  of  time
    himself. He may well have considered this too obvious to  need  further
    explanation, other than by reference to the authorities on  the  effect
    of the need for an extension of time not being considered.

15. The other, more general point about Boktor is that nothing said  in  it
    could give me a jurisdiction to entertain an appeal against a  decision
    to extend time, which the words of the 2007 Act and the 2009  Order  do
    not, as is already quite clear from NA. It follows that in my view I do
    not have jurisdiction to consider any appeal by the  appellant  against
    Judge Froom's extension of time for  the  entry  clearance  officer  to
    appeal Judge Blair-Gould's decision.

16. Mr Palmer asked me, if I came to that view, to stay the entry clearance
    officer's appeal so that he could challenge Judge Froom's  decision  on
    judicial review. Mr Kandola did not object to my doing that, so that is
    what  I  did.  This  resulted  in  a  decision  by  Ouseley  J  in  the
    Administrative Court ([2013] EWHC (Admin) 1622), quashing Judge Froom's
    decision (but upholding mine). The result of Ouseley  J's  decision  is
    that the Home Office appeal to the Upper Tribunal is out of  time,  and
    there is no longer any valid appeal before me.

No valid appeal

                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)


