
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/19196/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11 November 2013                           |On 25 November 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                              mrs siliana sufaj

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - TIRANA

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representation, but the sponsor appeared in
person
For the Respondent:    Mr S Ouseley, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. The appellant is a citizen of Albania who was born on  7  August  1989.
    She had applied for entry clearance as the spouse of Mr Atur  Sufaj,  a
    citizen of the United Kingdom of Albanian origin pursuant to  paragraph
    281(v) of the Immigration Rules.  The couple have a daughter who  is  a
    British citizen, currently living with her mother,  the  appellant,  in
    Albania.

 2. The appellant's appeal  was  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Turkington and the appellant appealed against that decision.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted, and subsequently, at a hearing before
    Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan and Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Woodcraft,
    that panel found  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  determination  had
    contained a material error of law such that that decision had to be set
    aside and re-made.  The error of law as found by the panel was that the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge had imported a test  into  his  determination
    that the sponsor needed to show that he had been able  to  work  for  a
    period of twelve months in order to demonstrate  that  the  maintenance
    requirements under the Rules were satisfied.  As  noted  by  the  panel
    when finding an error of law, there was  no  such  requirement  in  the
    Rules.

 4. Subsequently, the sponsor submitted further evidence on behalf  of  the
    appellant, and  the  respondent  conducted  independent  investigation,
    following which the respondent has now accepted (because of information
    supplied by HM Revenue and Customs) that the sponsor's  income  was  in
    fact sufficient to satisfy the maintenance requirements  applicable  at
    the date of decision.  As it has by now been accepted  that  the  other
    requirements under the Rules have been  satisfied,  the  respondent  no
    longer wishes to contest this appeal.

 5.  Having  given  independent  consideration  to  the  reasons  why   the
    respondent is now satisfied that the requirements under the Rules  have
    been met, I am also so satisfied, and it follows that this appeal  must
    be allowed, and I will so find.

Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal having been found to contain  a
material error of law, I substitute the following decision:

The appellant's appeal is allowed, under the Immigration Rules.






Signed:                                 Dated:  20 November 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Craig


