


                                     [pic]


The Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)            Appeal number:
OA/19711/2012

                                    THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House          |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On November 11, 2014          |On December 3, 2014              |
|                              |                                 |
|                              |                                 |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                               MR KHALED MIAH
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER


                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Khosla (Legal Representative)
For the Respondent:    Mrs Holmes (Home Office Presenting
      Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, born July 20, 1969 is a citizen of  Bangladesh.  He  has
    applied for a certificate of entitlement to  a  right  of  abode  under
    section 2 of the Immigration Act 1971  (as  amended).   The  respondent
    refused his application in a refusal letter dated August 29, 2012.

 2. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal under  Section  82(1)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on October 12, 2012
    and on February 24, 2014 Judge  of  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  Raymond
    (hereinafter referred to  as  the  "FtTJ")  heard  his  appeal  and  in
    determination promulgated on April 29, 2014 he refused the  appellant's
    claim. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on June 18, 2014  and  on
    July 23, 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal McDade  gave  permission
    to appeal. The matter came before me on September 22, 2014 and I  found
    there had been an error in law.  My  reasons  for  the  error  were  as
    follows:-

     a. Domicile of origin  and  domicile  of  choice  are  complex  issues
        especially when children are involved. The FtTJ was not  helped  by
        failure of the two representatives to address the key  issues.  The
        FtTJ should have had  regard  to  whether  the  appellant's  father
        retained Bangladeshi domicile when he married in 1965 because  this
        would determine whether the appellant was legitimate in the eyes of
        the law. Put simply, if he retained his domicile of origin then the
        appellant was legitimate and entitled to  the  certificate  he  had
        applied for.


     b. Alternatively, if the  marriage  was  void  the  FtTJ  should  have
        determined whether the parents reasonably believed the marriage  to
        be valid. As the appellant was born before the  Family  Law  Reform
        Act 1987 there was no presumption the parents  reasonably  believed
        that the marriage was  valid  unless  there  was  evidence  to  the
        contrary.

     c. I was satisfied the  FtTJ  failed  to  consider  these  issues  and
        concentrated on DNA tests and relationship  between  the  appellant
        and siblings and there was an error in law.

 3. I then adjourned the case for further  evidence  to  be  submitted  and
    issued directions requiring the appellant to serve additional  evidence
    and a skeleton argument on the respondent and  Tribunal.  I  also  gave
    directions for the respondent to file a skeleton argument  setting  out
    her position once she had received  the  papers  from  the  appellant's
    solicitors.

 4. Regrettably the appellant's solicitors did not comply with my direction
    to serve their papers until November 7, 2014 and consequently there was
    no skeleton argument from the respondent.



    PRELIMINARY ISSUES

 5. Mrs Holmes confirmed she was in a position to deal with the  matter  as
    she had spoken to Mr Khosla last week about the matter.  She  indicated
    she had had an opportunity to consider the  additional  evidence  filed
    alongside the evidence that had been previously submitted. She had  had
    regard to the Tribunal decision of Abdin [2012] UKUT 00309 (IAC) and in
    particular paragraphs [14] and  [15]  in  which  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Storey stated:

          "14. I am satisfied that the FTT  Judge  was  fully  justified  in
          finding that the appellant's husband had not retained a Bangladesh
          domicile.  There were, it is true, some factors  pointing  to  its
          retention: that he had retained his Bangladesh citizenship  (being
          a dual national); that (contrary to what the FTT judge thought) he
          had renewed his Bangladesh passport; that he had  no  property  in
          the UK; that he  had  travelled  back  to  Bangladesh  on  several
          occasions.  However, there were also a  very  significant  set  of
          factors pointing to his having acquired a domicile  of  choice  in
          the UK: that he had applied for and obtained  British  citizenship
          in 1997; that he had applied for and obtained British  citizenship
          for his children; that he had been ordinarily resident in  the  UK
          for some 25 years  (more  than  half  his  life)  and  that  in  a
          statutory declaration he had  described  himself  as  "permanently
          settled in the UK".


          15. Of course, under what is known as the principle of tenacity of
          domicile of origin, the burden of proving loss  of  such  domicile
          rests on the respondent.  In addition, I accept that the FTT judge
          was mistaken in finding that  the  sponsor  had  not  renewed  his
          Bangladesh passport; the file shows  it  was  renewed  on  31  May
          2009.  However, I do not consider that the sponsor  continuing  to
          hold a Bangladesh passport detracts in any  significant  way  from
          the very weighty factors otherwise indicating that he had acquired
          a domicile of choice in  the  United  Kingdom  prior  to  November
          2009."

 6. Mrs Holmes accepted that she had considered  the  facts  of  this  case
    based on the approach taken by the Upper Tribunal in Abdin.  She  found
    the following facts significant:-

     a. The appellant's father was born in Pakistan in 1927 and his  mother
        was born in August 1947.


     b. In October 1955 the appellant's father obtained a "Labour  Voucher"
        and came to work in the United Kingdom.

     c. In 1961 he registered as citizen of the United Kingdom and Colonies
        and in October he was registered as a citizen of the United Kingdom
        and Colonies.

     d. The appellant's father married the appellant's  mother  in  Sylhet,
        Bangladesh in June 1965. His brother was born  in  August  1966  in
        Bangladesh and the appellant was born in July 1969 in Bangladesh.

     e. The appellant's father's first wife died in November 1973.

     f. The appellant's father died in Bangladesh in May 1976.

     g. The appellant's sister (Happy Begum)  was  born  in  Bangladesh  in
        September 1976.

     h. The appellant's brother applied for a certificate of entitlement to
        the right of abode in 2005 and this was allowed on appeal on August
        16, 2006.

     i. The appellant's sister applied for a certificate of entitlement  to
        the right of abode in 2007  and  this  was  allowed  on  appeal  on
        September 17, 2008.

     j.  The  appellant's  father  financially  supported  his  family   in
        Bangladesh by sending money which was used to support his wife, the
        appellant and his siblings. The money was  also  used  to  purchase
        land for a property for them all to live  in  and  additional  farm
        land was used to provide a further income the family.

     k. The appellant's father did not  own  any  property  in  the  United
        Kingdom but rented a room and lived frugally sending  the  majority
        of his money back to Bangladesh.

     l. The appellant's father spent all his  holidays  in  Bangladesh  and
        planned to return to Bangladesh once he finished working.

     m. It was on one of his many trips back to Bangladesh that he suffered
        a heart attack and passed away. He was buried, according to his own
        wishes, in his ancestral village.

 7. She indicated to me that in light of these  facts  and  the  burden  of
    proof placed on the respondent to prove  the  appellant  had  lost  his
    domicile of  origin  she  accepted  that  the  appellant's  father  had
    retained his domicile of origin.

 8. I indicated  to  Mrs  Holmes  and  Mr  Khosla  that  if  that  was  the
    respondent's  position  then  the  appeal  must  succeed  because   the
    appellant was legitimate and as his father had British  citizenship  he
    was entitled to certificate of entitlement to a right  of  abode  under
    section  2  of  the   Immigration   Act   1971   (as   amended).   Both
    representatives agreed.



    DECISION


 9. There was a material error of law. I allow the appeal  and  direct  the
    appellant be issued with a certificate of entitlement  to  a  right  of
    abode.

10. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended) the  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    order was made in the First-tier Tribunal and I see no reason to  amend
    that Order now.


Signed:                           Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis


TO THE RESPONDENT

The respondent conceded the appeal following the service of further
evidence that I directed be obtained and served. No fee award is
appropriate.

Signed:                           Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
