
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/19362/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 22 June 2018                     |On: 9 January 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

                             MRS FATIMA BOUSBAA
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr AL-Rashid of Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant born on March 1989, a citizen of Morocco  appealed  against
   the decision of the Secretary of State dated 10 September 2013 for  entry
   clearance to enter the United Kingdom as  the  spouse  of  Mr  Hazzem  in
   accordance with the immigration  rules.  She  also  appeals  against  the
   decision of the Secretary of State dated 20  January  2016  refusing  her
   application for an EEA residence card as proof of  her  right  to  reside
   with Mr Hazzem in the United Kingdom.



2.    The appellant's  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
   granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge PJM Hollingworth who stated that  it
   is arguable that the Judge has fallen into error by concluding  that  the
   appellant has been dishonest as stated at the conclusion of paragraph  46
   of the decision. It is further arguable that the construction  placed  by
   the Judge on the validity or otherwise of the divorce referred to in  the
   decision is an error in relation to the marriage of the sponsor  and  his
   second wife. It is arguable that the  Judge  should  have  considered  in
   greater detail the circumstances in which the entry clearance officer had
   refused the second wife's application for settlement claiming she was not
   validly married to the sponsor. It is further arguable that the Judge has
   conflated legal and customary law marriage.




3. The first-tier Tribunal Judge dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  on  the
   basis that her sponsor has been married twice. His first marriage was  on
   18 June 2001 and they were divorced on 25 August 2015. On  11  July  2006
   the appellant sponsor married another woman who was an Iraqi national. An
   application was made for her entry clearance to join  the  sponsor  which
   was refused on 29 July 2007 and  her  appeal  against  the  decision  was
   dismissed on 22 May 2008. The Judge was not satisfied that the  appellant
   sponsor was free to marry the appellant as he had not  demonstrated  that
   he was divorced from his second wife.




4. The Judge stated that there is no evidence before him  that  polygamy  is
   allowed in Morocco although he accepted that it is  valid  under  Islamic
   law.  Therefore,  the  appellant's  marriage  to  her  sponsor,  even  if
   polygamous, was accepted as a valid Islamic marriage if not  valid  under
   the law of the land. The Judge found that the appellant sponsor  had  not
   demonstrated that his marriage to  his  second  wife  had  been  lawfully
   terminated and that he  was  free  to  marry  the  appellant.  The  Judge
   nevertheless found that the appellant  does  not  meet  the  relationship
   requirements of the immigration rules.




5. However, the evidence before the Judge was that  the  appellant  and  the
   sponsor provided a marriage certificate. This marriage was recognised  by
   the family Judge of the Tribunal of first instance  in  Morocco  and  the
   appellant was issued with a "certificate of non-implement to marriage" by
   the British Consulate to the sponsor on 22 June 2010. The Judge fell into
   error by trying to go behind the certificate to find that  the  appellant
   sponsor is not divorced from his first wife and therefore the appellant's
   marriage to her sponsor is not valid.




6.  The  respondent's  view  is  that  the  appellant  does  not  meet   the
   eligibility requirement because she failed to disclose that  her  sponsor
   was  previously  married.  The  appellant  however  did  write   on   her
   application form that her sponsor  had  make  an  application  for  entry
   clearance for another woman as his wife and the marriage was held not  to
   be valid by the respondent. The Judge therefore erred in saying that  the
   appellant  was  dishonest  and  not  revealing  her  sponsor's   previous
   marriage, because clearly, she had done so.




7. Mr Walker on behalf of the respondent accepted that the Judge had made  a
   material error of law about the marriage. He further  accepted  that  the
   fact that the British Council authorised the sponsor and the  appellant's
   marriage, they must have  been  satisfied  that  the  appellant  and  the
   sponsor were free to marry each other.




8. I therefore find that the appellant  has  met  the  requirements  of  the
   immigration rules for entry clearance as a spouse of a British citizen. I
   accept that the appellant and her sponsor are in a durable  relationship.
   No issue has been taken by Mr Walker that the appellant does not meet the
   requirements for maintenance.




9. I find that this is a material error of law in the decision of the First-
   tier Tribunal and I set it aside. I remake the  decision  and  allow  the
   appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules.




DECISON

The appellant's appeal is allowed under the immigration rules.


Signed by

Mrs S Chana
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                  This 24th day of June 2018










