
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/19780/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 25 February 2015                  |On 16 March 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                              sumaira ali khan
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (ISLAMABAD)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Bloomer instructed by Sabz Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This case concerns an appeal by a  national  of  Pakistan  against  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Herwald.  For  reasons  given  in
    his determination dated 6 June 2014, the  judge  dismissed  the  appeal
    against the Entry Clearance Officer's decision refusing entry clearance
    to the appellant to come to the United Kingdom as the spouse of a  Tier
    1 Migrant, Shaukat Khan,  whom  she  had  married  on  7  May  2013  in
    Peshawar,  Pakistan.   The  Entry   Clearance   Officer   refused   the
    application in these terms:

         "You have indicated that you completed your marriage contract  with
         your husband on 7 May 2013 in Peshawar in Pakistan.  You  now  wish
         to join your husband who has leave to remain conditions [sic] as  a
         Tier 1 Entrepreneur Migrant under the Points Based System,  in  the
         UK.  It is reasonable to expect  there  would  be  regular  contact
         between a couple in a relationship.  However you have not  provided
         any  evidence  or  information  to  show  contact  and  intervening
         devotion between you as a couple from either before  or  since  the
         marriage.  As a result I am not satisfied that  your  marriage  was
         subsisting at the time of your application and that you  intend  to
         live with your spouse throughout the period of any leave  that  may
         be granted to you in the United Kingdom.  319C(d) and (e)."

 2. The sponsor, Mr Khan gave evidence before  the  judge  and  provided  a
    comprehensive bundle of documents which  the  appellant  relied  on  to
    demonstrate continuing contact since marriage.  This took the  form  of
    photographs of the wedding event itself and the couple's  honeymoon,  a
    volume of invoices from Three.co.uk, a log of Skype calls and  the  use
    of Talk Home cards using an access number which appeared frequently  in
    the Three invoices.

 3. The Record of Proceedings indicates that the sponsor was cross-examined
    by a Presenting Officer and in limited form, the judge set out some  of
    that evidence in [13] of the determination.

 4. The findings  of  fact  were  prefaced  by  surprise  at  the  lack  of
    documentary evidence produced by the sponsor.  The judge was  concerned
    there was scant evidence of the couple having been in touch before  the
    wedding; his evidence had been that despite it being arranged,  it  was
    nevertheless a love match.

 5. The judge also expressed concern that the marriage invitation and other
    evidence that the marriage had taken place was more than a year  before
    the hearing.  He observed that whilst  evidence  of  telephone  contact
    "may be valuable and helpful it is, on its own,  insufficient  in  this
    case".  The judge considered that there was "no evidence whatsoever" to
    show that using the access numbers provided the appellant had spoken to
    the sponsor or vice  versa  and  no  evidence  that  she  had  been  in
    telephone contact with him.  He noted that the appellant lives with the
    sponsor's family but  here  also  the  judge  expressed  concerns  that
    contact by telephone would not necessarily prove  he  was  in  constant
    contact with his wife and that they were  in  any  sort  of  subsisting
    relationship.  The judge noted there was no evidence of Skype or  Viber
    communication. He observed there was no evidence that the appellant had
    visited the sponsor or  vice  versa  nor  was  there  any  evidence  of
    remittances and no documentary evidence to support the relationship.

 6. I granted permission to appeal expressing the view that it was arguable
    the judge had failed to make a clear finding on the credibility of  the
    sponsor's evidence and arguably erred in finding against the  appellant
    based on what he expected by way  of  evidence  rather  than  what  was
    actually before him.

 7. Mr Bloomer adopted these  two  aspects  which  he  extracted  from  the
    grounds of challenge.  In essence the judge had given no  consideration
    to what was provided and made his decision on the absence of  evidence.
    The judge had been incorrect in relation to the  evidence  relating  to
    Skype and Viber.  The second ground was that there had been no  finding
    by the judge on the credibility of the sponsor.

 8. Mr Diwnycz accepted that the judge had erred in  his  approach  to  the
    evidence particularly as the credibility of  the  sponsor  was  not  in
    issue.  He accepted that there had been no findings  on  the  sponsor's
    evidence.  I gave my decision at the hearing that I was  satisfied  the
    judge had erred on the basis of the two grounds relied on by Mr Bloomer
    and set aside the decision.

 9. As to re-making the decision, Mr Diwnycz indicated that he was  content
    to leave matters in my hands.  An extensive bundle of new material  had
    been  lodged  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  which  he  had  seen  and
    considered.  This included more up-to-date material  including  regular
    access via Skype to 27 January 2015 as well as screenshots from  Viber.
    The sponsor clarified his Skype name and that  of  the  appellant.   Mr
    Diwnycz clarified that he did not challenge the evidence of the sponsor
    nor had he any questions for him.

10. I am readily satisfied from the uncontested evidence  provided  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge and recently updated that the  appellant  and
    sponsor are in a subsisting relationship.  There is no challenge to her
    intentions to remain only for the length of the sponsor's  leave  which
    expires on 2 April 2016.

11. Accordingly I set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    error of law.  I re-make the decision and allow the appeal against  the
    refusal of entry clearance



Signed   Date 13 March 2015
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

