
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/19562/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 9th September 2014                           |On 3rd October 2014        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                 Awet Tecle

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Cole of Parker Rhodes Hickmotts
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision  of  Judge  McGinty
    made following a hearing at Manchester on 28th May 2014.



Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Eritrea, resident in  Khartoum,  born  on
    1st January 1996.  He applied for entry clearance to join his father in
    the UK for settlement under paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules but,
    on 24th September 2013, was refused on the grounds that the  Respondent
    was not satisfied that the Appellant was seeking leave to enter the  UK
    to join a parent who had had sole responsibility for him or that he was
    seeking to join a parent who was present and settled in the UK and that
    there were serious and compelling family or other considerations  which
    made exclusion of the child undesirable and suitable  arrangement  have
    been made for  his  care.   Furthermore  it  was  not  shown  that  the
    Appellant could be maintained without recourse to public funds.

 3. The judge recorded that the appeal had  been  listed  to  start  at  10
    o'clock but, by 12.15pm, there was no appearance by  the  Appellant  or
    his representatives, who had been served with notice and accordingly he
    proceeded to hear the appeal in their absence.

 4. He relied on the previous decision of Judge Nicholson made following  a
    hearing on 15th January 2013 and noted that  Judge  Nicholson  had  had
    serious  concerns  regarding  the  inconsistencies  in  the   Sponsor's
    evidence.  He did not accept either that the Appellant and Sponsor were
    in contact to the extent  claimed  nor  did  he  accept  the  Sponsor's
    account of the Appellant's living conditions in Khartoum.   Furthermore
    he was not satisfied that the Appellant could be maintained  adequately
    in the UK.

The Grounds of Application

 5. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that  neither
    he nor his representatives had received  the  notice  of  hearing.   He
    accepted that notice of hearing was sent to Sheffield  Law  Centre  but
    relied on an email from the supervising solicitor there which  confirms
    that the Law Centre did not receive any notification of the hearing.

 6. The Sponsor was also served with notice but it was returned marked "not
    known at this address" although in fact the Sponsor was  living  there.
    There  was  therefore  a  good  reason  for  the  Sponsor's   and   his
    representatives' absence albeit unknown to the judge.

 7. It was open to the judge to ask the Tribunal staff to make enquiries of
    the representatives or the Sponsor as telephone numbers were  available
    for both of them but he did not do so.  He relied on the  decisions  in
    FP (Iran) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 13 and MM (unfairness; E  &  R)  Sudan
    [2014] UKUT 00105 and asked that the appeal be remitted to  the  First-
    tier for another hearing on the grounds that  the  Appellant  had  been
    deprived of his right to a fair hearing as a consequence of the judge's
    decision to hear the appeal  in  the  absence  of  either  him  or  his
    representative.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted  by  Judge  Davidge  for  the  reasons
    stated in the grounds on 29th July 2014.

Submissions

 9. Mr Cole relied on his grounds and told me that  his  instructions  from
    Sheffield Law Centre were that they simply did not receive  the  notice
    of hearing.  Sheffield Law Centre were at that time in the  process  of
    handing their cases over to Parker Rhodes Hickmotts and were  generally
    very efficient at dealing with  all  the  correspondence.   He  had  no
    explanation as to why  the  notice  of  hearing  for  the  Sponsor  was
    returned because he was still living at that address at that time.

10. Mrs Pettersen submitted that the judge was  properly  satisfied  as  to
    service of the hearing notice and was fully entitled to proceed to deal
    with the appeal in the absence of the Sponsor.

Findings and Conclusions

11. Under Rule 19(1) of the Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)
    Rules 2005 the Tribunal may hear an appeal in the absence of a party or
    his representative if satisfied that -

         "(a) the party or his representative has been given notice  of  the
             date, time and place of the hearing, and

         (b)  there is no good reason for such absence."

12. Clearly on the information before the judge there was  no  satisfactory
    explanation at all  for  the  absence  of  both  the  Sponsor  and  his
    representative.  He checked whether notice had been properly served and
    having satisfied himself that it had been, was entitled to  proceed  as
    he did.

13. In FP (Iran) the Court of Appeal stated:

         "Put another way, Rule 19(1) simply assumes that a person can never
         have a good reason  for  not  knowing  about  a  notice  served  in
         accordance with the Rules.  So far as he is concerned, however, the
         opportunity to provide an explanation for  his  absence  is  simply
         unrealistic.

         In these circumstances, in my judgment, Rule 19(1) enters the realm
         of removing the right  of  the  party  to  provide  a  satisfactory
         explanation for his absence, by providing that  the  Tribunal  must
         proceed in his absence  if  he  does  not  provide  a  satisfactory
         explanation in cases where he did not  know  that  he  had  to  put
         forward such an explanation.  A situation in which a party is given
         a right and then it is  taken  away  before  he  has  a  chance  to
         exercise it is not one, in my judgment, which is fair,  nor  in  my
         judgment is it one which fulfils the basic requirements of the rule
         of law."

14. And again:

         "Paragraph (b) is unqualified, and  an  explanation  could  plainly
         include an explanation that the party did not become aware  of  the
         notice of hearing.  If a party is to have the right to put  forward
         this  explanation,  and   to   show   that,   in   the   particular
         circumstances, this was  a  satisfactory  explanation,  it  is  not
         enough for the Rule to rely on the notice of hearing as  notice  of
         his opportunity to put forward an acceptable explanation."

15. The problem here is that  there  has  still  not  been  a  satisfactory
    explanation for the Sponsor's absence nor that of his  representatives.
    So far as the Sponsor is concerned it is not disputed that  the  notice
    was sent to the correct address.  Indeed it  clearly  was  having  been
    returned to the Tribunals Service with a note:

         "Not at this address.  Please return to the sender."

16. There is absolutely no explanation as to  why  the  notice  of  hearing
    should have been returned in this manner. It could be that  someone  is
    unlawfully interfering with his post, or, equally that the  Sponsor  at
    that time decided that he did not wish to pursue the appeal.

17. Mr Cole made the point that the judge could have asked the court  clerk
    to telephone the representatives or indeed the Sponsor  himself.   That
    is correct but there is no obligation on the judge or the  court  staff
    to do so and indeed it  may  be  an  impracticable  imposition  on  the
    administrative staff.

18. So far as Sheffield Law Centre is concerned it is clear  that  at  that
    time they had handed their  files  over  to  Parker  Rhodes  Hickmotts.
    However, Mr Cole said that the handover took place in January, and this
    notice was  sent  in  mid-February.   Mr  Cole  said  that  in  general
    Sheffield Law Centre had been very efficient in sending  correspondence
    on.  They did have systems in place for dealing with notices of hearing
    on cases which had been handed over.

19. The Appellant's difficulties are compounded by the fact that HM  Courts
    & Tribunals Service sent a fax coversheet on 22nd May 2014 to Sheffield
    Law Centre stating  that  the  bundle  of  documents  was  awaited  and
    requiring them to serve the bundle as a matter of  urgency.   Sheffield
    Law Centre were informed that a Tigrinya interpreter  had  been  booked
    for the hearing.

20. In summary, no satisfactory explanation has ever  been  given  for  the
    fact that the Sponsor and his  representatives  were  informed  of  the
    notice of hearing both by post and by subsequent fax five  days  before
    the hearing.  The transfer of files might have been an explanation  for
    missing the notice of hearing, or not properly  recording  it  but  the
    transfer took place a month before the notice was  sent  and  Sheffield
    Law Centre had a system in place for dealing with  correspondence.   In
    any event it is no explanation at all for the failure of Sheffield  Law
    Centre to respond to the fax which was sent some five days  before  the
    hearing.

21. In these circumstances I cannot see that it could properly be said that
    there is any error of law in this determination.



Decision

22. The original judge did not err in law and his decision shall stand.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


