
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: OA/19978/2012



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 31 October 2013                            |On 01 November 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?

                                   Between

                               Mui Nguyen Thi
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Entry Clearance Officer

                                                                  Respondent
Representation
For the appellant:     Mr P Douglas, Counsel
For the respondent:    Ms Z Kiss, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.    This appeal comes before me  following  the  grant  of  permission  to
    appeal to the ECO by Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge McClure on 14
    August 2013.  For the sake of convenience I continue to  refer  to  the
    ECO as the respondent and to Mrs Thi as  the  appellant.  No  anonymity
    order was made by the First-tier Tribunal and none has  been  requested
    of the Upper Tribunal.

2.    The appellant is a Vietnamese national born on 19  December  1971  who
    seeks entry clearance as a partner under Appendix FM of the rules.  The
    sponsor is Tan Lac. The application was made on 23 July  2012  but  was
    refused on 27 September 2012 under paragraph EC-P.1.1(d) and  E-ECP.3.1
    because the specified documents in Appendix FM-SE were not produced and
    the financial requirements were not met.

3.    The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Adio at Hatton  Cross
    on 3 July 2013. The sponsor attended and gave  oral  evidence  and  the
    judge allowed the  appeal.  On  17  July  2013  the  respondent  sought
    permission to appeal.

Error of Law Hearing


4.    The  hearing  then  came  before  me  on  31  October  2013.  I  heard
    submissions on whether or not the judge had made an error of law.

5.     Ms Kiss referred me to the rules.  One  of  the  specified  documents
    required by Appendix FM was proof that the sponsor was registered  with
    HMRC as self employed, to be  demonstrated  by  original  or  certified
    evidence from HMRC. She submitted  that  this  evidence  had  not  been
    submitted and that indeed it had been conceded by the  Counsel  at  the
    hearing and confirmed in writing by an accountant  that  the  appellant
    did not have this document. She submitted that as the document did  not
    exist, the  application  had  been  non  compliant  and  therefore  the
    evidential  flexibility  rules  which  the  judge   relied   on,   were
    inapplicable.

6.    In response, Mr Douglas submitted that the rules had changed and  that
    they now required the document to be submitted "if  available".  As  it
    was not available, it being  non  existent,  it  could  not  have  been
    submitted and the appellant  should  not  be  penalised  for  that.  He
    submitted that the rules had changed to allow  this  additional  phrase
    and that it was for the Secretary of State to show that  this  had  not
    been the rules at the relevant time.

7.    Ms Kiss replied. She submitted that if the appellant  was  relying  on
    the rule change it was for her to show it had been  applicable  at  the
    time. She took me to the 2013 issue of Phelan and  pointed  to  various
    amendments made in September 2012. That, she argued, demonstrated  that
    the rules without the "if available" phrase had not been  in  force  at
    the date of the application in July 2012.

8.    That completed the  submissions.  I  then  reserved  my  determination
    which I now give.

Conclusions

9.    At the date of the application in July 2012 and indeed at the date  of
    the decision in September 2012, the rules  required  the  appellant  to
    provide specified  evidence  including  proof  of  her  sponsor's  self
    employment from HMRC. It was not until 13 December 2012 that the phrase
    "if available" was added to paragraph 7 (c) of  Appendix  FM-SE  Family
    Members, Specified Evidence by virtue of  HC  760.  Counsel's  reliance
    upon that amendment does not, therefore, assist the appellant. She  was
    required to provide certain documents and she failed to do so. This was
    not through omission but because one of the documents that was required
    did not exist. This does not mean that such a document could  not  have
    been issued but that it had not, for reasons which I do not know,  been
    issued for the sponsor. In those circumstances, it has to be said  that
    Judge Adio's  reliance  upon  the  evidential  flexibility  policy  was
    entirely misplaced. The ECO could  not  have  asked  the  appellant  to
    provide a missing document when that document had never been issued  to
    her sponsor.

10.   Additionally, the judge appears to have contradicted  himself  in  his
    findings. At paragraph 8 he notes  that  evidence  in  respect  of  the
    sponsor's self employment "has to be provided". At paragraph 9 he  sets
    out the required documents. At paragraph 10 he  finds  that  the  rules
    require an appellant to produce those documents.  At  paragraph  11  he
    finds that the HMRC document does not exist. Yet he  nevertheless  goes
    on  to  conclude  that  the  appellant  "has  provided  the   specified
    documents". His reasoning is confused and contradictory. The evidential
    flexibility policy has no relevance to the appellant's case as this was
    not a case where the missing document could ever have been adduced.  It
    follows that the judge's determination is flawed and cannot stand.

11.   The parties agreed at the hearing that if I were to find an  error  of
    law, I could re-make the decision on the evidence already submitted.  I
    now do  so.  The  appellant  was  required  to  provide  the  specified
    documents set out in Appendix FM. She failed to do so.  Indeed,  it  is
    accepted that one of those documents could not have been adduced as the
    appellant did not have it at all, it never having been  issued  to  the
    sponsor. In the circumstances, she cannot meet the requirements of  the
    rules as they were at the relevant time.

 12.  I accept that the rules have since changed. It may be that she is  now
    able to meet the requirements. It is open to her to make a fresh  entry
    clearance application and provide the necessary evidence to the ECO for
    consideration. As far as this application  and  appeal  are  concerned,
    however, she cannot succeed.

Decision

13.    The  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  made  errors   of   law   and   his
    determination is set aside.

14.   I re-make the decision and dismiss the appellant's appeal against  the
    ECO.

Signed:



Dr R Keki?
Upper Tribunal Judge
31 October 2013
