
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/19843/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 19th July 2013                               |On 1st November 2013       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR



                                   Between

                       komail mustafa mohamed hussein
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           Entry Clearance Officer

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:         Mr J Martin, Counsel, instructed by the BEAP
                    Community Partnership
For the Respondent:    Mrs C Brewer, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Kelly made
    following a hearing at Bradford on 19th July 2013.

Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Tanzania born on 10th  August  1995.   He
    applied for entry clearance to join his mother Sarah Mohammed Hadji but
    was refused on 23rd April 2012.  The Entry Clearance  Officer  was  not
    satisfied that he was related as claimed to his Sponsor,  nor  that  he
    could be adequately maintained in the UK.  He also refused  the  appeal
    under paragraph 320(7A) because he was satisfied  hat  false  documents
    i.e. a birth certificate had been produced with the visa application.

 3. The factual background of  this  matter  is  as  follows.  The  Sponsor
    arrived in the UK in 2002 following her divorce from the father of  her
    three children, Fatima, Rukaiaya and Komail, the  Appellant.   She  was
    granted indefinite leave to remain in  2008.   She  applied  for  entry
    clearance for the two younger children to join her,  the  oldest  being
    over age.  Tragically, following the  refusal,  her  daughter  Rukaiaya
    committed suicide on 9th May 2012.

 4. The Appellant's father was responsible for the  care  of  the  children
    whilst they were growing up but has  recently  remarried.   He  sent  a
    letter to the Tribunal stating that he wanted to give full  custody  of
    his child to his biological mother.  He said that he was  intending  to
    settle in India with his current wife Zainbab  shortly  but  could  not
    taken his son with him because of personal issues with his new wife.

 5. The judge found  in  favour  of  the  Appellant  with  respect  to  the
    mandatory refusal under paragraph 320(7A) and, following DNA  evidence,
    was  satisfied  that  he  was  related  as  claimed  to  the   Sponsor.
    However, he was  not  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  could  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 297(i)(e) or (i)(f) i.e. that the Sponsor had
    had sole responsibility for the Appellant's upbringing  or  that  there
    were serious and compelling family or other considerations  which  made
    his exclusion undesirable.  He also  concluded  that  the  decision  to
    refuse was not disproportionate.

 6. The judge recorded that at the date of the  application  the  Appellant
    and his two siblings had been brought up for approximately ten years by
    his father and later by his stepmother. He was not satisfied  that  the
    Sponsor had had any significant influence concerning the faith in which
    the Appellant was brought up and whilst  he  did  not  doubt  that  the
    Sponsor had properly contributed financially to the upbringing  of  the
    children, the evidence did  not  demonstrate  that  she  had  had  sole
    responsibility for his upbringing.  Many of the receipts for the  goods
    were luxury items which he accepted provided evidence of joint parental
    responsibility.   The Appellant admitted in his Grounds of Appeal  that
    his father took all the major  decisions  concerning  himself  and  his
    sister.  The judge concluded  that  the  application  was  due  to  his
    father's wish to relocate to India rather than a sudden  desire  to  be
    with his mother.

 7. The judge considered the argument that,  whilst  there  may  have  been
    joint parental responsibility in the past, it had been abandoned  as  a
    result of the recent remarriage of the Appellant's father.  However  he
    could  see no evidence to suggest that the father had  suddenly  ceased
    participating in his children's upbringing on his remarriage and it was
    clear to  him  that  he  had  always  intended  to  defer  his  planned
    relocation to India pending the outcome of the application.

 8. He wrote as follows:

         "At the date of decision the Appellant was age 16 years, his sister
         Rukaiaya had just turned 18 years and Fatima was 22 years.  At that
         time they lived with their father in Dar-Es-Salaam as they had done
         for the  preceding  ten  years.  The  Sponsor  contributed  to  her
         children's  upbringing  from  the  UK  principally   by   providing
         financial and emotional support  in  addition  to  that  which  was
         provided by  their  father.   At  the  time  of  the  decision  the
         Appellant's father had recently remarried.  I accept that this  may
         have led to tension between the Appellant and his stepmother but  I
         am not satisfied that these were as significant as has been implied
         by the Appellant's father.  This is because the Appellant does  not
         cite this matter as a reason for not wishing to go with his  father
         to India; rather he gives the reason that India would  be  'totally
         alien' to him.  I am satisfied  that  it  was  the  desire  of  the
         Appellant's father to relocate to India (the  expression  that  the
         Appellant used in his grounds of appeal was  that  his  father  had
         wanted to do this) but I am equally satisfied that   his  intention
         to do so was predicated upon  the  Appellant  being  granted  entry
         clearance to the UK."

 9. He said that, so far as finances were concerned, he said  that  he  was
    not satisfied that the third party who was offering support  had  fully
    appreciated the scale of the commitment he was  undertaking  and  there
    was no evidence that he had discussed  the  prospect  of  devoting  the
    entire of his surplus income to the children of another woman with  his
    own wife.

10. He was not satisfied that there were compelling or other considerations
    which made the Appellant's exclusion from the  UK  undesirable  and  he
    then considered Article 8.

11. He said:

         "Although the Appellant described the  prospect  of  relocating  to
         India as totally alien I am not satisfied that he would have  found
         the UK (which he has never visited) any less culturally alien  when
         compared to that to which  he  was  accustomed  in  Tanzania.   The
         effect of the decision was to leave the Appellant in the country of
         his birth, nationality and life long residence.  Any other decision
         would have  potentially  led  to  considerable  disruption  in  his
         settled circumstances, not least to his education. Even if  I  were
         to be wrong in my assessment of his father's intentions  concerning
         relocation to India, the Appellant was able  to  continue  to  call
         upon the care and emotional support of his adult sister Fatima  and
         the sponsor was able to continue to provide all the  emotional  and
         financial support that she has hitherto provided to  him  from  the
         UK."




The Grounds of Application

12. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on the following grounds.

13. First, there was nothing in the written  evidence  of  the  Appellant's
    father and the written and oral evidence of the Appellant's  mother  to
    support the judge's conclusion that the father's intention to  relocate
    to India was conditional upon the Appellant being  able  to   join  his
    mother in the UK.  It was the Sponsor's intention once the  Appellant's
    father had remarried that he should give up any responsibility for  his
    children and the Sponsor should henceforth  have  sole  responsibility.
    Alternatively the judge had erred in  his  assessment  of  serious  and
    compelling reasons and  should  have  taken  into  account  the  tragic
    suicide of the younger daughter.

14. With respect to maintenance, the judge had given  insufficient  reasons
    for rejecting the offer of third party support.  Mr Shah  had  gone  to
    considerable lengths  to  make  available  evidence  of  his  financial
    circumstances.  It was not a legal  or  evidential  rule  that  someone
    offering third party support should give oral evidence or evidence that
    he had discussed it with his spouse.

15. Third,  the  judge  had  erred  in  considering  that  the  Appellant's
    circumstances in Tanzania were settled and in  equating  the  emotional
    and financial support that his mother had provided from the UK with the
    actual love and care which a  united  family  could  provide  for  each
    other.

16. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Lewis  on  14th  August  2013
    particularly in relation to the judge's consideration of the  financial
    evidence.

17. On 28th August  2013  the  Respondent  served  a  reply  defending  the
    determination.

Submissions

18. Mr Martin relied on his grounds.  He  accepted  that  Judge  Kelly  had
    produced a carefully constructed determination  in  which  all  of  the
    issues had been  considered but he  submitted  that  he  had  erred  by
    speculating and making  unwarranted  inferences  with  respect  of  the
    Appellant's father's intentions and with respect  to  the  third  party
    support.  There were serious and compelling  circumstances  here  which
    made the Appellant's exclusion undesirable following the tragic suicide
    of his sister, although he accepted that this was post-decision.    The
    Appellant was not settled in Tanzania but was in a situation  of  great
    change  and  turmoil  and  the  refusal  of  entry  clearance   was   a
    disproportionate interference with his right to a family life with  his
    mother.

19. Mrs Brewer defended the determination  and  submitted  that  there  was
    clear evidence that the father  retained  responsibility  for  his  son
    evidenced by the fact that he  had  remained  there  whilst  the  entry
    clearance was processed. The Appellant's oldest sister was to remain in
    Tanzania which went both to the requirements of paragraph 297(1)(f) and
    to Article 8.  The judge's conclusions on  the  maintenance  were  ones
    which were open to him.

Findings and Conclusions

20. The grounds amount to a disagreement  with  the  decision  but  do  not
    disclose any error in this  determination.  There  was  ample  evidence
    before the judge that the Appellant's father's  intention  to  relocate
    depended upon the Appellant joining  his  mother.   The  interpretation
    which the judge put on the letter  from  the  father  was  plainly  one
    which was open to him, but in any event, as the judge  said,  the  very
    fact that the father remained in Dar-Es-Salaam  some  seventeen  months
    after the date of the application to enter  the  UK  indicated  not  an
    abandonment of  parental  responsibility  but  its  continuation.   The
    contention that the Appellant's father had abandoned responsibility for
    him is belied by his continuing presence there.

21. With respect to the consideration of third party support, the judge was
    entitled to conclude from the statement which Mr Shah had produced that
    the offer does not meet the requirements of the Rules as they  were  as
    at the date of application. There was evidence before him that Mr  Shah
    could afford to give some of his income to the Sponsor but  in  reality
    he had not shown that he was going  to  do  so.    The  judge  did  not
    criticise the fact that the third party was not able  to  attend  court
    but his comment that as a consequence  he  was  not  subjected  to  the
    scrutiny of cross-examination is unimpeachable.

22. With  respect  to  the  question  of  whether  there  are  serious  and
    compelling circumstances, the fact that the  Appellant's  older  sister
    intends to remain in Tanzania and his father is still  there  makes  it
    very difficult to see how this requirement could be satisfied.

23. As Mr Martin fairly acknowledged, his strongest points were in relation
    to Article 8 rather than the Rules.  However,  the  assessment  of  the
    proportionality of the decision was a matter for the judge.   The  fact
    that the Appellant has always lived in Tanzania  and  that  his  sister
    will stay with him and his mother  can  visit  and  continue  to  offer
    financial support were plainly relevant factors.  The Appellant is  not
    in a position to meet the requirements of the Rules.  With  respect  to
    the Appellant's best interests, whilst another judge might  have  found
    otherwise, it cannot be said that the judge's assessment that his  best
    interests lie in maintaining the status quo is in any way perverse.

Decision

24. The judge did not err in law and his decision stands.   The  appeal  is
    dismissed.


Signed                              Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

