
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/19363/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 25 September 2014                            |On 2 October 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MR SURAJ GURUNG
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Allen
For the Respondent:    Ms R. Stickler, Counsel


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the respondent's appeal but I shall  henceforth  refer  to  the
    parties in the original terms detailed in the determination of Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal A Creswell following a hearing on 23 July 2014,
    after which the judge promulgated his determination on 29 July 2014.

 2. No anonymity direction has been made hitherto in these proceedings  and
    no reason has been put before me for such an order to be made.

 3. The appellant appealed against a decision of the respondent  to  refuse
    entry clearance to the United Kingdom as the  adult  son  of  a  person
    present and settled in the United Kingdom  under  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules HC 305 (as amended).  The decision was  made  by  the
    respondent on 20 September 2013.

 4. The appellant appealed and following a hearing  at  Newport  the  judge
    allowed the appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.  It was not  in
    dispute that the appellant could  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    relevant Immigration Rules. The judge went on to deal with  the  appeal
    under Article 8.

 5. On 18 August 2014 Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Shimmin  gave  his
    reasons  for  concluding,  having  considered  an  application  by  the
    respondent for permission to appeal, that it should  be  granted.   His
    reasons were:-

         "1.  The respondent seeks permission to appeal, in time, against  a
             decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Creswell,  who,  in  a
             determination  promulgated  on  29  July  2014,  allowed   the
             appellant's appeal against the Secretary of  State's  decision
             to refuse him entry as the adult son of a person  present  and
             settled in the UK under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.

          2. The grounds of appeal argue that the judge erred in:

               1) his approach to the Article 8 assessment of the case;

               2) taking into account matters that  are  immaterial  to  the
                  assessment of Article 8;

               3) finding that there was an 'historic  injustice'  and  then
                  taking it into account.

          3. The grounds of appeal disclose an arguable error of law."

 6. Thus the appeal came before me today.

 7. Prior to the hearing the appellant's Counsel handed me the  authorities
    of Ghising (Family life - adults - Gurkha  policy)  [2012]  UKUT  00160
    (IAC), R (on the application of Gurung and Others) [2013]  EWCA  Civ  8
    and Ghising and Others (Gurkhas/BOCs: historic  wrong:  weight:  Nepal)
    [2013] UKUT 567 (IAC).

 8. In making his submissions Mr Allen relied on the  respondent's  written
    grounds which state:



         "Ground one: Making a material misdirection of law

          1. It is respectfully submitted that the Tribunal  has  erred  in
             law in its approach to the Article 8 assessment in this case.

          2. MF Nigeria [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 confirms that the  Immigration
             Rules are a complete code that form the starting point for the
             decision-maker.  Any Article 8 assessment should only be  made
             after consideration under these Rules.  That was not  done  in
             this case.  It is submitted that the Tribunal erred in law  by
             not having  regard  to  the  Rules  and  that  the  subsequent
             proportionality assessment is unsustainable  because  of  this
             omission.

          3. Furthermore, it was made clear in Gulshan [2013]  UKUT  000640
             (IAC) that the Article 8 assessment shall only be carried  out
             when there are  compelling  circumstances  not  recognised  by
             these Rules.  In this case the Tribunal did not identify  such
             compelling  circumstances  and  its  findings  are   therefore
             unsustainable.

          4. Gulshan also makes clear that at this stage an  appeal  should
             only be allowed where  there  are  exceptional  circumstances.
             Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 Admin endorsed the Secretary of  State's
             guidance on the meaning of exceptional  circumstances,  namely
             ones where  refusal  would  lead  to  an  unjustifiably  harsh
             outcome.  In this case the  Tribunal  has  not  followed  this
             approach and thereby has erred.

          5. It is respectfully submitted that the Tribunal has  failed  to
             provide adequate reasons why the appellant's circumstances are
             either  compelling  or  exceptional.   At  paragraphs  15  the
             Tribunal has found  that  the  appellant  is  emotionally  and
             financially dependant upon his parents.   It  is  respectfully
             submitted that relationships between adult siblings  or  adult
             children and their parents will not normally constitute family
             life unless there are special elements of  dependency,  beyond
             normal emotional ties.

          6. The Court of Appeal in Kugathas v Secretary of State  for  the
             Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 31 (21 January 2003) held that
             "a family life is in established between an  adult  child  and
             his surviving parent or other siblings unless  something  more
             exists than normal emotional ties....Such ties might exist  if
             the appellant were dependent on his  family  or  vice  versa".
             They also pointed out that "neither blood ties nor the concern
             and affection that ordinarily go with them are ...  enough  to
             constitute family life.  Most of us have  close  relations  of
             whom we are extremely fond and whom we visit ... from time  to
             time; but none of us would say on those grounds alone that  we
             share a family life with them in any sense capable  of  coming
             within the meaning and purpose of Article 8".

          7. In Kugathas the Court of  Appeal  felt  that  it  was  clearly
             necessary to confine Article 8 to situations where  a  genuine
             situation of mutual dependency exists  -  otherwise  the  mere
             fact of arrival in the United  Kingdom  can  be  exploited  to
             create a right to family life.   The  kind  of  dependency  at
             issue in this case is not economic as such but an indicator as
             to the genuineness of the family bond; what  Sedley  LJ  calls
             "the irreducible minimum" without which Article  8  cannot  be
             said to  be  engaged.   Strasbourg  authorities  support  this
             approach.

          8. Whilst it is possible, as acknowledged by the Court of  Appeal
             in Kugathas, for family life to continue, in Article 8  terms,
             between an adult and his parent, if there is an unusual degree
             of dependency the situation envisaged  in  Kugathas,  is  very
             different from the present case, where the appellant is living
             apart form  his  parents,  in  a  different  country.   It  is
             considered that financial remittances from his  parents  would
             not suffice to establish the requisite degree  of  dependency,
             which has to be more than financial.

          9. The appellant is an adult who is educated to a high  standard,
             it is submitted that whilst he  relies  on  financial  support
             from his parents this dependency is  one  of  choice  and  not
             necessity.  It is submitted that with his  qualifications  the
             appellant could find employment and support himself and  there
             is no reason why financial support cannot continue from abroad
             as has been done thus  far  if  he  chooses  to  continue  his
             studies rather than finding full time employment.  Whilst  the
             appellant may be suffering from  mental  health  problems  the
             evidence is unclear as to how he has suffered  from  this  and
             therefore this could be a condition which  was  existing  when
             his parents chose to relocate.  Even  if  it  was  not  it  is
             submitted that the appellant is  receiving  medical  treatment
             and there is no evidence that he  requires  the  care  of  his
             parents to cope.  His parents can continue to offer  emotional
             support via modern methods of communication and visits as they
             have been doing thus far and should he  need  support  he  has
             family there  in  the  form  of  2  aunt's  and  his  parental
             grandfather who he can seek support from.

         10. It seems that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  has  taken
             account of matters that are immaterial in  the  assessment  of
             the Article 8 claim.  The Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
             appears to have been adversely influenced in their  assessment
             of the appellant's Article 8 claim by giving undue  weight  to
             their finding that the appellant is dependant on  his  parents
             financially and emotionally even though he is 26 years of age.
              However, it is respectfully submitted that in failing to give
             sustainable  reasons  for  finding  that   this   parent-child
             relationship goes beyond normal emotional ties, the  Judge  of
             the First-tier Tribunal has erred in law.

         11. As such it is submitted that there was no evidence before  the
             Judge of the First-tier Tribunal to suggest that, at the  date
             of decision, the Kugathas test could be met and  therefore  in
             finding there was and allowing the appeal under Article  8  of
             the ECHR the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal erred materially
             in law.

         12. The Tribunal allowed this appeal on the basis of an  "historic
             injustice" suffered by Gurkhas who were not allowed to  settle
             in the UK with their families  since  1997.   However,  it  is
             respectfully  submitted  that  in  allowing  this  appeal  the
             Tribunal misdirected itself in law by  failing  to  apply  the
             appropriate tests to the facts of this case.

         13. It is submitted that it is for the Gurkha to show that but for
             the historic injustice he would have settled in the  UK  at  a
             time when his dependent (now) adult child would have been able
             to accompany him as a dependent child under  the  age  of  18,
             that would be strong but not a determinative  feature  in  the
             appellant's favour.  Furthermore,  the  Tribunal  should  have
             considered the particular military service of the sponsor - UG
             (Nepal) [2012] EWCA Civ 58 - and the relevance of that service
             to the circumstances of  this  case.   Although  the  historic
             injustice is a relevant feature of the assessment, it  is  not
             determinative and it is just one  of  several  factors  to  be
             weighed  against  the  need  to  maintain  a  firm  and   fair
             immigration policy.

         14. It is submitted that there is no evidence that  the  appellant
             has suffered an "historical injustice" as there is no evidence
             his father had intended to settle  in  the  UK  prior  to  him
             turning 18 years of age.  It is submitted that  the  appellant
             has not been the subject of an "historic injustice".

         15. It is submitted that had the Tribunal taken these issues  into
             consideration they would  have  found  that  the  decision  to
             refuse entry clearance is proportionate.

         16. Permission to appeal is respectfully sought."

 9. He  also  emphasised  in  his  oral  submissions  that  the  issues  of
    historical injustice in relation to Gurkha families is a  complex  one.
    In particular here the judge  erred  in  having  gone  on  to  consider
    Article 8 not putting on the respondent's side of the balance the  fact
    that the appellant was unable to meet the requirements of  the  current
    Immigration Rules.  Further that in coming to his conclusions the judge
    again erred in the making of no "hard and fast" finding in relation  to
    the historical injustice pertinent to this particular appellant.

10. Ms Stickler, in her submissions relied upon her skeleton  argument  and
    in meeting Mr Allen's oral submissions contended  that  there  was  an
    acceptance that the appellant could not  meet  the  Immigration  Rules.
    However, thereafter that issue has been fully taken into account by the
    judge when considering the issue of proportionality.  In particular she
    referred me to paragraphs 21, 23, 24 and 25 which state:-

         "21. The answering of question (5), where that question is reached,
             must always involve the striking of a fair balance between the
             rights of the individual and the interests  of  the  community
             which is  inherent  in  the  whole  of  the  Convention.   The
             severity and consequences of the interference  will  call  for
             careful assessment at this stage.  Decisions taken pursuant to
             the  lawful  operation  of   immigration   control   will   be
             proportionate in all save  a  small  minority  of  exceptional
             cases, identifiable only on a case by case basis.

         23. In EB (Kosovo) [2008] UK HL 41, Lord  Bingham  reaffirmed  the
             acknowledgement of the House of Lords in Huang v Secretary  of
             State for the Home Department, that weight must  be  given  to
             the general  administrative  desirability  of  applying  known
             rules of immigration control that are  workable,  predictable,
             consistent and fair as between one applicant and  another  and
             the damage to good administration and effective control  if  a
             system is perceived by applicants internationally to be unduly
             porous, unpredictable or  perfunctory.   He  also  emphasised,
             under this heading, the need to  discourage  fraud,  deception
             and deliberate breaches of the law.  Secondly,  he  reaffirmed
             the point made in  Huang  that  the  Strasbourg  jurisprudence
             recognised that Article 8 imposes on  contracting  states  not
             only a negative duty to refrain from unjustified  interference
             with a person's right to respect for his  family  but  also  a
             positive duty to show respect for it.  Furthermore,  he  noted
             that the jurisprudence recognised  what  is  perhaps  obvious,
             i.e. that a person's ... family  or  extended  family  is  the
             group on which many  people  most  heavily  depend,  socially,
             emotionally and often financially".  His  quotation  from  the
             opinion of the judicial  committee  in  Huang  (which  he  had
             delivered), continues:

                  "There comes a point at which,  for  some,  prolonged  and
                  unavoidable separation from this group seriously  inhibits
                  their ability to live full and fulfilling lives.   Matters
                  such  as  the  age,  health  and  vulnerability   of   the
                  applicant, the  closeness  and  previous  history  of  the
                  family, the applicant's dependence on  the  financial  and
                  emotional support of the family, the  prevailing  cultural
                  tradition and conditions in the country of origin and many
                  other factors may all be relevant".

         24. I have considered the provisions of Article 8 and I find  that
             there does exist family life between the Appellant and his UK-
             based father and mother based on the facts I  have  found  and
             the  submissions  of  Ms  Stickler.   The  refusal  of   entry
             clearance does interfere with family life for the purposes  of
             Article 8(1) (AG (Eritrea  v  SSHD  (2007)  EWCA,  Sedley  LJ;
             "While an interference with private or  family  life  must  be
             real if it is to engage art. 8(1), the threshold of engagement
             (the "minimum level") is not a specially high one.")  for  the
             reasons given in paragraph 15 above.  That interference is  in
             accordance with the law as  the  interference  has  legitimate
             aims to the extent that immigration control  is  in  itself  a
             legitimate aim; and it is necessary in  a  democratic  society
             because implementation  of  a  firm  and  orderly  immigration
             policy is an important function  of  government  in  a  modern
             democratic  state.   I  have  already  determined   that   the
             Appellant cannot meet the requirements of Appendix FM  of  the
             Rules and my reasons for so  finding  in  paragraph  15  above
             (Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct  approach)  Pakistan
             (2013) UKUT 640).  I have  borne  in  mind  the  practical  or
             compassionate considerations which underlie the Rules (Patel v
             SSHD (2013) UKSC 72).

         25. Finally, I find that the interference is not proportionate  in
             a democratic society to the legitimate ain to be achieved.   I
             have  considered  the  guidance  on  proportionality   in   SS
             (Nigeria) v SSHD (2013) EWCA Civ 550 when so deciding.  I must
             balance the need to maintain firm yet fair immigration control
             with the Appellant's own circumstances.  I have had regard  to
             the guidance in Gulshan (Article  8  -  new  Rules  -  correct
             approach) Pakistan (2013) UKUT 640 and MF (Nigeria)  -v-  SSHD
             [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 and Muse v ECO (2012) EWCA  Civ  10;  the
             Appellant cannot meet the requirements of the Rules but  there
             are circumstances here which suggest to me that this is a case
             where application of the Rules  leads  to  a  disproportionate
             outcome as I have detailed above in paragraph 15.  I find that
             the refusal of leave to enter prejudices the  family  life  of
             the Appellant in a manner sufficiently serious to amount to  a
             breach of the fundamental right protected by Article 8."

    She highlighted how  the  judge  had  then  referred  himself  back  to
    paragraph 15 of his determination wherein it states:-

         "... Finally, in relation to proportionality, there are  the  dicta
         of Lord Dyson MR in Gurung, where he made it clear that  the  adult
         dependent child of a Gurkha veteran who can  establish  an  Article
         8(1) right has such a strong claim to have that  right  vindicated,
         notwithstanding the potency of the legitimate aim argument, if they
         can show that they would have settled in the UK years  before,  had
         that been possible.  Gurung was applied by the  Upper  Tribunal  in
         Ghising (Gurkhas/BOCs: historic wrong: weight)  (2013)  UKUT  00567
         (IAC), which held that the historic wrong will ordinarily determine
         the proportionality assessment where the Respondent only relies  on
         fair immigration policy as the  legitimate  aim,  as  in  the  case
         here."

11.  Ms  Stickler  emphasised  that  within  the  written  grounds  seeking
    permission to appeal  the  respondent  has  wrongly  applied  only  the
    authority of "UG (Nepal) [2012] EWCA Civ 58 when the guiding  authority
    should have been Ghising  and  Others  (Gurkhas/BOCs:  historic  wrong:
    weight) (2013) UKUT 00567 (IAC).

12. Further that at paragraph 15(v) of the judge's determination the  judge
    made the relevant finding as follows:-

             "The sponsor told me that he would have come to settle in  the
             UK in 1992 had he been able to do so because his family  would
             have had a better life here as he could have  found  work  and
             his children would have received a  high  standard  education.
             It is significant that he did  actually  come  to  the  UK  to
             settle  as  soon  as  he  had  the  opportunity  to   do   so,
             commensurate with honouring his work contract in  Brunei.   It
             would be rather cruel first to deny someone a right to  settle
             and then to castigate him when he showed honour by  fulfilling
             his contract in a foreign land, a contract  taken  to  support
             his family."

13. Moreover as can be gleaned from paragraph 15(iv) of  his  determination
    the judge concluded that he had "no reason to believe other than that I
    was given a truthful account by the sponsor".

14. I find the judge clearly considered the appellant's  application  under
    the Immigration Rules and in so doing, recognising that they could  not
    be met, went on to factor  this  into  the  subsequent  proportionality
    assessment under  Article  8.   The  judge  plainly  sets  out  in  his
    determination the importance of weight that needed to  be  attached  to
    the maintenance of a fair and effective system of immigration  control.



15. The judge then correctly followed the authority of Gulshan [2013]  UKUT
    000640 (IAC) and dealt  with  this  appeal  on  the  basis  that  after
    applying the requirements of the Immigration Rules only  if  there  may
    arguably be good grounds for granting leave to remain outside  them  is
    it necessary for Article 8 purposes to go on to consider whether  there
    are compelling circumstances not sufficiently  recognised  under  them.
    It  was  not  incumbent   upon   the   judge   to   find   "exceptional
    circumstances". The judge has gone on to correctly apply the  authority
    of Kugathas v Secretary of State  for the Home Department  [2003]  EWCA
    Civ 31  The judge has not erred in his approach to Article 8 and it was
    open  to  him  to  conclude  that  the  appellant   remains   dependent
    emotionally, practically and financially on his UK-based parents  which
    is to be set against a background of an intention at all material times
    to effect a reunion in the United Kingdom.

16. The judge has not taken into account erroneous factors in carrying  out
    the balancing exercise.  In so doing account  has  been  taken  of  the
    Upper Tribunal approach and in particular  where  at  paragraph  59  of
    Ghising and Others (Gurkhas/BOCs: historic wrong: weight)  [2013[  UKUT
    00567 (IAC) which states:-

         "That said, we accept Mr Jacobs' submission that where Article 8 is
         held to be engaged and the fact that but for the historic wrong the
         Appellant  would  have  been  settled  in  the  UK  long   ago   is
         established, this will ordinarily  determine  the  outcome  of  the
         proportionality assessment; and  determine  it  in  an  Appellant's
         favour. The explanation for this is to be found, not in any concept
         of new or additional "burdens" but, rather, in  the  weight  to  be
         afforded   to   the   historic   wrong/settlement   issue   in    a
         proportionality balancing  exercise.  That,  we  consider,  is  the
         proper interpretation of what the Court of Appeal were saying  when
         they referred to the historic injustice as being such an  important
         factor to be taken into account in the balancing exercise. What was
         crucial, the Court  said,  was  the  consequence  of  the  historic
         injustice, which was that Gurkhas and BOCs:

             "were prevented from settling in the  U.K.  That  is  why  the
             historic injustice is such an important  factor  to  be  taken
             into account in the balancing exercise and why  the  applicant
             dependent child of a Gurkha who is settled in the UK has  such
             a strong claim to have  his  article  8(1)  right  vindicated,
             notwithstanding  the  potency  of  the  countervailing  public
             interest in maintaining of a firm immigration policy". [41]

           In  other  words,  the  historic  injustice  issue   will   carry
         significant weight, on the Appellant's side of the balance, and  is
         likely to outweigh the matters relied on by the  Respondent,  where
         these consist solely of the public interest just described."

17. The respondent's grounds here are  essentially  an  argument  with  the
    judge's findings and reasoning which are  legally  adequate  and  which
    take  proper  account  of  the  material  that  was  before  him.   The
    conclusions were open to be made in all the circumstances  and  I  find
    that there is no error here as asserted by the respondent.

18. The making of the previous decision involves the making of no error  on
    a point of law and I do not set aside the decision but  order  that  it
    shall stand.





Signed                              Date 1 October 2014.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard

