
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/19632/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Promulgated on                |
|on 17th February 2015                         |On 18th February 2015         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                            Adekunle Muazu Olaoti
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      Entry Clearance Officer, Nigeria
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A J Bradley, of P G Farrell, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Newberry (promulgated on 9th June 2014  following  a  hearing  at
    Taylor House on 6 May 2014) dismissing his appeal  against  refusal  of
    entry clearance to join his father in the UK.

 2. The appellant (through the sponsor, who lives in Scotland) has  changed
    representatives since the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.   Neither
    representative had a complete file, nor was the history entirely  clear
    from the Tribunal file.  Previous representatives have not provided  an
    explanation of what may have gone wrong.  However, it is apparent  that
    the appellant submitted a 51 page bundle or inventory  of  evidence  in
    advance of the hearing, but it was either overlooked by  the  judge  or
    was not placed on the  file  in  good  time  for  his  attention.   The
    appellant was not represented at the hearing  and  the  judge  recorded
    that there had  been  no  letter  or  other  communication  seeking  an
    adjournment, but the appellant's representative had sought a change  of
    hearing centre.  It seems a representative may have been instructed and
    may have gone to another hearing centre.

 3. The information available is incomplete  but  it  was  enough  for  the
    Presenting Officer (very fairly) to concur that there was  a  breakdown
    of procedure such that there has not yet been a fair hearing.

 4. The determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.   Under
    Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act  and  Practice  Statement  7.2  the
    nature and extent of judicial fact finding necessary for  the  decision
    to be remade is such that it is appropriate to remit the  case  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The member(s) of the First-tier  Tribunal  chosen
    to reconsider the case are not to include Judge Newberry.

 5. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.




                    [pic]




                    Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
                    18 February 2015

