
IAC-HX-Dml-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: oa/19984/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 November 2014                          |On 15 April 2015              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE conway


                                   Between

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            mr trevor lloyd price
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jarvis
For the Respondent:    Mr Solomon


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Mr Price is a citizen of Jamaica born in 1953.  He appealed  against  a
    decision of the Secretary of State made on 23 July 2013  to  refuse  to
    revoke a deportation order.

 2. Although in proceedings before me the Respondent is the Appellant,  for
    convenience I keep the terms as they were before the  First-tier,  thus
    Mr Price is the Appellant and the Secretary of State the Respondent.

 3. The history, which is not in dispute, is that the Appellant came to the
    UK as a visitor in February 1999 and was granted leave to  enter  until
    August 1999.  He overstayed.  In March 2001 he  applied  for  leave  to
    remain as a student which was refused later that month.  He remained as
    an overstayer.  In  October  2006  he  was  convicted  of  offences  of
    dishonesty and sentenced to a total  of  18  months  imprisonment.   On
    appeal  in  January  2007  that  sentence  was  reduced  to  9   months
    imprisonment.

 4. That month he was notified of a decision to make a  deportation  order.
    He appealed against that decision.  His  appeal  was  heard  at  Taylor
    House on 27 March 2007.  It was dismissed by  Immigration  Judge  Kealy
    and Mr Taylor CBE.  Application for reconsideration was refused as  was
    a renewed  application  for  reconsideration  by  the  High  Court,  in
    November 2007.  A deportation order was made on 20 May 2008 and he  was
    deported to Jamaica on 20 June 2008.

 5. On 26 June 2012 the Entry Clearance Officer refused an application  for
    entry clearance for settlement  as  the  spouse  of  Mrs  Cherry  Jack-
    Warburton on the grounds that he was the subject of a deportation order
    and could not succeed under paragraph 320 of the Immigration Rules.

 6. On 28 August 2012 the Appellant sought revocation  of  the  deportation
    order.  The application was refused on 25 July 2013.  On 20 August 2013
    he lodged a Notice of Appeal arguing that the decision was contrary  to
    Article 8.  It was said that he was not a persistent offender;  it  had
    been accepted that he presented  a  low  risk  to  the  public  and  of
    reoffending.  Such did not make it undesirable to allow him to re-enter
    the UK.  The best interests of a child, the son  of  Mrs  Cherry  Jack-
    Warburton had not been taken into account.

 7. The judge made his findings at paragraph  [18]  ff.   He  accepted  the
    genuineness of the relationship between the  Appellant  and  Mrs  Jack-
    Warburton.  He noted that she has a good job and  salary  and  property
    here and that her son is a British  citizen.   He  found  that  she  is
    'clearly fully integrated into the life of this country' [19].

 8. The judge having noted paragraph 390A of the Rules and that 398(a)  and
    (b) did not apply went on to consider 398(c) and 399(b).  In  his  view
    398 (c) did not apply for reasons he gave at [22]  in  particular  that
    the Appellant's actions did not cause 'serious harm'. However, he noted
    at [23] that the Respondent's view  that  398  (c)  was  applicable  so
    proceeded on that basis to look at 399 (b).

 9. He found that Mrs Jack-Warburton had lived in the UK  continuously  for
    at least fifteen years prior to the decision.   Also  that  there  were
    insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing with  the  Appellant
    in Jamaica. He said: 'I find that having regard to the  fact  that  she
    has lived here for so long, has such a good job, owns a house  in  this
    country and her only child lives here, it is not reasonable  to  expect
    her to leave all of that behind her and go and live with the  Appellant
    in Jamaica now.' [25]

10. Having found that paragraph 399 applied the judge did not  consider  it
    necessary to go on to consider whether the  Appellant  had  established
    whether there were exceptional circumstances as  would  otherwise  have
    been required under paragraph 390A.

11. He then went on (at [27]) to consider  paragraphs  391  and  391A.   He
    found that the  Appellant  had  not  been  sentenced  to  a  period  of
    imprisonment of at least 12  months,  had  not  been  convicted  of  an
    offence that had caused serious harm indeed 'caused no actual  harm  to
    the public', and was not a 'persistent offender.' Also, he did not meet
    the definition of a  'foreign  criminal'  in  Section  117D(2)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.   He  found  that  as  a
    result section 117C was not relevant.  He  then  went  on  to  consider
    section 117B.

12. In that regard he found that the Appellant speaks English and  that  he
    would  be  financially  independent.   Although  he  found   that   the
    Appellant's  relationship  with  Mrs  Jack-Warburton   (a   'qualifying
    partner') was established when he was  in  the  UK  unlawfully  it  had
    'clearly been re-established and  consolidated  since  he  returned  to
    Jamaica because of her frequent visits there and  indeed  the  marriage
    there.'  He  considered  it  appropriate  'to  give  weight'  to  these
    features of the current relationship.

13. The judge then repeated that the Appellant would not be regarded  as  a
    'foreign criminal' as defined by Section 32 of the UK Borders Act  2007
    and thus would not be liable to  automatic  deportation  and  that  the
    offences for which he was convicted 'cannot in reality be regarded as a
    series of several minor convictions  meriting  deportation.'  [30].  He
    also considered it relevant that the offence for  which  the  Appellant
    was sentenced to  12  months'  imprisonment  was  committed  more  than
    fourteen years ago.  The second offence was committed nearly nine years
    ago.  Both convictions are now spent.

14. The judge then went on to note that the Appellant at 60  years  of  age
    'is not a young man'.  He considered that 'exclusion of a man  for  ten
    years must be regarded as more drastic for a man of the Appellant's age
    than it would be for a man of say, half his age.'[32]

15. The judge then considered Article 8.  He found that the continuance  of
    the deportation order prevented the Appellant from making a  successful
    application for leave to join his wife in the UK.   Such  represents  a
    considerable interference with his family life.  There was no reason to
    doubt that but for the deportation order such an application  would  be
    successful.

16. Advancing to proportionality he took particular heed of the 'relatively
    minor nature of the Appellant's offences'; that 'no  serious  harm  was
    caused by any of them'; that he is of no 'real risk to the  public  and
    never has been'; 'his age'; 'the length of time he  has  been  excluded
    from this country'; 'the strength of his relationship with his wife  as
    demonstrated by the fact that it has survived his  exclusion  for  more
    than six years', and the 'principles of rehabilitation'.

17. He concluded that the case succeeded  under  the  Rules  and  on  human
    rights grounds.

18. The judge ended by considering  that  there  was  a  'more  fundamental
    error' why the appeal must be allowed.  The  deportation  order  stated
    that a court had recommended that a deportation order be made.  He  was
    thus liable to deportation under Section 6(3) of  the  Immigration  Act
    1971.  In fact the criminal court did not recommend that a  deportation
    order be made.  He was  not  therefore  liable  for  deportation  under
    Section 3(6).

19. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal which was granted by
    a judge on 14 October 2014.

20. At the error of law hearing Mr Jarvis sought to rely on the grounds and
    a skeleton argument.  In summary, first, it was an error for the  judge
    to conclude that the appeal must be  allowed  because  the  deportation
    order itself was 'unarguably defective and invalid' because  it  refers
    to a recommendation for deportation by the Court.  It  was,  Mr  Jarvis
    stated, the notice of  decision  to  make  a  deportation  order  which
    ordered the deportation order not the order itself.

21. Second, it was an error for the judge to substitute his own findings on
    the definition 'serious harm to the public' and 'persistent  offender.'
    What constitutes 'serious harm' and 'persistent offender' is  a  matter
    for the Secretary of State.  In any event, obtaining a British passport
    by deception was an offence deemed to amount to  'serious  harm'.    As
    for 'persistent offender' he  gave  no  obvious  consideration  to  the
    Appellant's offending history which included two separate  applications
    for a British passport using a  false  name  and  two  convictions  for
    possession of crack cocaine. He was deported owing to  the  seriousness
    of the offences.

22. Third, the judge applied the wrong rule. HC 532 came into force  on  28
    July 2014.  The test under paragraph 399(b)(ii) had changed.  It is  an
    'unduly harsh' test.  The judge erred in  applying  an  'insurmountable
    obstacles' test.  Even applying that test he had done so  wrongly.  His
    analysis that these words 'mean obstacles  that  cannot  reasonably  be
    surmounted' was not the correct approach.

23. Further, the judge erred in taking account of  the  amendments  to  the
    Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974.  Such amendments did  not  affect
    the requirement for ten years  exclusion.   There  is  nothing  in  the
    immigration legislation or the wording of the amended  1974  Act  which
    requires spent conviction legislation to be  the  same  as  immigration
    legislation.  Each piece  of  law  addresses  different  social  policy
    needs.

24. Mr Jarvis ended by submitting that the judge further erred  by  stating
    that he was 'not strictly bound' by the requirements of section 117B(4)
    in assessing the family life of the  Appellant  because  he  considered
    that family life had been 're-established and consolidated  whilst  the
    Appellant was in Jamaica rather than in the UK.'  Also,  the judge  had
    given weight to immaterial matters namely that the Appellant would 'not
    be regarded as a foreign criminal' under S32  of  the  UK  Borders  Act
    2007.

25. In reply, Mr Solomon submitted that the determination looked  at  as  a
    whole was logical and well reasoned.  The judge had applied the correct
    rule ( paragraph 399) which had been in force at the date  of  decision
    and was the rule referred to in the refusal letter. As for the 'serious
    harm'/'persistent offender' issue the judge acknowledged (at [23]) that
    such was for the Secretary of State.   As  such  his  comments  in  the
    preceding paragraph 22 were irrelevant and not material.

26. Mr Solomon said that having properly found that the Appellant succeeded
    under paragraph 399 he continued in a 'belt  and  braces'  approach  to
    consider human rights outside the Rules.  In doing so he dealt with the
    material matters. It had been  found  that  the  Appellant  was  not  a
    'foreign criminal' under paragraph 117D, thus the assessment was  under
    117B  not  117C.   The  judge  had  dealt  satisfactorily  with   117B.
    Paragraph 117B needed to be modified when dealing with entry  clearance
    cases.

27. Mr Solomon  continued  by  submitting  that  the  judge's  findings  on
    proportionality were open to him on the evidence.  His approach on  the
    Rehabilitation of Offenders Act was also one that he  was  entitled  to
    take.  All in all adequate reasons had been given.  The Respondent  was
    merely seeking a 'second bite of the cherry'.

28. Finally, on the issue of the deportation order, paragraph 320(2)  which
    deals  with  the  requirement  for  entry  clearance  refers   to   the
    deportation order, not the notice of intention to deport.  Thus  it  is
    the signing of the order that  results  in  removal/exclusion  not  the
    notice.  It is an important document signed by a senior  officer.   Its
    contents are flawed.  The  judge  was  correct  to  find  that  it  was
    invalid.

29. In considering this matter I deal first with the issue of the  validity
    of the deportation order.  Section 3(5) of  the  Immigration  Act  1971
    gives the Secretary of State power to deport a non-British citizen  (a)
    if she deems it to be conducive to the  public  good.   The  appealable
    decision is not the  signing  of  the  deportation  order  but  is  the
    decision to make the deportation order (Section 82(2)(j)) of  the  2002
    Act).   The  deportation  order  was  simply  the  last  step  in   the
    administrative process confirming the  act  of  deportation  which  had
    already been found by a Tribunal to be a lawful decision.  A mistake in
    the order as to the justification  for  deportation  made  no  material
    difference to its legal status.  If it was incorrect it could have been
    challenged by judicial review.  I conclude that the judge erred in  his
    findings on that matter at [37f].

30. His decision on that matter however is not per se materially  fatal  to
    his determination as he allowed the appeal on other grounds which I now
    turn to consider.

31. I look first at the issue of 'serious harm'/'persistent offender'.  The
    judge noted paragraph 398(c)  which  states  'the  deportation  of  the
    person from the UK is conducive to the public good because, in the view
    of the Secretary of State, their offending caused serious harm or  they
    are a persistent offender who shows  a  particular  disregard  for  the
    law.'

32. I find the judge's treatment of this issue somewhat confusing.  At [22]
    he found that the Appellant's offending did  not  cause  serious  harm;
    that he had only been convicted on two occasions viz for  two  offences
    of possession of class A drugs and the passport  offences  'which  were
    attempts only'.  Indeed none of the offences 'caused any actual harm at
    all'.  Further, that he could not be considered a 'persistent offender'
    or that he showed a 'particular disregard for the law'.

33. I find several problems with this.  First, I agree with Mr Jarvis  that
    'serious harm'/'persistent offender' is a matter  for  the  Respondent.
    It was not for the judge to make his own findings  on  the  definition.
    In that regard the  Respondent's  own  guidance  states  'Serious  harm
    2.1.2.  It is at the discretion of the Secretary of  State  whether  or
    not she considers an offence to have caused serious harm.'   2.1.3  'An
    offence that has caused serious harm' means an offence that has  caused
    serious physical or psychological harm to a victim or victims, or  that
    has contributed to a widespread problem that caused serious harm  to  a
    community or to society in  general".   (IDI  Chapter  13:  criminality
    guidance in Article 8 ECHR cases (28 July 2014)).

34. The approach is also inconsistent with M v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 146  in
    which Laws LJ said:

         '25. Thus as it seems to me this  whole  raft  of  authority  tends
             firmly to contradict Mr Blake's  argument  that  a  considered
             refusal of a recommendation to deport  creates  a  presumption
             which touches the Secretary of State's exercise of power under
             S3(5)(a).  It is also, I think, contradicted by the scheme  of
             the Act of 1971.  S3(5)(a) plainly establishes a free-standing
             power, whose exercise is entirely within the responsibility of
             the Executive ... '.

35. I find other difficulties in the judge's approach to this matter.   The
    judge without explanation has paid no heed  to  the  Tribunal  decision
    which dismissed the Appellant's appeal against notice of  intention  to
    deport made in April 2007. Such should have been his starting point. At
    [66] the Tribunal found 'a passport offence of this kind being bound up
    with immigration, is in  our  judgement  nearly  always  likely  to  be
    serious enough to justify deportation and we are satisfied that it  did
    so here.'  Further, I do not think that it was open  to  the  judge  to
    find that 'none of the offences caused any actual harm  at  all.'   The
    courts have repeatedly said that the use of false passports and  stolen
    birth certificates contribute to the undermining of the good  order  of
    society (see R v Benabbas [2005] EWCA Crim 2113) at [41] and the use of
    class A drugs also in small part facilitates the scourge  that  affects
    all layers of society in the UK.

36. That the First-tier Judge was not  wholly  clear  on  his  approach  to
    'serious harm'/'persistent offender' is apparent  from  the  very  next
    paragraph [23] of his determination where he stated that 'However  that
    may be, it appears that it is the view of the Secretary of  State  that
    it is important and accordingly  398(c)  is  applicable.'  However,  he
    again in the latter part of his determination  [28f]  returned  to  the
    view that the Appellant had not been convicted of offences that  caused
    serious harm. I find his failure to properly consider or apply the  law
    to be a material error.

37. The judge went on  to  find  that  the  Appellant  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with his wife, and that she has lived in the UK
    for at least fifteen years prior to date of  hearing.   He  found  (per
    paragraph 399(b)(i)) that there were  'insurmountable  obstacles'  i.e.
    'obstacles that cannot reasonably be surmounted' to her going  to  live
    with the Appellant in Jamaica [25]. He made that  finding  because  she
    has 'lived here so long', 'has a good job', 'owns a house here' and her
    only child lives here.  It was not, the judge  considered,  'reasonable
    to expect her to leave all of that behind her'.

38. Mr Jarvis submitted that the judge applied the  wrong  version  of  the
    Rules.  He  should  have  applied  HC  532  amendments,  namely  399(b)
    applicable from 28 July 2014.

39. It reads (b) 'the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with
    a partner who is in the UK and is a British citizen or settled  in  the
    UK, and (i) the relationship was formed  at  a  time  when  the  person
    (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and their immigration status was  not
    precarious; and (ii): it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live
    in the country to which the  person  is  to  be  deported,  because  of
    compelling circumstances over and above these  described  in  paragraph
    EX.2 of Appendix FM; and (iii)  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  that
    partner to remain in the UK without the person who is to be deported.'

40. If Mr Jarvis is right the judge erred in applying the wrong rule.  Such
    would be a material error.

41.  I think Mr Jarvis is correct. He referred to YM (Uganda) v SSHD [2014]
    EWCA Civ 1292. In  that  regard  the  court  at  [16]  noted  that  the
    Statement of Changes in the Immigration Rules HC  532  said  under  the
    heading 'Implementation': 'The changes set out in paragraphs 14  to  30
    of this statement take effect on 28 July 2014 and  apply  to  all  ECHR
    Article 8 claims from foreign criminals which are decided on  or  after
    that date.'

42. Further, at [19] the court notes an explanatory memorandum attached  to
    the statement of changes made  to  create  the  2014  Rules.  It  notes
    paragraphs 3.4, 3.5 and 4.7.

         '3.4. The changes relating to family and  private  life  will  come
         into force on 28 July  2014,  in  line  with  the  commencement  of
         section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014.  The  Home  Office  regrets
         that it was not possible to finalise this Statement of Changes on a
         basis that, consistent with normal practice, would have allowed the
         changes to be laid at least 21 days  prior  to  their  coming  into
         force. This is because many of the changes to the Immigration Rules
         need to coincide with the coming into force of sections  17(3)  and
         19 of the Immigration Act on 28 July 2014.

         '3.5. However, the substance of those  changes  which  concern  the
                 alignment of the Immigration Rules relating to  family  and
                 private life  with  sections  117B,117C  and  117D  of  the
                 Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum   Act   2002,   were
                 extensively debated by both Houses of Parliament during the
                 passage of the Immigration Act.'

         '4.7.  The changes set out in paragraphs 14 to 30 of this statement
                 take effect on 28 July 2014 and apply to all ECHR Article 8
                 claims from foreign criminals which are decided on or after
                 that date.'

43. Thus, in my judgement, 'decided' refers to the date when  the  Tribunal
    made its decision having heard the case after 28 July 2014, rather than
    'decided' refering to when the immigration decision was made which  was
    in July 2013.

44. Even if I am wrong and in his decision he referred to the correct rule,
    I consider that the  judge  has  erred  in  his  consideration  of  the
    'insurmountable obstacles'  test.  In  Gulshan  (Article  8-new  Rules-
    correct approach) [2013] UKUT  640  the  Upper  Tribunal  set  out  the
    correct approach to appeals involving both Article 8 and the Rules. The
    head  note  reads  '...(c)  the  term  "insurmountable  obstacles"   in
    provisions such as Section EX1 are not obstacles which  are  impossible
    to surmount...they concern the practical possibilities  of  relocation.
    In the absence of such insurmountable obstacles,  it  is  necessary  to
    show other non-standard and particular features demonstrating that  the
    removal will be unjustifiably harsh (Nagre v SSHD [2013] EWHC 720)'.

45. In this case  the  judge  should  have  considered  all  the  material,
    relevant facts. Instead, he dealt only with a small number  of  matters
    which he considered she would have to give up (her residence, her  job,
    her property, her  adult  son).  He  did  not  consider  the  practical
    possibilities of relocation. In failing to apply the relevant test  the
    judge materially erred.

46. In finding that the Appellant satisfied the Rules the judge could  have
    stopped there the Rules being a complete code.  However he went  on  to
    consider the case on Article 8  grounds  outside  the  Rules.   In  his
    analysis on that issue I consider that he made  further  mistakes.   In
    particular, he found, correctly,  that  the  relationship  between  the
    Appellant and Mrs Jack-Warburton was established when he was in the  UK
    unlawfully but that it had been re-established and  consolidated  since
    he returned to Jamaica because of her frequent visits there.   However,
    he erred in stating that he was not 'strictly bound by the requirements
    of sub-section 117B(4) to give little  weight  to  their  relationship'
    because of their current relationship. He was strictly bound  to  apply
    the requirements.  I disagree with Mr Solomon that  they  do  not  have
    application in an out of country case.

47. For the reasons given I conclude that the First-tier  Judge  materially
    erred and that his decision must be set aside to be remade.

48. It was submitted by both parties at the hearing that if such was so the
    case should be dealt with under the new Rules.

49. I agree that  the  new  Rules  apply.  In  YM  (supra)  (in  which  the
    immigration decision had been made in 2008) it was stated at  [37]  'If
    this court were to set aside the decision of the UT  and  either  remit
    the matter or remake the decision itself, then, at that stage  I  think
    that both the new statutory provisions and the 2014 Rules would  become
    relevant.' (Aitkens LJ). I  see no reason why I should not  proceed  to
    remake the decision. There is  no dispute on the  facts  in  particular
    the strength of the relationship. The facts stand.

50. The Appellant was sentenced to 9 months imprisonment.  The  deportation
    order was made on 20 May 2008. The application for revocation was  made
    on 28 August 2012. The refusal decision was made on  25  July  2013.  I
    consider the relevant rules. I  note   paragraph  390,  391  and  391A.
    Paragraph 390  states  that  an  application  for  revocation  will  be
    considered in the light of all the circumstances including the  grounds
    on which the order was made, any representations, the interests of  the
    community, the interests of the applicant, including any  compassionate
    circumstances. Paragraph 390A states that where paragraph  398  applies
    the Respondent will consider whether 399 or 399A applies and if it does
    not, 'it will only be in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the  public
    interest in maintaining the deportation order  will  be  outweighed  by
    other factors.'

51. Paragraph 391 states in the case  of  a  person  deported  following  a
    criminal offence continued exclusion will be the proper course  in  the
    case of conviction for less than 4 years, unless 10 years have  elapsed
    since the making of the  deportation  order  unless   the  continuation
    would be contrary to the Human Rights Convention  or  there  are  other
    exceptional circumstances that mean that continuation is outweighed  by
    compelling factors. As for 391A, it states  that  revocation  will  not
    normally  be  authorised  unless  the  situation  has  been  materially
    altered, either by a change of circumstances since the order was  made,
    which may include the passage of time since the  person  was  deported.
    Also, fresh information which has come to light which  was  not  before
    the appellate authorities or the Respondent.

52. In this case the claim is that the immigration decision is contrary  to
    Article 8. There is clearly family life between the Appellant  and  his
    wife. The refusal to revoke the deportation order interferes  with  the
    right to respect for that family life. Such is sufficiently serious  as
    to engage Article 8. The issue is proportionality. It is  necessary  to
    consider whether 399 or 399A applies. These apply if 398 applies.   The
    issue in this case is whether 398(c) applies. It does. The  deportation
    was found to be to the public good because  the  offending  has  caused
    serious harm or they are a persistent offender.

53. I consider whether 399 applies. In this case  399  (b)  is  the  issue,
    namely, whether the person has a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
    with a partner who is in the UK and is a British citizen  and  (i)  the
    relationship was formed at a time when the person (deportee) was in the
    UK lawfully and their immigration status was not precarious;  and  (ii)
    it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live  in  the  country  to
    which the person is to be deported, because of compelling circumstances
    over and above those described in paragraph EX2 of Appendix FM; and  it
    would be unduly harsh for that partner to remain in the UK without  the
    person who is to be deported.

54.  On the evidence I find, and it is not disputed, that the  relationship
    was not formed at a time when the Appellant was  in  the  UK  lawfully.
    (i). I look additionally at (ii). His poor immigration history as  well
    as his criminal history has been  noted.  As  for  Ms  Jack-Warburton's
    situation, while she has a job and property in the  UK  and  has  lived
    here for some years, she is of Jamaican  origin,  spent  her  formative
    years there and will have knowledge of the culture and life there.  She
    married the Appellant there and has visited him often  there.  She  has
    relatives including cousins and brothers there. There are  no  language
    issues, nor is it suggested there are any significant health  problems.
    There is no indication that she is financially dependent  on  him.  Any
    skills she may have acquired in the UK can be used  to  assist  her  in
    settling in Jamaica.  Whilst she has a  son  he  is  an  adult  in  his
    twenties. I see no reason why her contact with him could  not  continue
    though modern means of communication and by visits by  either.  On  the
    evidence I do not see it to be unduly harsh for her to live in  Jamaica
    or to remain here without her partner.

55. I conclude that paragraph 399 does not apply. Paragraph 399A also  does
    not apply.

56. The next issue to consider is, with  neither  paragraph  399  nor  399A
    applying 'it will only be in exceptional circumstances that the  public
    interest in maintaining the deportation order  will  be  outweighed  by
    other factors.' (390A). Per MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 the court
    said (at [42] 'The  word  "exceptional"  is  often  used  to  denote  a
    departure from a general rule. The general rule in the present  context
    is that, in the case of a foreign prisoner to whom paras 399  and  399A
    do not apply, very compelling reasons will be required to outweigh  the
    public interest  in  deportation.  These  compelling  reasons  are  the
    "exceptional circumstances"'.

57. The court added: 'We would therefore hold that  the  new  Rules  are  a
    complete code and that the exceptional circumstances to  be  considered
    in the balancing exercise involve the application of a  proportionality
    test as required by the Strasbourg jurisprudence...' [44] And  (at[55])
    'Even if we were wrong about that, it would be  necessary  to  apply  a
    proportionality test outside the Rules...Either way, the  result  would
    be the same.'

58. I note that the Appellant has been excluded since mid 2008.  It  is  to
    their credit that the relationship between him and  Mrs  Jack-Warburton
    has prospered despite the  obvious  difficulties  inherent  in  a  long
    distance marriage. The problem for the Appellant is that he was removed
    for committing serious crime in a country where  he  had  been  staying
    unlawfully  for  many  years.  Mrs  Jack-Warburton  was  aware  of  his
    circumstances when she began a relationship  and  subsequently  married
    him. Article 8 does not confer a choice upon the Appellant and his wife
    as to where they wish to  enjoy  their  family  life  together.  Whilst
    sacrifices may have to be made, such are the  hardships  a  couple  may
    encounter when one partner does not have entry clearance to come to the
    UK owing to their previous criminal conduct.

59. In that regard as the tribunal who considered  the  deportation  appeal
    noted (at[65]) 'each (offence) was  committed  with  the  intention  of
    using  the  resulting  passport  as  his  own,  to  be  used  to  avoid
    identification as an over stayer and the consequent removal as an  over
    stayer, that certainly the second offence had been premeditated in  the
    sense that a false birth certificate was involved. Had the  application
    been successful, no doubt Mr Trevor  Lloyd  Price  would  have  quietly
    disappeared and Mr Leonard Lloyd Wedderburn...would have  been  quietly
    substituted. He would have  achieved  the  object  which  he  had  been
    pursuing since becoming an over stayer in 2000.'

60.  Looking at the facts in the round I do not find the  passage  of  time
    since deportation to be such in itself to warrant  revocation.  Looking
    at the material evidence I do not see there to be  any  exceptional  or
    compelling  circumstances  which  outweigh  the  public   interest   in
    maintaining the  deportation  order.  The  case  cannot  succeed  under
    paragraph 390A.

61. For the sake of completeness I consider the case out  with  the  Rules.
    The  same  findings  apply.  Additionally,  I  require  in  considering
    proportionality to take into account s117A and B of the  2002  Act.  In
    that regard it is in the Appellant's  favour  that  he  speaks  English
    (117B(2)). However, he does not appear to  be  financially  independent
    (117B(4)).  Also,  the  relationship  with  his  wife,  a   'qualifying
    partner', was established at a time when he was in the  UK  unlawfully.
    As such I give it little weight (117B(5)). I find also  that  he  is  a
    'foreign criminal' as defined in 117D as he has been  convicted  of  an
    offence  that  has  caused  serious  harm  (2)(c)(ii)  or  (iii)  is  a
    persistent offender. Exception 1 does not apply not  least  because  he
    has not been lawfully resident in the UK for most of his life. Nor does
    Exception 2 apply because on the facts found above the effects  of  his
    deportation on his partner are not unduly harsh. I see  no  exceptional
    circumstances that mean the continuation is  outweighed  by  compelling
    factors. The appeal does not succeed on Article 8 grounds.

62. The appeal fails under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  on  human  rights
    grounds.



Decision

The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  showed  an  error  of  law.   Its
decision is set aside and remade as follows:

    The appeal is dismissed under the Rules.

    The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds



No anonymity direction is made.



Upper Tribunal Judge Conway

