
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/19653/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 11 December 2014                       |On 15 December 2014              |
|Oral judgment                             |                                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                           Mr A K M Suajaat Husain
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Smith, Counsel, instructed by Danielle Cohen
                    Immigration Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   This is the appeal of  Mr  Suajaat  Husain,  who  appeals  against  the
    decision of Mr Lawrence in the First-tier Tribunal in  a  determination
    promulgated on 27 August 2014 dismissing his appeal against the refusal
    to grant him a residence card as  the  dependant  of  an  EEA  national
    exercising treaty rights in the UK.  The grounds seeking permission are
    quite lengthy and permission  was  granted  by  Judge  Osborne  on  all
    grounds.

2.   The most significant issue before me  though  is  the  failure  of  the
    judge to take account of the length of time that the appellant's son-in-
    law, who is  a  Ugandan-born  Norwegian  citizen  who  does  not  speak
    Bengali, spent in Bangladesh: some  fourteen  months  out  of  eighteen
    months.  Although in  the  absence  of  that  it  may  well  have  been
    difficult for the appellant to succeed in challenging the  decision  of
    Judge Lawrence, it is apparent that the credibility findings that  were
    made by the judge did not consider that length of  time.   Although  Mr
    Bramble submitted that it is possible that Mr  Jamal,  the  son-in-law,
    had been in Bangladesh for business reasons that was not a matter  that
    was put to Mr Jamal in the First-tier Tribunal as far as I can see  nor
    was it disputed that he had spent that amount of time there and nor was
    it referred to by the judge other than to record that he had spent that
    amount of time.

3.   Although there are adverse credibility findings made by  the  judge  in
    connection with a previous visit visa and the relationship between  the
    appellant and his son the issue of dependency is a  matter  that  would
    have to include consideration of the amount of time that the son-in-law
    had spent there given there is  some  evidence  of  relatively  serious
    illness and given of course his age.

4.   There are problems with the medical  reports  that  were  produced  and
    there are issues in relation to discrepancies in the evidence that  was
    given by the two  sponsors.   However,  to  spend  fourteen  months  in
    Bangladesh, in a country where you do not speak the language,  and  you
    are not a blood relative  and  you  have  three  children  and  a  wife
    remaining  in  the  UK  is  a  matter  that  needed   proper,   serious
    consideration in assessing whether the appellant was a dependant.

 5. For that reason I am satisfied that there is an error  of  law  in  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal such that  it  is  to  be  set
    aside and remade.



Signed        Date 15th December 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Coker

