
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/19890/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 20th November 2014                           |On 3rd December 2014       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                     mrs Maek Sultan Bahaduralia Trikam
                         (anonymity ORDER not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Brown, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss C Johnstone, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Kenya, born on 13th  January  1948.   She
    applied for entry clearance to the United Kingdom as an adult dependent
    relative under Appendix FM.  Her application was refused by  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer on 11th October 2013 on the  grounds  initially  that
    she was not considered suitable for  entry  clearance  requirements,  a
    matter which was not subsequently pursued on appeal and latterly on the
    basis that she did not meet the provisions for  eligibility  for  entry
    clearance as an adult dependent relative.  The Appellant  appealed  and
    the appeal came before Immigration Judge Edwards sitting at  Manchester
    on 29th May 2014.  In a determination promulgated on 19th June 2014 the
    Appellant's appeal was dismissed under the Immigration  Rules  and  was
    not allowed under the Human Rights Act.  The Appellant on 7th July 2014
    lodged Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  On  20th  August  2014
    Designated First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Zucker  granted  permission  to
    appeal.  Judge Zucker noted that the grounds  included  the  submission
    that in stating at paragraph 25 of the determination that he could  not
    say with any degree of certainty what the needs of the  Appellant  were
    suggested that the wrong standard of proof had been  applied  and  that
    the judge had failed to have regard to the medical evidence upon  which
    the Appellant relied.  In particular Judge Zucker considered  that  the
    judge had not had sufficient regard, if any, to  the  medical  evidence
    and granted permission to appeal.

 2. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  initially  to
    determine whether or not there is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The  Appellant  appears  by
    her instructed Counsel Mr Brown.  Also in attendance on her behalf  are
    her Sponsor and daughter Mrs  Reshma  Janmohammed.   The  Secretary  of
    State appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer Miss Johnstone.

The Facts and the Current Position

 3. It is important  to  acknowledge  in  this  determination  the  factual
    approach that is necessary for me to adopt.  The matter comes before me
    by way of an appeal that there is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   Consequently  it   is
    addressing those issues that has to be the starting point.  However  it
    is  appropriate  before  considering   the   submissions   therein   to
    acknowledge the current position in this matter.  At the  time  of  the
    application and the appeal the Sponsor who is  a  pharmacist  lived  in
    Manchester.  She has four children aged between 6 and 6  months.   Both
    she and her husband are British citizens.  Her mother who is  a  Kenyan
    citizen  has  no  family  left  in  Kenya.   She  is   suffering   from
    Alzheimer's.  That medical fact is not disputed  by  the  Secretary  of
    State.  The main thrust of Mr Brown's submissions so far as there is an
    error of law  relates  to  the  purported  failure  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge to consider the medical evidence.

 4. Following the failure of the Appellant's appeal Mrs  Janmohammed  moved
    to County Kildare, Ireland.  She moved as  an  EEA  citizen  exercising
    treaty rights and she has temporary employment there as  a  pharmacist.
    She lives there with her children.  She applied in Ireland for  a  visa
    for her mother to join her as a dependent relative of  an  EEA  citizen
    exercising treaty rights and this has been granted until  mid-December.
    As a result her mother currently resides with her, as does her husband.
     The family home in Manchester is being rented but it is the  Sponsor's
    wish that the family returns to that home.

 5. I note therefore that there is a change in both the Appellant's and the
    Sponsor's circumstances as at today's date.  I am also conscious of the
    fact that so far as the appeal under the Immigration Rules is concerned
    the relevant date is the date of decision,  whereas  any  appeal  under
    Article 8 the relevant date would be the date of hearing.  That  is  of
    relevance to submissions made to me and described later herein.

Submissions/Discussion on the Error of Law

 6. Mr Brown submits that the issues in dispute relate to  whether  or  not
    the Appellant can meet the requirements of paragraph E-ECDR.2.4 and 2.5
    of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules and pursuant to  Article  8  of
    the European Convention of Human Rights.  He points out to me  that  at
    paragraph 24 of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's determination the judge
    has dealt with satisfactorily the issue by which  entry  clearance  was
    refused on the basis of suitability and entrance clearance requirements
    under EC-DR.1.1(c) and that Article 8 is engaged on the basis that this
    was in fact referred to in the Grounds  of  Appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 7. He turns to the judge's findings at paragraphs 25 and  26.   He  points
    out that the judge has only looked at E-ECDR.2.4 and that  he  has  not
    gone on to consider 2.5.  Miss  Johnstone  in  response  interjects  by
    stating that in order to reach paragraph 2.5 it is  necessary  for  the
    judge to be satisfied under 2.4 and as he was not satisfied the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge was entitled not to proceed further.

 8. Mr Brown's response is to concentrate very much on the submission  that
    the judge has failed to give any or due consideration  to  the  medical
    evidence that has been produced.  He refers me  in  particular  to  the
    letter from Dr Pius Kigamwa, a consultant psychiatrist which refers  to
    the Appellant's Alzheimer's dementia.  He points out  that  the  letter
    from Dr Kigamwa indicates that the Appellant needs 24 hour  care.   The
    response to this from Miss Johnstone is that even though that letter is
    not referred to, it is not material because the  judge  has  given  due
    consideration to the nursing care that is available and being  provided
    in Kenya to the Appellant.

 9. Mr Brown contends that it is not possible to draw any conclusions  from
    paragraphs 25 and 26 of the judge's findings and that there is  no  way
    in knowing how the judge came to his  conclusions.   His  challenge  is
    consequently a "reasons" challenge and that it is not sufficient merely
    to say that she can receive care in a care home and that the  care  she
    requires has not been properly considered.

10. He also goes on to point out that the judge  has  failed  to  give  any
    analysis to Article 8 and has not engaged with Article  8  submissions.
    He points out that the only reference to Article 8 in the  findings  is
    to be found at paragraph 28 and that the judge  is  wrong  to  conclude
    that no human rights point was raised in the Notice of Appeal and  none
    appeared to him to be obvious.  He asked me to find  that  there  is  a
    material error of law and to set aside the decision.





The Law

11.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account   immaterial   consideration,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

12. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

13. The findings are found at paragraphs 25, 26 and 28  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's determination.  It is clear from paragraphs 25 and  26
    the judge has made no reference to, nor does he appear  to  have  given
    any due and proper consideration to, the medical evidence  produced  by
    Dr Kigamwa.  That consists of two letters.  The judge appears  to  have
    failed to engage with the requirements of paragraph E-ECDR.2.4  and  as
    such has materially erred in law.  Had he done so  he  certainly  would
    have gone on to consider the case under 2.5.

14. In addition the judge was wrong to find that  no  human  rights  points
    were raised in the Notice of Appeal and whilst he may  be  entitled  to
    conclude  that  there  are  no  sufficiently  compelling  circumstances
    outside the Rules for allowing the appeal it is incumbent upon  him  to
    give reasons.  For all these factors I find  that  there  are  material
    errors of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and set  aside
    that decision.

The Current Position

15. I am very conscious of the fact that the Sponsor has travelled all  the
    way  from  Ireland  to  hear  this  appeal.   I  am  anxious  in   such
    circumstances that a further hearing is not necessary.  Mr Brown  urges
    me to rehear the matter today both  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    under Article 8.  Miss Johnstone strongly objects to a rehearing  under
    Article 8 taking place today.  The basis for her argument is that there
    is  a  completely  different  change  of  circumstances  to  that  that
    originated at the date of decision and that the Sponsor is currently an
    EEA national exercising treaty rights in Ireland and that  that  raises
    difficulties  of  jurisdiction  and  of  hearing  this  matter   today,
    particularly bearing in mind that the Appellant  herself  is  currently
    resident in Ireland.  I find  Miss  Johnstone's  view  on  this  aspect
    persuasive and I therefore ruled that the appeal pursuant to Article  8
    would remain extant and adjourned  to  be  restored  only  and  if  the
    Appellant's solicitors made  application.   The  reason  for  that  was
    I proceeded today to rehear the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

The Relevant Rules

            16. E-ECDR.2.4. The applicant or, if  the  applicant  and  their
                partner are  the  sponsor's  parents  or  grandparents,  the
                applicant's partner, must as a result  of  age,  illness  or
                disability  require  long-term  personal  care  to   perform
                everyday tasks.

    E-ECDR.2.5.   The applicant or, if the applicant and their partner  are
                the  sponsor's  parents  or  grandparents,  the  applicant's
                partner,  must  be  unable,  even  with  the  practical  and
                financial help of the sponsor, to obtain the required  level
                of care in the country where they are living, because-

                (a)    it is not available and there is no  person  in  that
                    country who can reasonably provide it; or

                (b)    it is not affordable.

Submissions on Rehearing

17. Miss  Johnstone  relies  on  the  original  Entry  Clearance  Officer's
    decision.  She submits that it is incumbent upon the Appellant to  show
    that she is not able to perform everyday tasks and that she cannot  get
    the level of care required where she is living.  She submits that  care
    is available in Kenya, taking me to the fee schedule for  home  nursing
    from Tel-a-Nurse Limited and to the terms and  conditions  attached  to
    that schedule.  She points out, that carers were paid for  to  go  into
    the Appellant's home and that financial help is  also  available.   She
    submits that the Sponsor is a professional lady and therefore under 2.5
    can afford to meet the care fees that would be necessarily generated in
    looking after her mother in Kenya.  She asked me to dismiss the appeal.
     Mr Brown submits that on the evidence it is clear that  the  Appellant
    was at date of decision living outside the UK (and that  indeed  whilst
    in different circumstances she continues to do so) and that  she  meets
    the requirements of long-term care as set out in 2.4 and that  she  has
    extra medical needs as required by  paragraph  2.5  which  justify  the
    bringing in of the Appellant to this country to live with her daughter.
     He takes me to the Tel-a-Nurse terms and condition  and  submits  that
    the required level of care for the Appellant is  not  met  therein  and
    that the Appellant needs someone to assist in her care  on  a  24  hour
    round the clock basis.

18. I took evidence from the Sponsor with regard to  the  regime  that  was
    necessary for the Appellant's day-to-day care.  Ms Janmohammed  advises
    that the Appellant needs care on a 24 hour  a  day  basis  in  cooking,
    cleaning and making sure she has  drinks  and  that  it  is  also  very
    important that she has familiar faces around her.  She advises that  24
    hour care is provided by a family member.  She further points out  that
    the Appellant has no sense of responsibility over money and she  cannot
    be left on her own or indeed in a country where she  would  be  on  her
    own.  She reminds me that the Appellant has no other  family  in  Kenya
    and that her (Ms Janmohammed's) brother lives in Watford.

19. Mr Brown seeks to impress upon me and to highlight  the  importance  of
    the significant factors that have not  been  addressed  in  this  case,
    namely the care requirements of the Appellant.   He  acknowledges  that
    under the old Rules - in particular Rule 297 - it was  difficult  for
    elderly parents to meet the Rules, but that these  Rules  were  changed
    quite deliberately to avoid elderly  parents  being  left  where  their
    needs cannot be met and he submits that the Appellant's needs cannot be
    met by what is available in Kenya.  He asked me  to  allow  the  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules.

Findings

20. The starting point in  this  matter  has  to  be  whether  or  not  the
    Appellant can meet the provisions of  paragraph  E-ECDR.2.4.   In  this
    instance the question to be asked as a starting point is whether  as  a
    result of age, illness or disability the Appellant  requires  long-term
    personal care to perform everyday tasks.  I am satisfied that  that  is
    the case.  In reaching that conclusion I have given  due  consideration
    to medical evidence that has  been  made  available.   Firstly  I  have
    considered Dr Kigamwa's consultant psychiatric report/letter of 3rd May
    2013.  This letter predates the Entry  Clearance  Officer's  Notice  of
    Refusal by some five months.  It is a letter  of  some  substance.   It
    points out that the Appellant has even at that  time  radiological  and
    clinical diagnosis of dementia, most probably of the  Alzheimer's  type
    and has clinical depression.  Dr Kigamwa has considerable knowledge and
    understanding of the Appellant.  He had been seeing her for almost  two
    years when this letter was written on a two monthly  basis  and  states
    therein that he has noticed a deteriorating condition and that  a  care
    plan has been  put  in  place.   He  emphasises  that  the  Appellant's
    cognitive functions have declined to a point where she has proved to be
    a danger to herself and that she needs care around the clock.  As  long
    ago as May 2013 he has emphasised that this care is better provided  by
    a close family member of the family to prevent further triggers and for
    better support of the patient.  He stresses that  activities  of  daily
    living, like bathing, dressing and assistance with  toileting,  require
    total assistance and that the Appellant will need 24 hour care at  this
    stage of her condition and that because she is diabetic, the  risks  of
    not taking medication may on its own make her ill, not to  mention  the
    deteriorating nature of the condition emphasises the importance of care
    with a close  and  familiar  member  of  the  family  and  in  familiar
    environments and in his considered opinion she would benefit from close
    family care.

21. Dr Kigamwa updates his analysis a year later by  way  of  letter  dated
    28th April 2014.  Therein he states that the Appellant's  dementia  has
    progressively gotten worse to a point where she is not able to remember
    much but she still recognises family members.   In  addition  he  notes
    that she has developed features  of  a  depressive  illness  and  often
    threatens suicide, and thus requires  to  be  constantly  watched.   He
    emphasises that the Appellant is looked after, at time of  his  report,
    by family members, in particular his son-in-law and that at  her  stage
    of dementia it is his opinion that she requires family support and care
    and that she would need 24 hour care and help with activities of  daily
    living, like bathing, dressing and toileting.  He emphasises  therefore
    those aspects of the care that Mrs  Janmohammed  has  provided  in  her
    testimony and he has emphasised the very considerable support that both
    Mrs Janmohammed and her husband Zilad have provided  by  travelling  to
    and from Kenya.  He has concluded by emphasising the  significance  and
    importance of care with a close and familiar member of the  family  and
    in familiar environments and that with dementia the loss of memory puts
    more strain on the individual when they are in unfamiliar surroundings.



22. In addition to that I have given due consideration to, albeit  that  it
    postdates the date of hearing, the letter from Dr Sheila Dobell who  is
    a GP in County Kildare and who does no more  than  reiterate  the  view
    expressed by Dr Kigamwa that the Appellant requires 24  hour  care  and
    help and that she requires a full-time  carer  and  will  benefit  from
    close family care.

23. Having previously concluded that  the  Appellant  meets  therefore  the
    requirements of E-ECDR.2.4  in  that  it  is  clear  from  the  medical
    evidence that she requires long-term personal care to perform  everyday
    tasks, I proceed to look at this matter pursuant to E-ECDR.2.5.   I  am
    satisfied that the Appellant is unable to obtain the required level  of
    care in Kenya because it is not available and there  is  no  person  in
    that country who can reasonably provide it.  Cost  is  not  a  relevant
    factor herein.  The Appellant comes from a very  caring  family  and  I
    have gleaned from my hearing of this matter and  consideration  of  the
    evidence the exceptional family care that  has  been  provided  by  the
    Sponsor and her husband and the support that is also  provided  by  the
    Appellant's son.  It is clearly totally impractical where there are  no
    other family members and the Appellant is  subject  to  a  care  regime
    provided by a nursing service that the  care  and  attention  that  she
    requires can be adequately provided in  Kenya.   What  is  particularly
    emphasised by Dr Kigamwa and enlarged upon by Dr Dobell is firstly  the
    24 hour care that the Appellant requires and secondly the importance of
    that care being provided by close  family  members.   I  am  completely
    satisfied that that can only be  obtained  by  her  residing  with  the
    Sponsor whose devotion to her mother is to be most highly commended.

24. In all the circumstances I am consequently therefore satisfied that the
    Appellant meets the requirements of  Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and the Appellant's  appeal  is  allowed  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.

25. I was asked by Mr Brown to give a direction under  the  2002  Act  that
    entry clearance be expedited by the Entry Clearance  Officer.   On  due
    consideration I am not of the view that this is a matter that needs  to
    be either remitted to the Entry Clearance Officer or for any  direction
    under the 2002 Act.  It is  sufficient  merely  to  allow  the  appeal.
    Further even though I am dealing with the matter  as  at  the  date  of
    hearing under the Immigration Rules the practicality  of  the  position
    remains that the matter has to be looked at on the parties' behalf from
    where they are currently positioned.   It  seems  to  me  it  would  be
    ridiculous to even remotely suggest that the Appellant in her condition
    should have  to  return  to  Kenya  to  obtain  entry  clearance.   The
    Appellant is a family member of a UK  national  and  the  situation  in
    which the family find themselves  in  is  covered  by  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006, paragraph  9.   The  Sponsor
    would be returning to the UK as a UK national currently residing in  an
    EEA state as a worker or self-employed person or was so residing before
    returning to the United Kingdom.  In such circumstances it  would  seem
    appropriate that  that  may  well  be  a  factor  for  the  Appellant's
    instructed  solicitors  wish  to  consider  when  arranging   for   the
    appropriate entry clearance.  In any event for clarification I consider
    that the correct decision is that  the  appeal  be  allowed  under  the
    Immigration Rules.

Decision

26. The appeal is allowed under the Immigration Rules.

27. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to  Rule  14  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  No application  is
    made to vary that order and none is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

