
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/19578/2012
                                                               OA/19529/2012
                                                               OA/19537/2012
                                                               OA/19545/2012
                                                               OA/19540/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 22 November 2013                           |On 9 December 2013           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                     FEVEN TEKLE AMINE (FIRST APPELLANT)
                   DAWIT ELIAS TEWOLDE (SECOND APPELLANT)
                     NOH ELIAS TEWOLDE (THIRD APPELLANT)
                    NEBI ELIAS TEWOLDE (FOURTH APPELLANT)
                    LIDIA ELIAS TEWOLDE (FIFTH APPELLANT)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - CAIRO

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms J Robinson instructed by BHD Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REMITTAL

 1. The appellants are citizens of Eritrea who were born respectively on  7
    January 1977, 12 September 1999, 27 April 2002, 6 January 2005  and  27
    September 2007.  On 10 July 2012, they applied for leave to  enter  the
    United Kingdom as the spouse (first appellant) and  dependent  children
    (second, third, and fourth appellants) of  Elias  Tewolde  Tekle,  (the
    sponsor) who had been granted indefinite leave to remain as  a  refugee
    in July 2008.

 2. On 20 September 2012, the Entry Clearance Officer refused each  of  the
    appellants' applications under para 352A (in  the  case  of  the  first
    appellant) and para 352D (in the cases of the other appellants) of  the
    Immigration Rules (HC 395  as  amended).   In  relation  to  the  first
    appellant, the ECO was not satisfied that their  marriage  was  genuine
    and subsisting and that it had, in any event, taken  place  before  the
    sponsor had left Eritrea to claim asylum in the UK.  In relation to the
    remaining appellants, the ECO was not satisfied that they formed  "part
    of the family unit" of the sponsor before he  left  Eritrea.   The  ECO
    also concluded that the appellants were not entitled to entry clearance
    on the basis of Art 8 of the ECHR.

 3. The appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.   The  appeal  came
    before Judge W L Grant.  In respect of  the  first  appellant,  it  was
    accepted that she could not meet the requirements of the family reunion
    rule in para 352A.  She had married the sponsor  (for  a  second  time)
    after he had left Eritrea.  The judge dismissed her appeal under Art  8
    of the ECHR.  In  relation  to  the  remaining  appellants,  the  judge
    dismissed their appeals under  para  352D  on  the  basis  he  was  not
    satisfied that they formed "part of the family  unit"  of  the  sponsor
    prior to him leaving Eritrea and,  in  addition,  the  judge  dismissed
    their appeals under Art 8 of the ECHR.

 4. The appellants sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  That
    permission was initially refused by the First-tier Tribunal but  on  27
    August 2013, UTJ Latter granted the appellants permission to appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal.  By that date, the fourth appellant had died and so
    the appeals before me concerned only the first, second, third and fifth
    appellants.

 5. Before turning to the parties' submissions, it is helpful  to  set  out
    briefly the background to  these  appeals.   The  first  appellant  and
    sponsor married in July 1999.  The  second  appellant  was  born  as  a
    result of an extramarital affair by the sponsor in September 1999.  The
    children of the sponsor and first appellant were born  in  April  2002,
    April 2004 and January 2005.  In May  2007,  the  first  appellant  and
    sponsor divorced.  In January 2008, the sponsor married  another  woman
    in Eritrea.  On 1 May 2008, the sponsor left Eritrea and on 4 July 2008
    claimed asylum in the United Kingdom.  He was granted refugee status on
    7 July 2008.  In September 2009, the sponsor divorced his second  wife.
    In September 2011, the appellants left Eritrea and moved to Sudan.   In
    January 2012 the appellants initially applied for  entry  clearance  to
    join the sponsor but their applications were refused.  On 13 May  2012,
    the sponsor and first appellant remarried.  The  appellants  then  made
    the applications, the subject of these appeals, on 10 July  2012  which
    were refused on 20 September 2012.

The Submissions

 6. Ms Robinson, who  represented  the  appellants,  submitted  that  Judge
    Grant's decision could not stand for three reasons.

 7. First, she  submitted  that  Judge  Grant  had  made  adverse  findings
    concerning the sponsor's divorce from his second  wife  and  also  made
    allegations of forgery  or  deceit  against  the  first  appellant  and
    sponsor.  Ms Robinson submitted that  the  validity  of  the  sponsor's
    divorce from his second wife was not in issue before  the  judge.   The
    judge failed to raise the issue or any suggestion that documents relied
    on were forgeries at the hearing.  That,  Ms  Robinson  submitted,  was
    unfair and in breach of the Surendran guidelines  (see  MNN  (Surendran
    guidelines for Adjudicators) Kenya [2000] UKIAT 0005).   Those  errors,
    Ms Robinson submitted, tainted or coloured the judge's adverse  finding
    that the child appellants had not formed a family unit with the sponsor
    prior to his departure from Eritrea.

 8. Secondly, Ms Robinson submitted that  the  judge  had  failed  to  give
    reasons for his finding that the child  appellants  had  not  formed  a
    family unit with the sponsor before his departure  but  were,  instead,
    living with the first appellant apart from the sponsor.

 9. Thirdly, Ms Robinson submitted that the judge's findings in respect  of
    Art 8 were perverse, in  particular  that  there  was  no  family  life
    between the appellants and the sponsor.

10. On behalf of the respondent,  Mr  Richards  acknowledged  that  as  the
    respondent had not been represented before the judge he could not  cast
    any light on what had happened at the hearing.  He  accepted,  however,
    that there was no reason to doubt what was said in the grounds prepared
    by the appellants' (then) Counsel who had represented them  before  the
    judge.  Mr Richards did not seek to support the judge's decision on the
    basis of the first ground upon which Ms Robinson put their case  before
    me.

Discussion

11. In my judgment, the judge's decision cannot stand on the  basis  of  Ms
    Robinson's first submission which I accept in substance.

12. In his determination, at para 10, the judge noted that  the  respondent
    did not place in issue the fact that the sponsor  and  first  appellant
    were divorced in May  2007.   Likewise,  the  ECO  did  not  call  into
    question  the  validity  of  the  sponsor's  remarriage  to  the  first
    appellant or of his divorce from his  second  wife  as  he  claimed  in
    September 2009.  These were matters, of course,  that  could  not  have
    been raised by the respondent at the hearing before the judge since the
    respondent  was  not  represented.   Whilst  the  judge's   Record   of
    Proceedings shows that  the  sponsor  was  asked  questions  about  his
    divorce and remarriage, including a letter relied upon by the appellant
    but discounted by the judge in para 14  of  his  determination,  it  is
    clear from the record of the  proceedings  by  the  appellant's  (then)
    Counsel that the judge did not directly raised any  issues  as  to  the
    validity of the sponsor's divorces, first from the first appellant  and
    subsequently from his second wife.

13. In para 13, the judge said this in relation to  the  sponsor's  divorce
    from his second wife:

         "The sponsor was granted refugee status on 07 July 2008.  He claims
         that he divorced Mary Ghirmay in September 2009.  He  relies  on  a
         document in the respondent's bundle which has not been  translated.
         With the help of the  court  interpreter  we  identified  it  as  a
         document showing that the divorce took place on 25  September  2009
         and  that  it  is  signed  by  a  total  of  7  people,  namely   2
         representatives from his side, 2 from her side,  a  mediator,  Mary
         Ghirmay herself and he sponsor's uncle.  There is no indication  on
         the document of the location where the  document  was  prepared  or
         signed.  It does bear the insignia of the Eritrean  government.   I
         did not have to  admit  this  document  because  it  has  not  been
         translated but I waived the requirements of  the  Procedure  Rules.
         However that does  not  mean  that  I  place  weight  on  it.   The
         appellant claims to be a Christian as opposed to a Muslim who would
         be able to be married to more than one wife.  I have never seen the
         certificates relating to either of his  claimed  marriages  or  his
         claimed divorce from the first appellant.  He was not present  when
         the divorce from Mary Ghirmay took place and her  whereabouts  were
         totally unknown to  him  since  the  date  of  his  departure  from
         Eritrea.  There is no evidence before me to show that in Eritrea it
         is possible to divorce in absentia.  Given that there is no address
         on the document, that  there  is  no  indication  in  it  that  the
         presiding Judge or Registrar saw the marriage  certificate  or  had
         any idea who the sponsor was, I can place no weight on it.   If  it
         is the case that the sponsor fled Eritrea having failed  to  report
         for signing at the local police  station  then  I  find  it  highly
         unlikely that he would have allowed  his  personal  details  to  be
         placed before a representative of the authorities  for  any  reason
         and he gives no explanation for the fact that Mary Ghirmay suddenly
         reappeared at the divorce registry after he had effectively removed
         her from his life when he left the country some 15 months earlier."

14. Likewise, at para 14 of the determination the judge dealt with a letter
    relating to the sponsor's divorce  from  and  reconciliation  with  the
    first appellant as follows:

         "There is a  letter  in  the  respondent's  bundle  which  bears  4
         signatures and this letter has been translated into English.  It is
         dated 05 June 2012 and states that the appellant  and  the  sponsor
         divorced in May 2007 but reconciled in October 2009 with  the  help
         of village elders.  It states that the 4 children were looked after
         by their father (the sponsor) during the  divorce  and  they  lived
         with him since May 2007 up  to  their  parents'  reconciliation  in
         October 2009.  That is simply not true because the sponsor was  not
         present in Eritrea after 01 May 2008.  I place no  weight  on  this
         letter."

15. Then, in relation to both documents the  judge  reached  the  following
    conclusion at para 14:

         "The two documents show that the appellants and/or the sponsor  are
         prepared to rely upon documents  which  if  not  forged  have  been
         prepared to help their cases and here I refer  back  to  the  birth
         certificates and taking the  documents  in  the  round  I  make  an
         adverse finding of credibility.  There is a letter from  the  fifth
         appellant in the respondent's bundle.  At its highest it  is  self-
         serving.  I place no weight on it in any event.  The  documents  to
         which I have referred are totally unreliable  as  evidence  of  the
         facts which they purport to set  out  and  as  such  undermine  the
         credibility of the appellants and their applications."

16. The judge's conclusion is as follows:  either he took the view that the
    documents were forged or that they were "prepared to help their  cases"
    which, at least by implication, suggests that they are  otherwise  than
    'speaking the truth' in their contents.  As  the  Surendran  guidelines
    make clear (at [8]):

         "There might well be matters which are not raised in the letter  of
         refusal which the Special Adjudicator considers to be relevant  and
         of importance ... Where these are matters which clearly the Special
         Adjudicator considers  he  may  well  wish  to  deal  with  in  his
         determination, then he should raise these with  the  representative
         and invite submissions to be made in relation thereto."

17. I am not satisfied that the judge raised the issues which troubled  him
    in  paras  13  and  14  of  his  determination  with  the   appellants'
    representative.   Certainly  as  recorded,  the  submissions   of   the
    appellants' representative did not seek to address the points raised in
    paras 13 and 14.  Had they been raised  by  the  judge,  that  omission
    would be somewhat surprising.

18. In my judgment, the judge should have raised  these  matters  with  the
    appellants' legal representative if he intended to rely  upon  them  in
    his determination.  None of these  points  were  raised  in  the  ECO's
    refusal  decisions.   The  appellant  was,  therefore,  not  given  the
    opportunity to deal with the points taken against her by the judge.  Ms
    Robinson told me, for example, that there was evidence which dealt with
    the apparent discrepancy  in  para  14  which  stated  that  the  child
    appellant had lived with the sponsor after his divorce from  the  first
    appellant in May 2007 until he and the first appellant were  reconciled
    in October 2009.  The discrepancy arises because the sponsor could  not
    have been in Eritrea after May 2008 when he came to the UK.  The  point
    is, however, that as these matters were not raised by  the  judge,  the
    appellants and their representative had no opportunity to deal with the
    points relied on by  the  judge  including  the  implication  that  the
    documents are forgeries.

19. It is not necessary  to  deal  with  Ms  Robinson's  second  and  third
    submissions because, in my judgment, the failure by the judge to  raise
    these matters at the hearing,  as  she  submitted,  tainted  the  fact-
    finding process and his ultimate adverse findings in  relation  to  all
    the appellants which cannot, as a result, stand.

Decision and Disposal

20. For these reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the
    making of an error of law and the decisions  to  dismiss  each  of  the
    appellants' appeals are set aside.

21. Both representatives indicated to me that the proper course was for the
    appeals to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  de  novo  re-
    hearing with none of the judge's findings standing.  I  agree  that  is
    the proper course.  Ms Robinson, on instructions, asked me to remit the
    appeal to the Newport Hearing Centre, given that the sponsor  lives  in
    Cardiff.

22. The appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
    rehearing (not before Judge WL Grant).




                                                                      Signed


                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
