
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/19229/2013
                                                               OA/19230/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6th February 2015                          |On 17th February 2015         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                    mr m g e (a minor - first appellant)
                   miss s g e (A MINOR - second appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Richardson, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr M Shilliday, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are nationals of Jamaica born respectively on 12th  June
    1998 and 27th May 2003.  Application had been made by  both  Appellants
    for indefinite leave to enter the United Kingdom as a child of a parent
    present and settled in the United Kingdom  and  their  application  was
    originally considered  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  pursuant  to
    paragraph  297  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   That   application   was
    considered by the Entry Clearance Officer on 28th August  2013  and  it
    was refused on the grounds that the Appellants did not  meet  paragraph
    297, in particular:-

      i) that the Entry Clearance Officer was not satisfied that the  parent
         that  the  Appellants  were  seeking   to   join   has   had   sole
         responsibility for their upbringing (paragraph 297(i)(e)), and

     ii) that the Entry Clearance Officer was not satisfied that  there  are
         serious and compelling family or other  considerations  which  make
         the Appellants' exclusion undesirable (paragraph 297(i)(f)).

 2. The Appellants appealed and the appeal came before Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Davey sitting at Taylor House on 7th October 2014.  In  a
    determination promulgated on 17th October 2014 the Appellants'  appeals
    were allowed under the Immigration Rules.

 3. On 21st October 2014 the Secretary of State lodged  Grounds  of  Appeal
    contending that the judge had failed  to  apply  the  correct  test  as
    enunciated in TD (Yemen) [2006] UKAIT 00049.

 4. On 11th  December  2014  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cruthers  granted
    permission to appeal.  It is on that basis that the appeal comes before
    me to determine whether or not there is a material error of law in  the
    decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   For  the  purpose  of
    continuity throughout the proceedings, albeit that this is an appeal by
    the Secretary of State, the Secretary of State is referred to herein as
    the Respondent and Mr and Miss E as  the  Appellants.   The  Appellants
    appear by their instructed Counsel Mr Richardson.   Mr  Richardson  has
    served  a  handwritten  Rule  24  response  on  the  Tribunal  at   the
    commencement of the proceedings.  That Rule 24 response merely states

         "The Appellant submits, that in the event that the  Upper  Tribunal
         identifies an error of law in the determination  of  Judge  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal Davey, that the appeal ought to nevertheless be
         allowed under

         (i)  279(i)(f) of the Immigration Rules and or

         (ii) Article 8 ECHR".

     Mr Shilliday does not object to that Rule 24  response  being  admitted
    in evidence.

The Issue

 5. The issue in this matter is quite succinctly described in Judge Davey's
    determination.  The sole issue is whether or  not  the  father  of  the
    Appellants, their  Sponsor,  had  sole  responsibility  and  that  sole
    responsibility has to be understood in the sense of the case law in  TD
    (Yemen) [2006] UKAIT 49.







The Case Law

 6. In TD (Yemen) it was held:-

         "'Sole responsibility' is a factual matter to be decided  upon  all
         the evidence.  Where one parent is  not  involved  in  the  child's
         upbringing  because  he  (or  she)  had  abandoned   or   abdicated
         responsibility, the issue may arise between  the  remaining  parent
         and others who have day-to-day care of the child abroad.  The  test
         is whether the parent has continuing control and direction over the
         child's upbringing, including making all the important decisions in
         the child's life. However, where both parents  are  involved  in  a
         child's upbringing, it will be exceptional that one  of  them  will
         have 'sole responsibility'".

The Evidence

 7. It is accepted by both Mr Shilliday and Mr Richardson that the evidence
    is as set out  in  paragraph  6  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    explanation as explained and expanded in paragraphs 7 to 11 thereof.

Submissions

 8. Mr Shilliday submits that the phrase used by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge at paragraph 21 of his determination that the Sponsor's  ex-wife,
    the mother of the Appellants, takes some  interest  in  the  children's
    upbringing is, he contends, fatal to a contention that the Sponsor  has
    sole responsibility  for  the  children's  upbringing  as  required  by
    paragraph 297(i)(e).  He submits that  at  the  date  of  decision  the
    Sponsor did not have sole responsibility and that the judge's  decision
    was speculative on what would happen in the future and that is not  the
    way the claim should be looked at  under  the  Rules.   That  apart  he
    relies on the Grounds of Appeal.

 9. Mr Richardson points out that it was made very clear before the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge that the Appellants' mother was intending  to  move
    to Canada from Jamaica to  work  and  study  and  that  that  technical
    desertion/abandonment of the children  meant  that  responsibility  for
    them had to be passed to their UK based Sponsor.  He acknowledges  that
    the parents had gone about the matter in a proper way  and  that  legal
    custody of the children and responsibility for them transferred to  the
    Sponsor by an order of the court in Jamaica on 16th December 2012.   He
    acknowledges that for the best interests of  the  children  whilst  the
    immigration procedures were  taking  their  course,  their  mother  has
    delayed her move but any living with the mother is  only  taking  place
    until circumstances are such that she can leave.  He emphasises however
    that all major decisions are made by the UK based father.

10. He submits that the parents have looked at the matter  in  considerable
    depth and the parents have sought what is  in  the  best  interests  of
    their children and have decided that the children should come to the UK
    and that the only person who would look after  the  children  would  be
    their father.  He points out that the basis of  paragraph  297  of  the
    Immigration Rules is for the benefit of children and it cannot be right
    that sole responsibility cannot pass  until  a  need  materialises  and
    therefore the judge is entitled to make the findings that  he  did  and
    that the decision contains no material errors of law.  He asked  me  to
    dismiss the appeal.

The Law

11.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account   immaterial   consideration,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

12. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

13. The whole thrust of the Secretary of State's appeal is  the  judge  has
    erred in his assessment of what constitutes sole responsibility.   Sole
    responsibility is a factual matter to be decided on all  the  evidence.
    That is noted in the head note of TD (Yemen)  and  was  also  noted  by
    Immigration Judge Davey.  It is not necessary to  recite  again  within
    this determination the factual matrix of this matter.  That is well set
    out within the First-tier  Judge's  determination  and  the  facts  are
    accepted and agreed.  I remind myself that it is the role of the  Upper
    Tribunal to correct errors that have arisen in a decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal.  It is not per se the role  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  to
    rehear the evidence and to try and come to different findings  on  that
    evidence.   In  this  matter  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has  at
    paragraph  4  taken  on  board  fully  the  basis   upon   which   sole
    responsibility can exist as a matter of law.  He has then  gone  on  to
    analyse the facts, considered the children's schooling at paragraph 15,
    considered issues which,  whilst  he  acknowledges  postdate  decision,
    consist of communications at paragraph 16 and makes findings  that  the
    Sponsor has not only continued with the financial  responsibility  that
    he had previously maintained but has taken over sole responsibility for
    major decisions as set out at paragraph 18.

14. The First-tier Tribunal Judge has therefore carried out a very full and
    detailed analysis before reaching his findings and I  totally  disagree
    with the submission made  by  Mr  Shilliday  that  merely  because  the
    children's mother shows some interest in the children's  upbringing  is
    fatal to a claim under Section 297.  That clearly is  not  what  either
    the Immigration Rules or TD (Yemen) states or contemplates.

15. It is important to note that the First-tier Tribunal Judge allowed  the
    appeal "under the Immigration Rules".   That  was  a  perfectly  proper
    approach and he did not need to specify which sub-Rule of paragraph 297
    he allowed them under.  Argument  raised  by  the  Secretary  of  State
    relating to sole responsibility, bearing in mind the physical  presence
    of the Appellants' mother, might, if considered on its own, have led to
    a different determination under Section 297(i)(e).  However the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge looked at the matter under paragraph 297  and  made
    findings to the effect that this was one  of  those  exceptional  cases
    that should succeed.  Whether it effectively  succeeded  under  Section
    297(i)(e) or 297(i)(f) is irrelevant.  Each case is fact specific.   In
    such circumstances the arguments made by the Secretary of State  amount
    to no more than  disagreement  and  argument  and  the  appeal  of  the
    Secretary of State is dismissed and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge discloses no material error of law and is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses  no  material  error
of law and the appeal of  the  Secretary  of  State  is  dismissed  and  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

The First-tier Tribunal Judge made an anonymity order.   No  application  is
made to vary that order and the order is continued.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
