
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/19113/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal|              Decision & Reasons     |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 27th October 2015                   |              On 24th November 2015  |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                              Sabriya Mohammed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                       entry clearance officer - amman
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Lawrence, Counsel instructed by Alsters Kelley
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a female citizen of Iraq born on 1st July  1945.   She
    applied for entry clearance to come to the UK as the dependent relative
    of the Sponsor, her son, Soran Ahmad Mohammad.   That  application  was
    refused for the reasons given  in  a  Notice  of  Decision  dated  19th
    September 2013.  The Appellant appealed, and her appeal  was  heard  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Birk (the Judge)  sitting  at  Birmingham  on
    15th September 2014.  She decided to dismiss the appeal for the reasons
    given in a Decision dated 16th September 2014.   The  Appellant  sought
    leave to appeal that decision, and on 2nd December 2014 such permission
    was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Judge dismissed the appeal because  although  she  found  that  the
    requirements of paragraph E-ECDR.2.4 of Appendix FM of HC 395 were met,
    she was not satisfied  that  the  Appellant  met  the  requirements  of
    paragraphs E-ECDR.2.5 or E-ECP.3.4.  The Judge was not  satisfied  that
    the Appellant had shown  that  there  was  no-one  in  Iraq  who  could
    reasonably provide the Appellant with the various aspects of care which
    she needed.  This was because the Appellant  was  financially  able  to
    look after herself including the provision of medical needs, and  there
    was no evidence that the Sponsor had investigated  the  possibility  of
    hiring some sort of home help for the Appellant.  The  Judge  was  also
    not satisfied that  there  would  be  adequate  accommodation  for  the
    Appellant in the UK as the evidence did not  show  that  the  Sponsor's
    landlords would consent to the Appellant living with him on a permanent
    basis.

 4. Mr Lawrence argued that the Judge had erred in law in coming  to  these
    conclusions.   The  Judge  had  decided  the  accommodation  issue   by
    reference to paragraph E-ECP.3.4 which related to applications made  by
    a partner.  She should have applied paragraph E-ECDR.3.1 which  applied
    to adult dependent relatives.  Further, the  Judge  did  not  give  due
    weight to the evidence of Dr Qashany,  an  expert,  that  the  required
    level of care was not available in Iraq.  In addition, when considering
    maintenance and accommodation,  the  Judge  erred  by  considering  the
    income thresholds set out in paragraph FM-SE which  did  not  apply  to
    adult dependent relatives.  The Judge should have decided these  issues
    by reference to  paragraph  E-ECDR.3.1  where  adequacy  was  the  only
    consideration.  As regards accommodation, the consent of the  Sponsor's
    landlord was not a specific requirement of paragraph E-ECDR.3.1.

 5. In response, Mr Smart referred to the Rule 24 response.  He argued that
    there was no error of law in the decision of the Judge as the Judge had
    properly considered the evidence and made appropriate findings.  It was
    not right to say that the provisions of Appendix FM-SE did not apply in
    this appeal.  They applied to all applications made by family  members.
    The Appellant had failed to supply the documents set out  at  paragraph
    A1 which by paragraph 1(a)(iii)(3) applied  to  applications  by  adult
    dependent relatives.  By virtue of paragraph (h), the documents  needed
    to be originals.  Mr Smart agreed, however, that the test  was  one  of
    adequacy but submitted that the Appellant had failed to show such.

 6. I find no error of law in the decision of the Judge which I do not  set
    aside.  The Judge came to factual findings which were open  to  her  on
    the evidence before her.  The Judge  was  entitled  to  find  that  the
    provisions of paragraph E-ECDR.2.5.  The burden of proof  is  upon  the
    Appellant, and the Judge found  that  there  was  a  lack  of  evidence
    showing that there was nobody in Iraq who could provide the care  which
    the Appellant required as a result of her ailments, nor that such  care
    could not be afforded.  In reaching that conclusion,  the  Judge  dealt
    with the evidence of Dr Qashany and found it lacking.  His evidence was
    that of an expert, but he did  not  explain  his  conclusion  that  the
    appropriate care would not be available to  the  Appellant  by  showing
    what evidence he relied upon  for  that  conclusion.   The  failure  to
    satisfy paragraph E-ECDR.2.5 alone means that  the  Appellant's  appeal
    must fail in which event any error of law made by the Judge in  respect
    of maintenance and accommodation is immaterial.   However,  I  find  no
    such error.  It may be the case that the Judge erroneously applied  the
    income threshold test derived from paragraph FM-SE, but having analysed
    the relevant financial circumstances at paragraph 16 of  the  Decision,
    it is significant that in the subsequent paragraph the Judge wrote that
    the Appellant had failed to show that there was  adequate  maintenance.
    Regardless of these arguments, it was still the case that the Appellant
    was obliged to show that adequate accommodation would be  available  to
    her in the UK, and in my view the Judge was entitled to find that where
    there was no evidence that  the  Appellant  would  be  allowed  by  the
    landlord to live in the accommodation of the Sponsor in the  long-term,
    then the Appellant had failed to show that adequate  accommodation  was
    available to her.

 7. For these reasons, I find no error of law by the Judge.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for anonymity and  I  find  no
reason to do so.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

