
IAC-HW-MP-V2
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/19308/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 February 2015                            |On 6 February 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                              MRS emonena ovie
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Anifowoshe of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Emonena Ovie, is a citizen of Nigeria and was born on 23
    October 1978.  She applied for entry clearance to come  to  the  United
    Kingdom for settlement as the  spouse  of  Gilford  Onoguaye  Ohwoghere
    Ovie, which application was refused by the respondent on  23  September
    2013 because it was not accepted that the parties  were  in  a  genuine
    subsisting relationship and that the appellant  had  not  provided  the
    documentary evidence required in Appendix FM-SE of HC 395 in respect of
    the financial requirements.  The respondent reviewed her decision after
    receiving the appellant's notice of appeal.  An  explanatory  statement
    dated 19 March 2014 said the decision was maintained.

 2. The appellant's appeal against the respondent's refusal was allowed  by
    Judge Aujla ("the judge") in a determination promulgated on 20  October
    2014.  The grounds claimed the judge made a material error of law.  The
    Rules of specified evidence were comprehensively set out in Appendix FM
    and Appendix FM-SE to the Immigration Rules.  They set out  what  types
    of evidence were required, the periods they covered and the format that
    they should  be  in.   The  judge  had  no  regard  to  those  evidence
    requirements at  [25]  of  the  determination  where  he  set  out  his
    findings.

 3.  The  sponsor  was  seeking  to  rely  on  income  from  two  different
    employments to demonstrate that the income threshold requirements could
    be met by the appellant but bearing in mind that the sponsor in respect
    of the employment at TRG had only started working for that company from
    19 March 2013 and the appellant having made her application  for  entry
    clearance on 3 July 2013 meant that at  the  date  of  application  the
    sponsor had not been working for TRG for the requisite six months  such
    that the requirements of Appendix FM-SE could not be met.

 4. Judge P J M Hollingworth granted permission to  appeal  on  8  December
    2014.  He took the view that an arguable error of  law  had  arisen  in
    relation to the analysis conducted by the  judge  appertaining  to  the
    fulfilment of the requirements of the Rules.

Submissions on Error of Law

 5. Mr Tufan relied upon the grounds.  The appellant could  not  rely  upon
    the sponsor's employment with  TRG  because  as  of  the  date  of  the
    application the sponsor had not been working for that company  for  the
    requisite six months such that the requirements of Appendix FM-SE could
    not be met.

 6. As regards the employment with CMG:

       .      there was no payslip for May 2013;

       .      there was no employer's letter;

       .      there were bank statements only for nine  months  out  of  the
         twelve months' requisite period showing the salary being paid  into
         the sponsor's account.

 7. Ms Anifowoshe accepted that the sponsor had not been  working  for  TRG
    for the requisite period. She also accepted that the  documentation  at
    [6] above had not been supplied, which was required under Appendix  FM-
    SC, however, she  took  the  view  that  the  appellant  was  saved  by
    D(b)(i)(aa) and (e).  Ms Anifowoshe submitted that there was a  tension
    between the Immigration Rule and Section 85(2) and (5) of the 2002 Act.
     In any event, by the time of the hearing all of the documentation  was
    before  the  judge  which  he  took  into  account  at  [25]   of   the
    determination such that the appellant satisfied the requirements of the
    Rules and the judge made no error of law.

Conclusion on Error of Law

 8. Mr Tufan said that the main thrust of the respondent's refusal was with
    regard to the genuineness of the relationship;  finances  were  only  a
    secondary issue at the outset.

 9. The grounds of appeal were generic in nature and did  not  address  the
    specific issues raised in the refusal reciting only that  the  decision
    was not in accordance with the Rules and failed to take account of  the
    available  evidence  before  the  ECO.   The  Entry  Clearance  Manager
    reviewed the decision comprehensively in a letter dated 19 March  2014.
    The requisite mandatory documents were set out and the deficiencies  in
    the application highlighted.

10. The judge noted the explanatory statement at [6] of  his  determination
    but did not engage with the issues raised, perhaps because he took  the
    view that the sponsor having supplied the outstanding documentation, he
    need not consider the Entry Clearance Manager's letter  further.   What
    the judge had to say in the final sentence at [25] was:

         "The sponsor has provided all the mandatory documents that  he  was
         required to provide and I  am  able  to  take  those  into  account
         because the documents related to a matter arising on  the  date  of
         the decision."

11. Clearly, the judge erred in finding that he could take into account the
    documentation supplied by the  sponsor.   Whilst  there  is  a  tension
    between the mandatory requirements of Appendix FM-SC and Section  85(2)
    and (5), that does not obviate the necessity of the appellant complying
    with the requirements of the Rules such that she can supply them as  of
    the date  of  the  hearing  via  the  sponsor,  rather  than  with  her
    application.  Further, the judge erred when he included  the  sponsor's
    earnings from TRG as he had been working for that company for a  period
    less than six months prior to the date of the application.

12. The application was deficient in other respects which I have set out at
    [6] above.  Ms Anifowoshe submitted that FM-SE D(b)(i)(aa) and (e)  and
    245AA were relevant to the application but she failed to explain how it
    was in the appellant's own particular circumstances that they  assisted
    her.  There were various deficiencies in the application.  It  was  not
    merely that a sequence of documents had been submitted and some of  the
    documents in the sequence had been omitted.

13. In my view, the Entry Clearance Manager acted reasonably and fairly  in
    setting out in the letter of 19 March  2014  the  inadequacies  in  the
    appellant's application.  The proper course of action for the appellant
    at that stage was to submit another  application,  with  the  mandatory
    documentation.  I find the documentation supplied by the  appellant  to
    support her application was inadequate and incomplete  and  that  could
    not be remedied by the sponsor at the hearing.

14. The respondent has shown an error of law in the determination such that
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal should be set aside.  I re-make
    the decision by dismissing the appeal.

Notice of Decision

15. Appeal dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Dated 2 February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed        Date 2 February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart

