
IAC-AH-sar-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/19740/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Sheldon Court             |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 9th January 2015                           |On 21st January 2015          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                      MISS MARIAME ELIANE ROLINE CISSE
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ACCRA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No legal representation
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Pacey promulgated on 23rd May 2014, following a hearing  at  Birmingham
    Sheldon Court on 14th  May  2014.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal of Mariame Eliane  Roline  Cisse.   The  Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a minor aged 17 years, who  was  born  on  11th  April
    1997.  She is a citizen of the Ivory Coast.  She appealed  against  the
    decision of the Respondent dated 27th  September  2013,  rejecting  her
    application to join her British settled father, Mr Moussa Cisse, as his
    dependent child under paragraph 297 of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that she has been looked after by her  father,
    Mr Moussa Cisse, because her mother's current whereabouts are  unknown,
    she suffered a brutal rape, which was reported to the police, and  that
    there  is  evidence  of  telephone  calls,  and  money  transfers,  and
    objective evidence of child rape in the  Ivory  Coast.   Her  claim  is
    based upon the fact that her father has had "sole  responsibility"  for
    her or that her exclusion would otherwise be undesirable because  there
    are serious and compelling circumstances in her case.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge observed that  the  Respondent  had  decided  to  reject  the
    Appellant's application because she had  been  living  apart  from  her
    father  for  thirteen  years  and  was  currently   living   with   her
    grandmother.  Her father had come to the UK and had left the  Appellant
    with her biological mother.  Although the whereabouts of the biological
    mother were at present unclear, there was no consent  from  the  mother
    for the  Appellant's  travel  and  no  documentary  evidence  that  the
    Appellant's grandmother could no longer care for her (see paragraph 5).



 5. On the other hand, Mr Cisse claimed that he was  the  only  person  who
    could look after his daughter.  She was not  the  same  person  anymore
    after her rape.  He called her every day.   He  had  described  to  the
    judge the rape that his daughter had suffered and  how  this  had  been
    reported to the police.  An application had been made for the Appellant
    to come to the UK in 2009  but  this  was  refused.   The  assault  had
    happened in 2011 (paragraph 15).

 6. The judge concluded that, "I accept from the medical evidence that  the
    Appellant was assaulted as she  claimed"  because  the  medical  report
    records and gives a medical diagnosis, following a medical examination,
    which is independent of what the Appellant had told  the  doctor.   The
    judge found that, "moreover, her blouse  and  skirt  being  ripped  are
    matters of fact, which the doctor clearly saw for herself.  I also note
    that the reporting doctor is a gynaecologist, a logical  speciality  to
    examine a female who has been sexually assaulted" (paragraph 20).

 7. The judge then went on to say that, "however, what is material here  is
    the effect of  that  horrific  incident"  (paragraph  21).   The  judge
    observed that there was substance in the criticism  of  the  government
    representative that "the Sponsor had on the evidence not done  anything
    to help his daughter after the attack.  The  Sponsor  argues  that  the
    police in Africa do not behave as those in the UK"  because  "it  would
    not be expected that they would follow up the Appellant's report of the
    attack".  But the judge held that, "given the horrific  nature  of  the
    attack, I do not accept that a loving father, particularly one with, as
    he claims, sole responsibility for his daughter,  would  not,  bluntly,
    keep pestering the police to do something  ..."  (paragraph  22).   The
    judge was also of the view that the sponsoring  father  also  "did  not
    arrange for any counselling or any ongoing medical  treatment  for  his
    daughter" (paragraph 22).  The  judge  concluded  that,  "the  lack  of
    action can in my view only reasonably be explained by the father's  not
    having sole responsibility for the Appellant ... " (paragraph 23).

 8. There were discrepancies in the Sponsor's  evidence,  which  the  judge
    held to be material.  For example, there was the question of  when  the
    rape took place and when it was reported to the police.   It  was  said
    that the rape took place on 8th November  2011  and  that  it  was  not
    reported to the police until three days afterwards "because she  needed
    time to recover and the family told her not to go to the  police.   The
    police did nothing" (paragraph 24).

 9. At the hearing before the judge,  the  Appellant's  representative  had
    also argued that, "it was reasonable to suggest that the  Sponsor,  who
    had not been there at the time, would mix up a day  or  so"  (paragraph
    25), but the judge  held  that  this  was  not  plausible  because  the
    sponsoring father should have taken steps afterwards to familiarise  or
    re-familiarise himself with the precise details of the incident  so  as
    not to get confused (paragraph 25).  Furthermore, the grandmother, with
    whom the Appellant currently lives, had said in  a  letter  dated  28th
    August 2012, that there were no problems with  the  Appellant  herself,
    and this the judge took to mean that "by the following summer  she  had
    recovered from the effects" of rape (paragraph 26).

10. Finally, the judge held that whereas there were "documents provided" in
    the form of telephone cards, and money transfer receipts", nevertheless
    "these  can  only  stand  as  evidence  of   contact,   not   of   sole
    responsibility" (paragraph 31).  This was a case where both the Sponsor
    and the grandmother were involved in taking decisions relating  to  the
    Appellant  (paragraph  32).   Therefore,  there  could   be   no   sole
    responsibility on the part of the sponsoring father.

Grounds of Application

11. The grounds of application make two essential points.  First, that  the
    judge failed to give any consideration to the  "exclusion  undesirable"
    arm  of  paragraph  297(i)(f)  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  even  when
    arguments were made by the Appellant's advocate at the hearing on  this
    point.

12. Second, that the Section 55  of  the  BCIA  2009  obligation  upon  the
    responsible party had been overlooked by the judge because this  was  a
    case where the statutory guidance issued under Section  55  had  to  be
    taken into account because this was "an action concerning children  ...
    undertaken by ... administrative  authorities".   Reliance  was  placed
    upon the judgment of Blake J  in  Mundeba  (Section  55  and  paragraph
    297(i)(f)) [2013] UKUT 88 and the earlier case of T  (Section  55  BCIA
    2009 - entry clearance) Jamaica [2011] UKUT 00483.

13. On 2nd September 2014, permission to appeal was granted  on  the  basis
    that given that the Appellant had been raped in  the  Ivory  Coast,  as
    accepted by the judge, the failure to make any findings upon the issues
    raised in the Grounds of Appeal amounted to an error of law, especially
    given what the judge had said at paragraph 20 of the determination.

14. On 10th September 2014, a Rule 24 response was entered  to  the  effect
    that the judge had found that there was insufficient evidence  of  sole
    responsibility and that the judge had found that the Sponsor had  taken
    insufficient steps to help his daughter after the attack.

Submissions

15. At the hearing before me Mr Cisse, who was unrepresented  and  appeared
    as the father of the Appellant, simply said that he had only on  Monday
    this week returned from  the  Ivory  Coast  (today  being  Friday  10th
    January 2015 of the same week) and that he was very concerned about the
    condition of his daughter because her grandmother, with  whom  she  was
    staying, was increasingly  unable  to  look  after  her  and  that  "my
    daughter is in a bad condition".

16. In reply, Mr Smart submitted that  he  would  rely  upon  the  Rule  24
    response.  It was  accepted  that  paragraph  297(i)(f)  had  not  been
    considered relating to exclusion being undesirable but on the facts  as
    found by the judge the sponsoring father had  not  shown  that  he  had
    exercised sole responsibility for his daughter or done enough for  her.



17. Mr Cisse responded to say that he had done what he could.   He  was  in
    the United Kingdom.  He was not in the Ivory Coast.  Rape  was  routine
    in that country.  The police did not react to  such  cases.   The  rape
    happened on 8th November 2011.  She was taken to the  hospital  in  the
    afternoon because she was bleeding.  She stayed there because she could
    not walk.  She was still unrecovered the next day.  It was on the third
    day that a police report was  made.   He  had  explained  this  at  the
    hearing (as set out at paragraph 24), but he was not physically himself
    there, and his concern over his child was of greater importance to him,
    and the assurance of her wellbeing, then precisely when a police report
    was made.

Error of Law

18. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision and remake the decision
    (see Section 12(2) of TCEA 2007).  My reasons are as follows.

19. First, this is a case where, as the Grounds of Appeal made clear, there
    were detailed submissions before the judge in relation to  there  being
    serious and compelling circumstances  which  rendered  the  Appellant's
    exclusion   undesirable.    The   judge   focused   solely   on    sole
    responsibility.

20. Second, a spate of recent decisions (starting with UGO), especially  by
    Mr Justice McCloskey in the Upper  Tribunal,  now  make  it  ever  more
    important, that the Section 55 duty in the BCIA 2009 is to  be  applied
    in a parallel and principled manner before a decision involving a child
    in immigration matters can be lawfully rendered.  The failure  to  deal
    with Section 55 is an omission such that it amounts to an error of law.



Remaking the Decision

21. I remake the decision on the basis of  the  findings  of  the  original
    judge, the evidence before her and the submissions that  I  have  heard
    today.  I am allowing this appeal for the following reasons.

22. First, it is important to recognise that the "sole responsibility" test
    in paragraph 297 of HC 395 is a distinct and  separate  test  from  the
    finding of there being "serious  and  compelling  circumstances"  which
    render a person's "exclusion undesirable".  To say that  just  because,
    judged from the vantage  point  of  a  decision  maker  in  the  United
    Kingdom, a parent did not take such steps as he may  or  may  not  have
    taken, following the rape of his child in  a  country  like  the  Ivory
    Coast,  such  that  he  fails  thereby  to  show  that  he  has   "sole
    responsibility", does not mean to say that because of this there are no
    serious and  compelling  circumstances  which  render  the  Appellant's
    exclusion undesirable.

23. Second, there are  facts  here  that  are  clearly  in  the  sponsoring
    father's favour.  The judge accepted that there  was  evidence  in  the
    form of telephone cards and money transfer receipts (see paragraph 31).
     There was evidence before the judge that the sponsoring father "called
    her every day" (paragraph 15).  It was accepted that  medical  evidence
    proved that the Appellant had been sexually  assaulted  and  there  was
    "recent haemorrhagic defloration" and that "her blouse  and  skirt  had
    being ripped are matters of fact" (paragraph 20).

24. In this respect two other matters were of great significance, and  both
    of these were brought into evidence by  the  Appellant's  side.   These
    were that there was "objective evidence of child rape in  the  country"
    (paragraph 18) and that "the police in Africa do not behave as those in
    the UK" (paragraph 22), such that the  arrest  and  punishment  of  the
    offenders in a country like the Ivory  Coast  was  more  unlikely  than
    likely.

25. But in any event, to deduce from this that, "I do  not  accept  that  a
    loving father, particularly one with, as he claims, sole responsibility
    for his daughter, would not, bluntly, keep pestering the police  to  do
    something" (paragraph 22) is arguably to deduce too much given the  two
    features that I have already highlighted above.  It certainly does  not
    show that a failure to do this, in the given circumstances  highlighted
    above, amounts to a failure to demonstrate "sole responsibility".   The
    same applies for the absence of counselling.  Whereas it may very  well
    have been desirable to provide counselling, the failure to do so  maybe
    on account of any number factors, and  it  would  be  wrong,  from  the
    vantage point of a judge sitting  in  the  United  Kingdom,  to  simply
    surmise what the reasons for this may be.

26. It is equally likely that a parent living so many  thousands  of  miles
    away in the United Kingdom, may  have  resigned  himself  to  what  has
    happened, in a country where this is all too often an occurrence.  What
    is important is not to deduce any more  than  one  reasonably  can  do.
    What is clear, and it is worth repeating this, is that  the  sponsoring
    father has been in regular contact on a daily basis with his  daughter,
    that there is evidence of telephone cards, and  there  is  evidence  of
    money transfer receipts, and this was accepted by the judge.

27. Third, and in any event, the  appeal  succeeds  on  the  basis  of  the
    child's exclusion being  undesirable  because  it  is  clearly  in  the
    child's welfare and the best interests of this child that she  be  with
    her sponsoring father in the UK.  The judge  stated  that,  "there  was
    nothing to make the refusal  disproportionate.   Section  55  had  been
    considered" (paragraph 17).  Nothing further was said about Section 55,
    however.

28. The case of Mundeba makes it clear that once  an  immigration  decision
    engages Article 8 rights, due  regard  must  be  had  to  the  European
    Convention on the Rights of the Child.  This is because  the  admission
    of a child under 18 is "an action concerning children ... undertaken by
    ... administrative authorities" and in these circumstances Article 3 of
    the Convention applies so that "the best interests of the  child  shall
    be a primary consideration".  It is true that the Section 55 UKBA  2009
    duty applies only to children within the UK, but the established  cases
    now make it clear that the broader  duty  doubtless  explains  why  the
    Secretary of State's IDI invites Entry Clearance Officers  to  consider
    the statutory guidance issued under Section 55.

29. The child's welfare includes her emotional  needs.   The  reference  to
    "other considerations" means a reference to other aspects of a  child's
    life that are serious and compelling, and these would,  as  Mr  Justice
    Blake found in Mundeba, mean "an applicant is living in an unacceptable
    social and economic environment".

30. Yet this is a case which is stronger.  This is a case where the medical
    evidence showed the Appellant child to have been the victim of  a  very
    brutal sexual assault.  This being so the focus  needs  to  be  on  the
    circumstances of the child in the light of her age, social  background,
    and developmental history.  This will involve  an  enquiry,  especially
    where the Section 55 duty bites, of evidence of neglect or  abuse,  and
    evidence of unmet needs and evidence of  stable  arrangements  for  the
    child's physical care.  Ultimately it needs to  be  asked  whether  the
    combination of circumstances are sufficiently serious and compelling to
    require admission.  The  established  cases  make  it  clear  that  the
    "starting point" of an enquiry into the best interests of  a  child  is
    that these are served by being  with  both  or  at  least  one  of  the
    parents.

31. In this case,  there  is  evidence  of  the  sponsoring  father  having
    provided support and care for his child in a  country  where  there  is
    evidence of child rape and lack of police action with respect to  this.
    This evidence is not contested.  The Appellant only has  to  prove  her
    case on a balance of probabilities.  It does  not  have  to  be  proved
    beyond all reasonable doubt.  So what we are left with, therefore,  are
    the following circumstances.

32. The facts of this case clearly indicate that  the  Appellant's  welfare
    would  be  jeopardised  by  exclusion  from  the  United  Kingdom,   in
    circumstances where she has been raped, where the threat of child  rape
    exists, and where police inactivity is a fact of life.  The evidence of
    the Sponsor before me today, having just returned on  Monday  from  the
    Ivory Coast, was that the grandmother looking after the  Appellant,  is
    in failing health and finding it hard to look after the Appellant.  The
    Appellant is now 17 years of age.  She will have demands  that  any  17
    year old adolescent child has.   The  judge  below  did  not  find  the
    Sponsor to be lacking in credibility and I have found his  evidence  to
    be entirely plausible in this respect.  It is possible that if one  has
    regard to the "exclusion undesirable"  provisions  of  the  Immigration
    Rules, and the extra statutory guidance to the Entry Clearance Officers
    to apply the spirit of the statutory guidance  in  circumstances  where
    children are involved, that the balance is in favour of  the  Appellant
    (see T (Section 55 BCIA 2009 - entry  clearance)  Jamaica  [2011]  UKUT
    00483).  It is clear that  the  best  interests  consideration  is  not
    irrelevant to an Article 8 evaluation.  In fact, Article 8 is the genus
    and "best interests" is the specie where children are involved.

33. The established case also makes it clear  that,  "it  is  difficult  to
    contemplate a scenario where a Section  55  duty  was  material  to  an
    immigration decision and indicated a certain outcome but Article 8  did
    not" (see paragraph 29 of T (Section 55 BCIA 2009  -  entry  clearance)
    Jamaica [2011] UKUT 00483).  When the facts of this case are considered
    it is plain that there is no moral or physical danger to the  Appellant
    in the United Kingdom in the way that there is to this Appellant in the
    Ivory Coast.  She is a young woman.  She is in the formative  years  of
    her age.  She is being looked after by her grandmother.   The  starting
    point, as I have indicated above, in a Section 55 duty, is for a  child
    to be with either one or both parents.  That is the basis of the  "best
    interests" to begin with.  As against a grandmother in failing  health,
    the Appellant has a father in the UK who can  provide  maintenance  and
    accommodation and who has a clear desire to care for his daughter.   In
    these circumstances, the requirements of Article  8  are  plainly  met.
    This is for the following reasons.

34. If one applies Lord Bingham's tabulations in Razgar (at  paragraph  17)
    the following emerges.  First, it is plain that the continued exclusion
    of the Appellant is an interference by a public authority, namely,  the
    Secretary of State, with the  exercise  of  the  Appellant's  right  to
    respect for  her  family  life.   This  family  life  is  qualitatively
    different with the one that the Appellant  is  enjoying  in  the  Ivory
    Coast, where her carer is a grandmother whose health,  as  the  Sponsor
    maintains, is no longer good as is to be expected, as against which the
    family life that the Appellant will enjoy with her father, is one where
    he is keen and able to look after the Appellant, and this is especially
    the case given the Appellant herself has suffered from a horrific rape,
    being hospitalised, and where no police action has been taken.

35. Second, the interference here does have consequences of such gravity as
    to potentially engage the operation of Article 8 (bearing in mind  that
    this is a low threshold).  Third, the interference is not in accordance
    with the law because the Appellant  can  comply  with  the  Immigration
    Rules as far as paragraph  297(i)(f)  is  concerned  in  that,  on  the
    evidence before me, her exclusion is undesirable because there are  the
    compelling and compassionate circumstances that I have set  out  above.
    Fourth, the interference is not  necessary  in  a  democratic  society,
    because it is not necessary for the economic wellbeing of the  country,
    or for the prevention of crime, or for the protection of the rights and
    freedoms of others.  There is no hint whatsoever of any  wrongdoing  or
    illegality by any of the parties concerned.  In fact, all the  evidence
    is that the Appellant's mother has left and  that  the  grandmother  is
    finding it difficult to look after the 17  year  old  Appellant  child.
    Fifth, all in all, the interference here is not  proportionate  to  the
    legitimate public end that is sought to be achieved.

36.  It  is  well  accepted  that  the  material  question   engaging   the
    proportionality of an administrative decision that threatens to break a
    family is whether it is reasonable to expect the  Appellant  to  remain
    separately from her natural parents,  which  in  this  case  means  her
    natural father, who is now a person with legitimate legal status in the
    UK and is settled.  On the facts of this case, it is not reasonable.

37. Finally, as far as the "sole responsibility" test is concerned, I  find
    that given that there is an issue with the ability of  the  Appellant's
    grandmother in the Ivory Coast to look after her, and  given  that  the
    starting point of the evidence is always the narrative presented in the
    evidence, unless it is properly rejected, I find that  the  Appellant's
    father, who has physically been visiting the Appellant  child  whenever
    he can, and has maintained an interest in the Appellant child, as borne
    out by the cards and remittances that have  been  submitted,  that  the
    "sole responsibility" test is satisfied,  especially  as  the  term  is
    understood  to  mean  that  there   can   never   be   absolute   "sole
    responsibility".  The phrase is not to be taken  literally.   It  is  a
    term of art.  It is a relative matter.  In  these  circumstances  where
    the mother is absent and the grandmother is in ill health, I find  that
    the Sponsor as the Appellant's natural  father  is  a  person  who  has
    exercised practical care and day-to-day support for the Appellant  from
    the UK.  Whether or not he could have done more when the Appellant  was
    raped, and different decision makers may take different views  on  this
    given that the sponsoring father was in the United Kingdom thousands of
    miles away and not in the Ivory Coast, does not mean to say that he has
    not had sole responsibility.  It is clear on the evidence that  he  has
    singularly been involved in the welfare of this Appellant  child.   The
    test is one of balance of probabilities.  Applying the test,  I  am  so
    satisfied.

Notice of Decision

38. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    allowed under Article 8.

39. No anonymity order is made.

Signed        Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss        21st January 2015
