

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/19664/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Determination Promulgated |
|On 29 July 2014                        |On 1 August 2014          |
|                                       |                          |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                 ASIM MALIK
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E Cantor (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


       1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  He has  appealed  against
          a decision dated 2 October 2013 to refuse  to  issue  him  an  EEA
          residence card.  He claims to be the nephew of Mr Malik Asim  (the
          sponsor), an EEA citizen.



Procedural history



       2. In a determination promulgated on 8 May 2014  First-tier  Tribunal
          Judge Sangha dismissed the appellant's appeal,  having  considered
          it on the papers.



       3. The  appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  on  27  May  2014.
          Although the grounds of  appeal  are  unnecessarily  complex,  the
          essence of the grounds can be simply stated.  The Judge  erred  in
          law in failing to consider evidence that post dated  the  relevant
          date of decision but appertaining to facts at the time.  This  was
          the basis upon which Judge  JFW  Phillips  granted  permission  to
          appeal on 16 June 2014.



       4.  The  matter  now  comes  before  me   to   decide   whether   the
          determination contains an error of law, and if so to  re-make  the
          decision.

Error of law

       5. Judge Sangha focused his attention on the evidence submitted  with
          the application and that which was contained in  the  respondent's
          bundle (para 11).  The Judge was  not  satisfied  that  there  was
          sufficient evidence to demonstrate  that:  (i)  the  appellant  is
          related as claimed to the sponsor; (ii) the necessary  element  of
          dependency; (iii) the sponsor was a qualified person.   The  Judge
          went on to  indicate  that  he  had  taken  into  account  further
          evidence  in  the  appellant's  bundle   but   appears   to   have
          disregarded this evidence on the basis that  it  is  post-decision
          and was not placed before the respondent (para 12).   I  indicated
          to Mr Whitwell that my provisional view was  that  the  Judge  had
          erred in law in discounting  potentially  relevant  evidence  from
          his assessment of the three disputed  issues  and  that  I  should
          remake the decision.  Mr Whitwell agreed with this approach.

Re-making the decision

Hearing

       6. There were  a  number  of  bundles  submitted  on  behalf  of  the
          appellant at  various  stages  in  the  Tribunal's  file.   It  is
          regrettable  that  there  was  no  attempt  to  comply  with   the
          Tribunal's directions by providing an updated  index  of  relevant
          documents.  Ms Cantor  collated  the  relevant  documents  into  a
          bundle  of  36  pages.   After  taking  time  to  consider   these
          documents Mr Whitwell indicated he was content to proceed.

       7. The parties agreed  that  there  was  no  need  for  further  oral
          evidence and  I  could  re-make  the  decision  on  the  basis  of
          submissions only.   However, it soon  became  clear  that  it  was
          necessary for the sponsor to clarify aspects of the evidence.   Ms
          Cantor therefore asked the sponsor to  confirm  that  his  witness
          statements were true.  He was asked questions by Ms Cantor and  Mr
          Whitewell.   I  then  heard  submissions   before   reserving   my
          decision, which I now provide with reasons.





Findings

       8. I do not accept the evidence before me to  support  the  sponsor's
          claim that he is the appellant's uncle or that the  appellant  has
          been dependent upon him.  I also do not accept  that  the  sponsor
          was a qualified person at the relevant time.  The  sponsor's  oral
          evidence was wholly unreliable.  He was unable  to  provide  clear
          answers to straightforward questions.  I do not accept  his  claim
          that this was because he had to travel from Scotland  on  the  day
          of the hearing or he had  difficulties  speaking  English.   These
          excuses only emerged when the sponsor did not  know  which  answer
          to provide.  I  am  satisfied  that  the  sponsor  understood  the
          questions that were being put to him.  I ensured that  these  were
          put in simple terms and repeated.  Ms Cantor  did  not  raise  any
          issues regarding the need for an interpreter during  the  hearing,
          and one had not been requested by the solicitors.

       9. For the  avoidance  of  doubt  I  have  considered  the  sponsor's
          evidence alongside the detailed documentation  in  this  case,  in
          particular the documents set out in the 36  page  bundle  prepared
          by Ms Cantor.  I  am  satisfied  that  the  sponsor  has  provided
          wholly unreliable evidence and sought to rely  upon  documentation
          that little weight can be placed upon.

      10. The sponsor was wholly unclear on the appellant's  date  of  birth
          or the names and ages of his three brothers.  The sponsor's  vague
          knowledge of the most  basic  of  details  relating  to  his  four
          nephews is inconsistent with his claim to  have  lived  with  them
          from 1999 to 2006.

      11. The sponsor was simply unable  to  explain  why  the  family  tree
          submitted on behalf of  the  appellant  excluded  the  appellant's
          siblings.  He indicated that English is difficult in Pakistan  and
          that might be an explanation.  Ms Cantor submitted that the  focus
          was upon the appellant in this appeal  and  the  family  tree  had
          been constructed with this in mind.  I am not prepared  to  attach
          weight to a family tree that is patently inaccurate.  Further,  it
          was prepared at the appellant's request and  on  his  instructions
          and by a friend of the sponsor's.  Ms Cantor  submitted  that  the
          evidence on the family relationships should be considered  in  the
          round.  I have done that and considered  copies  of  a  number  of
          birth certificates together with statements from  various  members
          of the family.  The birth certificate for  the  appellant  in  the
          bundle does not link him to the sponsor.  Ms Cantor had  not  been
          provided with a copy of the birth certificate of  the  appellant's
          father or sponsor.  I note that reference has been made  to  these
          certificates in various  submissions.   I  find  on  the  evidence
          before me that the appellant is not  related  as  claimed  to  the
          sponsor.   The sponsor's evidence was wholly incredible   in  this
          regard.

      12.  The  witness  statements  prepared  for  this  appeal  omit   any
          reference to the appellant's  three  siblings.    The  appellant's
          uncle  in  Pakistan,  Mr  Malik  Anwar  states  that  he  provided
          financial assistance to the appellant's  father  and  the  sponsor
          took financial responsibility for the appellant.  No reference  is
          made  to  the  appellant's  three  brothers  and  who  has   taken
          financial responsibility for  them  in  light  of  their  father's
          claimed inability to work.  The sponsor's witness  statement  also
          fails to mention the appellant's three brothers.  I have not  been
          provided for  any  explanation  why  the  sponsor  took  financial
          responsibility  for  this  particular  appellant   and   not   his
          brothers.   The  appellant's  witness  statement  also  fails   to
          mention his brothers, who takes financial responsibility for  them
          and why it is that  the  sponsor  has  chosen  only  him  to  take
          financial responsibility for since 2005.  The sponsor said at  the
          hearing that his  brother  living  in  Glasgow,  Mr  Jhangir  Khan
          supports his other nephews.  Mr Khan makes no  reference  to  this
          in his very short letter dated 20 October 2013.

      13. The sponsor's oral evidence concerning his employment history  was
          wholly unreliable.  He indicated that he had  an  online  business
          selling clothes but was utterly unable to explain what website  he
          used and how he conducted his business.  He has  provided  'Profit
          and Loss Accounts' from accountants for his claimed business.   He
          was unable to explain why this does not  make  any  allowance  for
          stock, when he  claimed  that  he  provided  his  accountant  with
          receipts.  I do not accept that the accounts provided are  genuine
          or  refer  to  a  genuine  business.   The  sponsor  has  provided
          photocopied documents relevant to claimed job offers and  previous
          employment.   I  have  not  been  provided   with   any   original
          documents.  I am not prepared to accept photocopies  when  I  have
          found the sponsor to have provided completely unreliable  evidence
          as to his claimed employment.

      14. Having considered all the relevant evidence in the  round  I  find
          that the appellant is not related as claimed to  the  sponsor  and
          has not been financially dependent upon him.   I  also  find  that
          the sponsor has not been employed or self employed as claimed  and
          is not a qualified person.

Decision

      15. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve
          the making of an error on a point of law.




      16. I set aside the decision.



      17. I re-make the decision by dismissing the appellant's appeal.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
30 July 2014

