
IAC-AH-DN-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/20228/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15th May 2015                              |On 21st May 2015              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                              Mrs jushna begum
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Tariq Khan (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Neville Smart (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge A M Black, promulgated on 11th November 2014, following a hearing
    at Taylor House on 7th November 2014.  In the determination, the  judge
    allowed the appeal of Mrs Jushna Begum.  The  Respondent  Secretary  of
    State, subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female citizen of Bangladesh, who was born  on  22nd
    December 1985.  She appealed against the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    dated 2nd October 2013, refusing her a Certificate of Entitlement to  a
    Right of Abode in the United Kingdom as the child of a  person  by  the
    name of Abdul Garfur, who had since passed away.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that she is the legitimate child,  by  way  of
    descent, of her British citizen father,  Abdul  Garfur,  who  was  born
    after her father registered as a British citizen in the UK.  Her father
    married five times, and she was  the  child  of  his  last  wife.   The
    Respondent has contested the claim on a number  of  different  grounds.
    The Respondent states that the birth certificate  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant was issued more than 21 years after her birth.  There was  no
    evidence that Mr Garfur was in Bangladesh at the date of the conception
    of the Appellant's birth.  There is limited other documentary  evidence
    to support the claimed relationship.  Mr Garfur's  British  nationality
    certificate contained some immigration stamps from Bangladesh from 1991
    to 1994.  The Appellant had made  her  application  after  Mr  Garfur's
    death and so no DNA evidence was available.  The Appellant had provided
    no  family  photographs  or  other   documents   to   demonstrate   her
    relationship with her father.  There  was  no  evidence  of  legitimate
    descent from her claimed mother.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge held that the Appellant's  father,  Mr  Abdul  Garfur,  would
    likely have travelled on  a  British  passport  because  there  was  no
    Bangladeshi High Commission visa  endorsed  in  his  passport  when  he
    returned to Bangladesh.  He was born in 1924.  He would have been  aged
    55 when he arrived in Bangladesh in 1979.  He did not leave  again  for
    ten years.  The immigration  stamps  are  consistent  with  having  his
    returned to Bangladesh to retire.

 5. The judge went on to hold that Mr Garfur married the Appellant's mother
    on 10th September 1980 in Sylhet, in Bangladesh.  At that time he was a
    British citizen.  This  is  evidenced  in  his  British  passport  (see
    paragraph 16).

 6. The Respondent contests that there are no family photographs, but  this
    is incorrect because, "The Appellant has now provided a  photograph  of
    herself and her father" (paragraph 17).

 7. Furthermore, the Respondent contested that the Appellant's  father  had
    five wives, but the Respondent "Does not suggest that  the  Appellant's
    mother's marriage to Mr Garfur was polygamous", so  that,  the  logical
    conclusion was that Mr  Garfur  was  domiciled  in  Bangladesh,  having
    returned to that country in 1979, and "There is no evidence to  suggest
    that the marriage was not valid in Bangladesh".

 8. The appeal was allowed.

Grounds of Application

 9. The grounds  of  application  state  that  the  judge  found  that  the
    Appellant  was  of  legitimate  descent  from  Abdul  Garfur,  but  the
    Appellant's father had five wives, and the fact that the Respondent was
    not satisfied as to the legitimacy of the Appellant, implied  that  the
    Respondent did not consider the marriage to the fifth wife not to  have
    been polygamous.  Therefore, there could be no legitimacy assumed about
    the Appellant's birth.

10. On 5th January 2015, permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions

11. At the hearing before me on 15th  May  2015,  Mr  Smart,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Respondent Secretary of State, submitted that the  appeal
    had been allowed here on the basis of what was a "paper hearing".   The
    judge did not have the benefit of evidence.   Mr  Smart  said  that  he
    would rely on the Grounds of Appeal.  The judge

         "Had not been satisfied that the marriage was not polygamous to the
         last of the five wives by Mr Abdul Garfur.  The judge had  properly
         set out the three issues that he had to determine.  These were (see
         paragraph 8), (1) whether the Appellant is of  legitimate  descent;
         (2) whether the Appellant  is  related  as  claimed  to  a  British
         citizen; (3) whether the Appellant was born after  her  father  was
         registered as a British citizen".

12. Yet, the judge did not then properly consider the issue of  "legitimate
    descent".  The only time that the judge comes close to doing so  is  at
    paragraph 16,  where  he  holds  that,  after  Mr  Garfur  married  the
    Appellant's mother on 10th September 1980, the position was  that,  "By
    that date he was  a  British  citizen,  as  evidenced  by  his  British
    passport" (paragraph 16).  However, the Appellant's father had  married
    five times.

13. Mr Smart handed up the "Muslim Marriages  and  Divorces  (Registration)
    Act, 1974", and this makes it quite  clear  that  "It  applies  to  all
    Muslim citizens of Bangladesh wherever  they  may  be"  (see  paragraph
    1(2)).  The importance of  this  was  that  only  four  marriages  were
    allowed under Muslim law.  The  Appellant's  father  had  married  five
    times.  Therefore, there had to be a legitimate issue of  descent  that
    had to be  determined.   Finally,  the  judge  did  not  refer  to  the
    existence of a "nikah" (i.e. marriage certificate) before deciding that
    the Appellant's father and mother were legitimately married.

14. For his part, Mr Tariq Khan submitted that the judge had considered all
    the evidence, and had done so properly,  and  addressed  the  issue  of
    "legitimate descent" precisely at paragraph 16, to which Mr  Smart  had
    just referred, by stating that, at the time of  the  marriage  on  10th
    September 1980 with the Appellant's mother, the Appellant's father  was
    a British citizen.  Second, the issue of "polygamy" was  never  reached
    in the Grounds of Appeal, and was never before  the  judge.   The  only
    issue was that of "legitimate descent".  It could not be  assumed  that
    the issue of "legitimate descent" had to do with a polygamous marriage.
     It had just as  much  to  do  with  the  legitimate  marriage  of  the
    Appellant's mother  with  Abdul  Garfur.   The  judge  determined  this
    properly because there was  indeed  a  marriage  certificate  (see  the
    Respondent's own bundle) between the Appellant's mother  and  Mr  Abdul
    Garfur.

15.  Therefore,  it  was  entirely  improper  to  raise  the  question   of
    "polygamous marriage" at this late stage on an appeal from a First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.  Finally, however, and in any event, the fact  was
    that the marriage was in  compliance  with  the  Muslim  Marriages  and
    Divorces (Registration) Act 1974 because Mr Abdul Garfur's  first  wife
    had passed away in 1971.  This is clear from the supplementary  bundle,
    which shows that the  first  wife  died  during  the  "liberation  war"
    between East Pakistan and, what was then West Pakistan.

16. The supplementary bundle left no  doubt  that  the  Appellant's  father
    could legitimately marry the Appellant's mother.  The late Mrs  Neckjan
    Bibi, who had been born in 1933, died in  1971.   The  other  remaining
    wives were Mrs Safina Khatun, who Mr Abdul Garfur married on 28th  June
    1966; Mrs Monowara Begum, who Abdul Garfur  married  on  12th  November
    1979; and Mrs Nurun Nahar Leily, who Mr Abdul Garfur  married  on  10th
    September 1980.  These were the three wives in existence  at  the  time
    that Abdul Garfur married the Appellant's mother,  which  was  on  16th
    June 1983, when he married Mrs Hazera Begum.  These facts were known to
    the Respondent  Secretary  of  State  which  was  why  no  issue  of  a
    polygamous marriage was ever reached.

17. In reply, Mr Smart submitted that "legitimacy" is to do with polygamy.

No Error of Law

18. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.  This is a case where  the  judge
    considered the three questions, which had been specifically set  up  at
    the outset of the factual determination (see paragraph 8).

19. The judge had regard to the evidence, in a paper hearing, which had  to
    do with the "Appellant's parentage and date of birth",  and  there  was
    evidence from a number of witnesses (see paragraph 10).  These included
    the imam from the Appellant's village, the pharmacist from the village,
    the local doctor, the headmaster from the village, the  school  teacher
    from the high school, and so forth (see paragraph 10).  The evidence of
    witnesses was recounted (paragraph 11).

20. Thereafter, the findings of fact are made from  paragraphs  15  to  19.
    There can be no error of  law  because  the  judge  was  clear  in  the
    statement that, "The Respondent has noted the  Appellant's  father  had
    five wives; he does not suggest that the Appellant's mother's  marriage
    to Mr Garfur was polygamous" (paragraph 18).

21. The only issue of "legitimacy", therefore, was to do with the  marriage
    having taken place.  There was a "nikah" (marriage certificate) in  the
    Respondent's own bundle, and this was clear proof of the legitimacy  in
    legal terms of the marriage between Mr  Abdul  Garfur  and  Mrs  Hazera
    Begum.  On a balance of probabilities, the findings made by  the  judge
    were clearly open to the judge.  There is no error of law.

Notice of Decision

22. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

23. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    20th May 2015

