
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/20601/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated On  |
|On 2nd December 2014                 |18th December 2014                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      deputy upper Tribunal JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

                           BALA LOKESH REDDY YETI
                           (anonymity not directed)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                    the entry clearance officer - chennai
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Jamil, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mrs V Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
                    Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction

1. The appellant is a citizen of India who was born on  the  30th  December
   1983. He appeals to the Upper Tribunal  (with  permission)  against  the
   decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Saffer  who,  in   a   determination
   promulgated on the 15th July 2014,  dismissed  his  appeal  against  the
   respondent's decision to refuse  his  application  for  entry  clearance
   (hereafter, "the decision")  in order to join his  spouse,  Mrs  Asritha
   Adusumalli (hereafter, "the sponsor") in the United Kingdom.

2. As anonymity was not directed by the  First-tier  Tribunal,  I  consider
   that little purpose would be served by ordering now.

Background to the proceedings

3. For the purposes of this appeal, the relevant part of  the  respondent's
   Notice of Immigration Decision reads as follows:

       Your application also falls to be refused because you do not meet the
       income threshold requirement under Appendix  FM  and/or  the  related
       evidential requirements under  Appendix  FM-SE.  You  have  filed  to
       submit payslips from Ritu Fashions Limited the most recent  of  which
       his dated less than 28 days before you submitted your application, as
       the most recent payslip from there is dated  the  31/5/13,  you  have
       failed to submit an employer's letter from Ritu Fashions Limited, you
       have failed to submit an employer's letter from Capita containing all
       the required  information,  notably  the  nature  of  your  sponsor's
       employment and confirmation of how long they have been  paid  at  the
       rate quoted; bank statements showing salary deposits consistent  with
       the payslips submitted in support of your  application,  as  the  sum
       deposited to  your  sponsor's  account  on  1  March  2013  does  not
       correspond to the net pay detailed on the payslip dated  28  February
       2013. I further note that the tax codes on her payslips suggest  your
       sponsor appears to be enjoying her full  income  tax  allowance  from
       both employers - you have provided no evidence that she  is  entitled
       to this allowance from both employers,  nor  evidence  that  she  has
       taken steps to rectify this.

4. The respondent was also not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  was  in  a
   genuine and subsisting relationship with the sponsor and that he had met
   the English language requirement. However, Judge Saffer  resolved  these
   issues  in  the  appellant's  favour  [paragraphs  9  and  10   of   his
   determination] and his findings in this regard are not challenged in the
   present proceedings.

5. The matter was reviewed by an Entry Clearance Manager (ECM) on  the  2nd
   April 2014 in light of the grounds of appeal submitted to the First-tier
   Tribunal. The ECM  began  by  noting  that  grounds  made  reference  to
   paragraph 281 in Part 8 of the Immigration Rules.  This  reference  also
   appears in the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal. However, as  the
   ECM correctly observed, the timing of the instant application meant that
   Part 8 did not apply and it was instead governed exclusively by Appendix
   FM and Appendix FM-SE of  the  Immigration  Rules.  The  ECM  thereafter
   repeated each of the respondent's original concerns, above, noting  that
   no attempt had been made to address them in the grounds of appeal.

6. The original grounds of appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  effectively
   raised two grounds of appeal, namely, that  the  decision  was  "not  in
   accordance  with  immigration  rules"  and  was  incompatible  with  the
   appellant's right to respect for private and family life  as  guaranteed
   by Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention for the Protection of Human
   Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.

7. Judge Saffer dealt with the first of these grounds at paragraph 11:

       With the application  pay  slips  should  have  been  submitted  that
       covered the period until 10/5/2013. The rules in  Appendix  FM-SE-A1-
       (1) are clear in that regard. The pay slips do not cover that period.
       The most recent is 31/5/13.  This  is  not  a  matter  of  evidential
       flexibility whereby time a request for the  missing  document  should
       have been made as it is not a document from the middles of  a  series
       missing, but the payslip from the end of the series  that  is  within
       the actual time frame required by the rules. I therefore dismiss  the
       appeal under the rules.

   The reference to the "matter of evidential flexibility" is no doubt made
   to paragraph D of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.  This  allows  a
   decision-maker, in certain limited circumstances which are  far  removed
   from those of the instant appeal, a margin of discretion by allowing  an
   applicant to correct minor omissions in the documentation submitted with
   an application.

8. Judge  Saffer  dealt  with  the  issues  arising  under  Article  8,  at
   paragraphs 13 to 18 of his determination:

   13. There is nothing compelling or exceptional in this case that requires
       consideration of article 8 outside  the  rules.  The  appellant  need
       simply reapply with all the relevant documents for  consideration  by
       the respondent of the current position within  the  rules.  Having  a
       child is not compelling or exceptional as that is the usual result of
       marital relations between spouses. The fact they  may  succeed  under
       the rules if now assessed is not exceptional or  compelling  as  they
       had failed to  establish  that  they  did  so  at  the  date  of  the
       application or decision, and human rights legislation is not  a  back
       door for people who do not send in relevant documents.

   14. Even if I am wrong in that, there would be no breach in their  family
       life. That must be promoted. It will continue in the  way  that  they
       chose for themselves namely one that was to be limited by  living  in
       different countries. She has failed  to  establish  that  she  cannot
       return to India, where she is a national and has been recently, to be
       reunited with her Indian husband if they wish while  he  applies  for
       entry clearance. There is no cogent or independent evidence they  are
       from different castes or that they  would  have  any  problems  as  a
       result of that and he makes no  such  claim  that  this  would  be  a
       problem.

   15. In addition it has not been established that consequences of  gravity
       may flow from the decision, even  given  the  low  threshold,  as  Ms
       Adusumall can return to her home in India with her daughter  who  she
       would inevitably wish to introduce to her extensive family  there  in
       the interim, or remain here for the relatively  short  time  it  will
       take to submit a fresh application, and as the family can afford  the
       fee given her income and claimed level of savings.

   16. It is lawful and in pursuit of the legitimate aim  of  retaining  the
       integrity of immigration control to only allow those to come here who
       fulfil the rules.

   17. In relation to  proportionality,  I  must  first  consider  the  best
       interest of the appellant's daughter. Her nationality is not a  trump
       card. There is no evidence she is not an Indian national in  addition
       to being a British national. She was not born at the date of decision
       and the respondent cannot be faulted for not considering it then.  It
       is in her best interest to be with both of her parents where they can
       both lawfully and safely live. That is India which forms the entirety
       of her cultural and family heritage. Having  her  live  here  may  be
       denying her access to that heritage and may deny her access to  being
       able to enjoy the benefits of Indian nationality.  Given  her  tender
       age she has developed no ties at all here save with her  mother.  She
       has extensive family in India. They would have family  support  as  I
       reject the suggestion that she does not. She is not at school.  There
       is no evidence she has any ailments. She can return here whenever her
       mother wishes and, when he has established that he fulfils the rules,
       her father.

   18. It would also be proportionate to require the adults  to  submit  the
       relevant documents for  consideration  by  the  respondent  as  human
       rights legislation is not a back door for people who do not  send  in
       relevant  documents.  The  continued  separation,  which  itself   is
       entirely unnecessary as Ms Adusumall can easily and safely return  to
       India either permanently or temporarily, is  one  of  choice  by  the
       adults and not of necessity.

Analysis

19. I deal firstly with Mr  Jamil's  submissions  relating  to  the  judge's
   assessment of the appeal under the Immigration Rules. It will  be  noted
   that the judge considered only one aspect of the concerns that had  been
   raised by the respondent; namely,  that  the  payslips  issued  by  Ritu
   Fashions Limited did not cover a period of 6 months ending not more than
   28 days prior to the date of the application. The relevant provision are
   to be found in paragraphs 2 and 13 of A1 of Appendix FM-SE -

       2. In respect of salaried employment  in  the  UK  ...,  all  of  the
       following evidence must be provided:

          (a) Payslips covering:

             (i) a period of 6 months to the date of the application if the
             person has been employed by  their  current  employer  for  at
             least 6 months ... or

             (ii) any period of salaried employment in  the  period  of  12
             months prior to the date of application if the person has been
             employed by their current employer for less than 6 months  (or
             at least 6 months but the person does not  rely  on  paragraph
             13(a) of this Appendix)

  The relevant part of paragraph 13 reads as follows -

       13. Based on evidence that meets the requirements of  this  Appendix,
       and can be taken  into  account  with  reference  to  the  applicable
       provisions of Appendix FM, gross annual income  under  paragraphs  E-
       ECP.31., E-LTRP.3.1, E-ECC.2.1 AND E-LTRC.2.1 will be  calculated  in
       the following ways:

          (a) Where the person is in salaried in employment in the UK at the
          date of application, has been employed by their  current  employer
          for at least 6 months and has been paid throughout the period of 6
          months prior to the date of application at a level of gross annual
          salary which equals or exceeds the level relied upon in  paragraph
          13(a)(i), their gross annual income will be ... the total of:

             (i) The level of  gross  annual  salary  relied  upon  in  the
             application;

             (ii) The gross amount of any specified  non-employment  income
             ... received by them or their partner in the 12  months  prior
             to the date of application; and

             (iii) The gross annul  income  from  a  UK  or  foreign  State
             pension or  a  private  pension  received  by  them  or  their
             partner.

20. It will  be  seen  from  the  above  that  the  only  exception  to  the
   requirement  to  provide  payslips  for  the   six-month   period   that
   immediately precedes the date of the  application  is  in  circumstances
   where either, (i) the applicant has been in their current employment for
   a period of less than six months, or (ii) where the applicant has worked
   for their current employer for at least 6 months   but  is  not  relying
   upon salary from that employment in combination with income  from  other
   sources.

21. In order to meet the  income  threshold  in  this  case,  the  appellant
   relied upon a combination of the sponsor's income from  Capita  Customer
   Management Limited (for whom she continued to work at the  date  of  the
   application), Ritu Fashions Limited (for whom she had ceased to work  on
   the 31st May 2013), 'OneStop', and a rental income from  real  property.
   It was the fact that the appellant had ceased her employment  with  Ritu
   Fashions that meant that she was unable to  provide  recent  wage  slips
   from this employment. It was not however the case that the  sponsor  had
   moved from her employment with  Ritu  Fashions  in  order  to  work  for
   Capita. The position was that she had worked for  both  these  employers
   simultaneously until the time when she ceased to work for the former, on
   the 31st May 2013. Thus, whatever the position may have been with regard
   to compliance with paragraph 2  of  Appendix  FM-SE,  it  was  extremely
   doubtful that sponsor's income from this employment could be taken  into
   account for the purpose of calculating the sponsor's gross income  under
   paragraph 13 of the Appendix FM-SE.

22. However, even if it was permissible to  include  the  income  from  Ritu
   Fashions within the calculation of the sponsor's gross annual income and
   Judge Saffer was thus wrong to consider  that  the  payslips  from  that
   employment failed to meet the requirements of paragraph 2 of Appendix FM-
   SE, the fact remains that the appellant's documents  were  deficient  in
   other respects, as was highlighted by the respondent in  the  Notice  of
   Immigration Decision. Thus, the letter from Capita did not  specify  the
   nature of the sponsor's employment or the period for which she had  been
   employed at her current rate of pay.  Moreover,  at  least  one  of  the
   deposits in her bank account did not correspond with the amount  of  the
   payment shown on the payslips. Thus, even if it were the case that Judge
   Saffer was wrong to conclude that the appeal could not succeed by reason
   of the failure to achieve the impossible by  providing  a  payslip  from
   Ritu Fashion Limited immediately preceding  the  application,  he  would
   nevertheless have been bound to conclude the  appeal  failed  under  the
   Immigration Rules for the other reasons that  had  been  raised  by  the
   respondent in the Notice of Immigration Decision. Any error of  law  was
   thus immaterial to the outcome of the appeal in this regard.

23. The grounds of appeal relating to the  First-tier  Tribunal's  treatment
   of the appellant's case under Article 8 are not easy to follows -

       It will be argued that the  Appellant's  sponsor  and  child  can  be
       regarded as victims of the FTTJ's determination under  Article  8  of
       the ECHR.

   This appears to  be  a  reference  to  Lady  Hale's  observation  in  ZH
   (Tanzania) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2011]  UKSC  4
   that it is not right to visit  the  sins  of  a  parent  upon  a  child.
   However, that is not what either the respondent or the Tribunal  did  in
   this case. If it is the  case  (as  Judge  Saffer  suggested)  that  the
   appellant's daughter is a British citizen, then she  will  not  need  to
   obtain entry clearance in order to be able  to  exercise  her  right  of
   residence with her father in the United Kingdom. In any  event,  and  as
   Judge Saffer also pointed out, the appellant's daughter was not born  at
   the date of the decision. She did not  therefore  form  a  part  of  the
   "circumstances that were appertaining  at  the  date  of  the  decision"
   [Section 85 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002] and was
   thus irrelevant for the purposes of an assessment of an  appeal  against
   an out-of-country Immigration Decision. As no other potential  error  of
   law has been identified in Judge Saffer's analysis  of  the  case  under
   Article 8, it follows that this ground of appeal must also fail.

Notice of Decision

24. The appeal is dismissed.



Signed        Date 2nd December 2014

Judge of the First-tier Tribunal

