
[pic]
IAC-AH-SC-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/20312/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 7th April 2015                        |On 8th July 2015                    |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                            miss Fatima Zulfiqar
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Choudhury, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 2nd October  1997.   The
    Appellant had applied for entry clearance as a child  under Appendix FM
    of the Immigration Rules.  Her application was refused under  paragraph
    EC-C.1.1.(d) of Appendix FM of the Rules.  In refusing the  application
    it was noted that the Appellant's mother was divorced from  her  father
    but there was no supporting evidence that her father gave  his  consent
    for her to travel to the UK with her  mother  and  there  was  also  no
    evidence to show that the Appellant's mother  had  sole  responsibility
    for her.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Grimmett sitting at Birmingham on 11th November 2014, the
    appeal was based both under the Immigration Rules and under  Article  8
    and in a decision promulgated on  1st  December  2014  the  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 3. On 15th December 2014 Grounds  of  Appeal  were  lodged  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Those grounds were considered by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Wellesley-Cole on 26th January  2014.   Judge  Wellesley-Cole
    noted that the grounds asserted that the judge had erred at paragraph 3
    of the determination when she had concluded that the  Appellant  needed
    to show compelling reasons outside of the Rules.  The grounds contended
    that the judge had failed to make adequate  credibility  findings  with
    sustainable reasons in respect of  the  evidence  of  the  Sponsor  and
    witness which it was  incumbent  upon  her  to  do  and  that  she  had
    misapplied the compelling circumstances test when considering Article 8
    from paragraph  16  onwards  of  her  determination.   Furthermore  the
    grounds alleged that the Appellant did not have proper  regard  to  the
    best interests of the child following the authority of  T  [2011]  UKUT
    00483 (IAC).  Judge Wellesley-Cole had concluded  that  the  judge  may
    have fallen into error in not making adequate credibility findings  and
    applying the wrong test in  paragraph  3  that  is  compelling  reasons
    outside the Rules along with an inadequate consideration of Article 8.

 4. On 17th February 2015 the Secretary of State responded to  the  Grounds
    of Appeal submitting that the  judge's  approach  in  paragraph  3  was
    correct and that if the Appellant did  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    certain Immigration Rules  then  compelling  circumstances  had  to  be
    established for the purpose of Article 8.   It  was  submitted  therein
    that the judge had given adequate reasons for her credibility  findings
    and the conclusions drawn from those were open for her to make.  He had
    fully explained the inconsistencies that led to her  decision  and  had
    considered the best interests of the  child  at  paragraph  15  of  her
    determination.

 5. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  her  instructed
    legal representative Mr Choudhury.  Mr Choudhury is familiar with  this
    matter having appeared before the First-tier Tribunal.   The  Secretary
    of State appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Jarvis.

Submissions/Discussions

 6. Mr Jarvis starts off by commenting that there is nothing in this appeal
    whatsoever.  Whilst it is acknowledged that the Sponsor  may  want  the
    child to enter, and that it is incumbent in such circumstances for  the
    judge to look at the situation, the First-tier Tribunal Judge has given
    reasons for any inconsistencies and therefore  any  perceived  failings
    (which he disputes) on the  judge's  analysis  and  her  duty  to  give
    reasons fall away.  Mr Jarvis specifically takes me to paragraphs 11 to
    14 of the determination which he submits highlight the judge's concerns
    about the evidence that was before her.

 7. He points out the Sponsor's husband gave  evidence  and  that  this  is
    recorded at paragraph 10.  He submits that any  reliance  made  on  the
    guidance given in MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT  00641
    (IAC) does not assist the Appellant because the judge  was  considering
    oral evidence and that there is no real  attack  made  on  the  evasive
    evidence provided in the appeal which goes to the heart of the question
    as to what the best interests of the child must be.   He  submits  that
    any such submissions have to be based  on  reliable  findings  and  the
    findings made were open to  the  judge  and  therefore  the  judge  was
    entitled to conclude the Appellant had not been given reliable evidence
    regarding the Appellant's father.  Further, as Mr Jarvis points out, it
    was noted by the judge that the Appellant was well  cared  for  by  her
    grandmother, therefore the judge had given  due  consideration  to  the
    best interests of the child and no error of law  was  shown  under  the
    Immigration Rules.

 8. Addressing the issue pursuant to  Article  8  the  judge  takes  me  to
    paragraph 16 of the decision.  He submits that the grounds quite simply
    are wrong and refers me to the authorities of Singh v the Secretary  of
    State  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  74  and  Mundeba  (Section  55  of  paragraph
    297(i)(f)) [2013] UKUT 88 (IAC).   He  submits  that  reliance  on  the
    authority of T is not  good  law  and  that  that  was  an  exceptional
    circumstances case and that there is no general duty on  the  Secretary
    of State at interview.  He submits that the judge has given  sufficient
    reasons and that there is no material error of  law  disclosed  at  all
    pursuant to Article 8 and he asked me to dismiss the appeal.

 9. Mr Choudhury relies on the Grounds of Appeal and submits  that  when  a
    minor seeks to be relocated with her mother then it is  incumbent  upon
    the judge to give reasons and that  this  decision  is  empty  on  such
    observations.  He acknowledges that the judge noted that the child  was
    with a grandmother and that  the  grandmother  was,  he  submits,  only
    caring for the Appellant with the financial assistance of  her  mother.
    It is his submission that the judge failed to  give  adequate  reasons.
    He acknowledges that the applicant is 18 years old this year and  seeks
    to rely on the authorities of  T  (Section  55  BCIA)  [2009]  -  entry
    clearance) Jamaica [2011] UKUT 00483  (IAC)  and  TD  297(i)(e):  "sole
    responsibility" (Yemen)  [2006]  UKAIT  00049.   He  submits  that  the
    decision is unsustainable and he asked me to find a material  error  of
    law and to either order a rehearing or even to remit the matter back to
    the Entry Clearance Officer for the child to be interviewed.

The Law

10.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

11. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Specific Legal Authorities

12. There have been several specific legal authorities referred to in  this
    matter and it is appropriate that I give  due  consideration  to  them.
    The Appellant seeks to rely upon T (Section  55  BCIA  [2009]  -  entry
    clearance) Jamaica [2011] UKUT 00483 (IAC).  That case is authority for
    the following propositions:

         "(i) Section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act
             2009 does not apply to children who  are  outside  the  United
             Kingdom.

         (ii) Where there are reasons to believe that a child's welfare  may
             be jeopardised by  exclusion  from  the  United  Kingdom,  the
             considerations of Article 8 ECHR, the "exclusion  undesirable"
             provisions of the Immigration Rules and  the  extra  statutory
             guidance to Entry Clearance Officers to apply  the  spirit  of
             the statutory guidance in certain circumstances should all  be
             taken into account by the ECO at first instance and the  judge
             on appeal.

         (iii)    When the interests of the child are under consideration in
             an  entry  clearance  case,  it  may  be  necessary  to   make
             investigations, and where appropriate having  regard  to  age,
             the child herself may need to be interviewed.

         (iv) Where the appeal can be fairly determined on the merits by the
             judge, it is inappropriate to  allow  it  without  substantive
             consideration simply for a decision to be made  in  accordance
             with the law."

         (v)  It is difficult to contemplate a scenario where a s.  55  duty
             is material to an immigration decision and indicates a certain
             outcome but Article 8 does not."

13. Thereafter the Appellant relies on TD (Yemen) which is authority as  to
    the analysis of sole responsibility:

         "'Sole responsibility' is a factual matter to be decided  upon  all
         the evidence.  Where one parent is  not  involved  in  the  child's
         upbringing  because  he  (or  she)  had  abandoned   or   abdicated
         responsibility, the issue may arise between  the  remaining  parent
         and others who have day-to-day care of the child abroad.  The  test
         is whether the parent has continuing control and direction over the
         child's upbringing, including making all the important decisions in
         the child's life.   However, where both parents are involved  in  a
         child's upbringing, it will be exceptional that one  of  them  will
         have 'sole responsibility'."

    In addition the grounds contend that there are inadequate  reasons  and
    the Appellant relies on MK (duty  to  give  reasons)[2013]  UKUT  00641
    (IAC).  That case is authority for the following analyses:

         "(i) It is axiomatic that a  determination  discloses  clearly  the
             reasons for a tribunal's decision.

         (ii)  If  a  tribunal  finds  oral  evidence  to  be   implausible,
             incredible or unreliable or a document to be worth  no  weight
             whatsoever, it is necessary to say so in the determination and
             for  such  findings  to  be  supported  by  reasons.   A  bare
             statement that a witness was not believed or that  a  document
             was afforded no weight is unlikely to satisfy the  requirement
             to give reasons."

14. It is not necessary herein to recite the various analyses to  be  found
    in Ganesabalan and MM Lebanon other than to note a comment made by  the
    Court of Appeal in Singh [2015] EWCA Civ 74 that:

         "In short, neither MM  (Lebanon)  nor  Ganesabalan  undermines  the
         point made by Sales J in para. 30 of his judgment in  Nagre,  which
         in my view, together  with  his  endorsement  of  the  approach  in
         Izuazu, remains good law."

15. Further as the Secretary of State comments it is necessary to give  due
    consideration  to  the  position  regarding  serious   and   compelling
    circumstances.  I am referred to the guidance of the Upper Tribunal  in
    Mundeba (Section 55 para 297(i)(f) [2013] UKUT 88 (IAC)  at  paragraphs
    34 to 36.

         "34. In our view, 'serious' means that there needs to be more  than
             the parties simply desiring a  state  of  affairs  to  obtain.
             'Compelling' in the context of paragraph  297(i)(f)  indicates
             that  considerations  that  are   persuasive   and   powerful.
             'Serious' read with 'compelling' together  indicate  that  the
             family or other considerations render  the  exclusion  of  the
             child from the United Kingdom undesirable.   The  analysis  is
             one of degree and kind.  Such an interpretation  sets  a  high
             threshold that excludes  cases  where,  without  more,  it  is
             simply the wish of parties to be together however natural that
             ambition that may be.

         35.  The terms of s.55(1) and the decision of the Upper Tribunal in
             T (s.55 BCIA 2009 - entry clearance) Jamaica [2011] UKUT 00483
             (IAC) [2012] Imm AR 346, made it clear that s.55 only  applies
             to children who are in the United  Kingdom.   The  requirement
             therefore in the IDIs we have quoted above that officers  must
             not apply actions set out in the  instruction  without  having
             regard  to  s.55  inaccurately  states  the  legal   position,
             although as the Tribunal noted  at  [18]  that  the  statutory
             guidance asks 'staff working overseas to adhere to the  spirit
             if the duty and  make  enquiries  when  they  have  reason  to
             suspect  that  a  child  may  be  in  need  of  protection  or
             safeguarding or present welfare needs that require attention'.



         36.  The exercise of the duty by the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  to
             assess the application  under  the  Immigration  Rules  as  to
             whether there are family or other  considerations  making  the
             child's   exclusion   undesirable   inevitably   involves   an
             assessment of what the  child's  welfare  and  best  interests
             require.  Where an  immigration  decision  engages  Article  8
             rights, due regard must be had to the  UN  Convention  on  the
             Rights of the Child.  An  entry  clearance  decision  for  the
             admission of  a  child  under  18  is  'an  action  concerning
             children...undertaken by administrative authorities' and so by
             Article 3 'the best interests of the child shall be a  primary
             consideration'.  Although the statutory  duty  under  s.55  UK
             Borders Act 2009 only applies to children within the  UK,  the
             broader duty doubtless explains why the Secretary  of  State's
             IDI invites Entry Clearance Officers to consider the statutory
             guidance issued under s.55."

Findings

16. It is against this background that I have to consider  whether  or  not
    there has been a material error of law in the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  I start by addressing the position so far as it relates
    to the finding of the First-tier Tribunal under the Immigration  Rules.
    The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  heard  evidence  from  the  Appellant's
    mother and her stepfather and noted there was also the evidence  of  an
    affidavit from the Appellant's maternal grandmother  and  an  affidavit
    from a Mr Hussain the man whom it is claimed is the  intermediary  with
    the Appellant's father.   The  judge  made  findings  that  there  were
    inconsistencies in  the  evidence  provided  particularly  by  how  the
    Appellant obtained an affidavit  from  her  father  consenting  to  her
    leaving Pakistan with her mother and that the  Appellant's  mother  was
    vague about her former husband's whereabouts.  The judge made a finding
    of fact that the witnesses were deliberately evasive about the  contact
    that there was with the Appellant's father and that paragraph  14  gave
    reasons as to why she was not satisfied that  she  had  been  told  the
    truth about the Appellant's circumstances in Pakistan up  to  the  time
    her application was made.  It seems to me that the judge has given very
    full and careful consideration for the evidence that was before her and
    has within paragraph 15  of  the  determination  set  out  clearly  her
    conclusions in the reasons upon which such conclusions are based  under
    the Immigration Rules.  It cannot therefore with any reasonableness  be
    argued that the judge has failed to give due and  proper  consideration
    to the guidance given in MK as to how a Tribunal should and should  not
    set out their reasons.  So far as the claim pursuant to the Immigration
    Rules  is  concerned  the  assertions  amount  to  little   more   than
    disagreement with the judge's decision and I find  for  all  the  above
    reasons that there is no material error of law.

17. It is also appropriate to consider the position under Article  8.   The
    judge has found  that  there  are  no  compelling   circumstances  that
    warrant allowing the  appeal  outside  the  Rules  and  she  has  given
    detailed reasons at paragraph 16 to 19 as to  why  this  is  the  case.
    There has been argument as to the consideration of the  best  interests
    of the child under Section 55 and of the approach generally be adopted.
     I am satisfied that the judge, whilst not reciting case law, has given
    a very full  and  proper  consideration.   The  case  law  is  an  ever
    expanding and evolving set of authorities.  There  is  nothing  in  the
    subsequent authorities to show that the judge's approach was erroneous.
     R (on the application of Oludoyi and Others v Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department [2014] UKUT 539 (IAC) makes it  clear  that  it  is
    only necessary to look at the evidence to  see  if  there  is  anything
    which has not already been adequately considered in the context of  the
    Immigration Rules and which could lead to a successful Article 8 claim.
     The authorities do not qualify or fetter the assessment of  Article  8
    and there is no utility in imposing a further intermediary  test  as  a
    preliminary to a  consideration  of  an  Article  8  claim  beyond  the
    relevant criterion based Rule.  That is the approach that  this  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge has adopted.  Whilst clearly  cases  that  postdate
    the date of submissions cannot and would not have been referred  to  me
    there is nothing within them, in particular the decision in SS  (Congo)
    [2015] EWCA Civ 387 that does anything to support contentions  made  by
    the Appellant's legal representatives that there is a material error of
    law in the First-tier decision.

18. In all the circumstances this is a judge who has given full and  proper
    consideration to the position firstly under the Immigration  Rules  and
    latterly  Article  8  outside  the  Rules  and  her  finding  that  the
    Respondent has shown that the decision  is  proportionate  due  to  the
    inconsistencies in the evidence taking into account the public interest
    requirements of firm and effective immigration control is one that  she
    was entitled to make and one that does not disclose any material  error
    of law.  In such circumstances there is no material error  of  law  for
    the reasons set out above both under the Immigration Rules and pursuant
    to Article 8 and the Appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses no material error  of  law
and is dismissed and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is  maintained.


No anonymity order is sought and none is made.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application for a fee award.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

