
IAC-PE-AW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/20797/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 18th December 2014                           |On 28th April 2015         |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                          Mr Banga Colline Karamira
                          (anonymity not retained)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Klear of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss Holmes


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 27th March 1999 is  a  citizen  of  Uganda.   The
    Appellant was represented by Mr Klear of Counsel.  The  Respondent  was
    represented by Miss Holmes, a Home Office Presenting Officer.



Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had applied for settlement as the dependent  child  of  a
    British citizen present and settled  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  12th
    September 2013.  The Respondent had refused that  application  on  14th
    October 2013.  The Appellant had appealed that decision and the  appeal
    was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Malone sitting at  Taylor  House
    on 19th September 2014.  The judge had allowed  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules.

 3. The Respondent had made application for permission to appeal dated  6th
    October 2014.  Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Cox on 13th November 2014.  Permission was granted on  the  basis
    that it was arguable that the judge had materially misdirected  himself
    in law and failed to give  adequate  reasons  in  respect  of  material
    matters.  Directions were issued  for  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  decide
    firstly whether or not an error of law had been  made  and  the  matter
    came before me in accordance with those directions.

Submissions on Behalf of the Respondent

 4. Miss Holmes presented submissions in line with the  Grounds  of  Appeal
    submitted by the Respondent namely that the judge had firstly erred  in
    law in respect of his  understanding  at  paragraph  320(7A).   It  was
    further said that the judge had failed to  give  adequate  reasons  for
    findings  on  material  matters  relating  to   the   issue   of   sole
    responsibility.

Submissions on Behalf of the Appellant

 5. It was submitted that the  Appellant  had  been  unrepresented  at  the
    hearing but the judge had found the Sponsor to be credible and  honest.
    There were little further submissions  on  the  question  of  paragraph
    320(7A) but it was submitted that in terms of sole  responsibility  the
    judge had dealt properly with that matter.

 6. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision to consider the
    evidence and submissions presented.  I now provide that  decision  with
    my reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 7. There were two matters for the judge to decide in this  case.   Firstly
    did the  Appellant's  application  fall  for  mandatory  refusal  under
    paragraph 320(7A) of the Immigration Rules, and secondly in  any  event
    did the Appellant succeed under paragraph 297 of the Immigration  Rules
    where the issue was the question of sole responsibility.

 8. In respect of the  first  matter  a  first  birth  certificate  of  the
    Appellant had been presented to the Entry Clearance Officer.  The Entry
    Clearance  Officer  having  obtained  a  document  verification  report
    concluded that that birth certificate was false.  It was on  the  basis
    of that first  false  birth  certificate  the  Respondent  refused  the
    application under paragraph 320(7A).  At a later stage a  second  birth
    certificate was presented to the Entry Clearance Manager on review.   A
    further document verification report was obtained which disclosed  that
    document was genuine.  However the Appellant's  alleged  father's  name
    was recorded on the birth certificate inconsistent with  the  Sponsor's
    evidence she did not know the name or identification of the Appellant's
    father.  That had led the  Entry  Clearance  Manager  to  question  the
    veracity of the Sponsor's account of the conception  of  the  Appellant
    but he did not find  that  second  birth  certificate  to  be  a  false
    document.

 9. The judge somewhat erroneously at paragraph 23 appears to have believed
    that the Respondent relied upon both birth certificates as founding the
    refusal under paragraph 320(7A).  That was clearly not the case.

10. The judge accepted the first birth certificate was  indeed  false.   He
    accepted  the  document  verification  report  but  went  substantially
    further at paragraphs 13 to 16 by setting  out  the  reasons  why  that
    certificate was patently a false document.  Indeed at paragraph  16  he
    said "The Entry Clearance Officer did not need to go to the trouble  of
    getting a  document  verification  report  to  confirm  the  document's
    falsity.  Its falsity was plain to see".

11. Thereafter the judge  had  referred  himself  to  paragraph  76  of  AA
    (Nigeria) [2010] EWCA Civ 777 in respect of  paragraph  320(7A).   That
    was potentially an unfortunate reference as  paragraph  76  of  AA  was
    concerned with "false representations" rather than false  documentation
    and was in itself a reference back to paragraph 68.  In the context  of
    this case the more pertinent paragraph within AA was paragraph 67 which
    stated:

         "First, false representation is aligned  in  the  Rule  with  false
         documents.  It is plain that a false document is one that  tells  a
         lie about itself.  Of course it is possible for a  person  to  make
         use of a false document (for instance a counterfeit  currency  note
         but that example used for its clarity is rather  distant  from  the
         context of this discussion) in total ignorance of its  falsity  and
         imperfect honesty.  But the document itself is  dishonest.   It  is
         highly likely  therefore  that  where  an  applicant  uses  in  all
         innocence a false document  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  entry
         clearance or leave to enter or to remain it is because  some  other
         party, it might be a parent or Sponsor  or  agent  has  dishonestly
         promoted the use of that document.  The response of  a  requirement
         of  mandatory  refusal  is  entirely  understandable  in   such   a
         situation.  The mere fact that a dishonest document has  been  used
         for such an important application is  understandably  a  sufficient
         reason for a mandatory refusal.  That is  why  the  Rule  expressly
         emphasises that it  applies  whether  or  not  to  the  applicant's
         knowledge."

12. The judge in his examination of that birth certificate at paragraphs 20
    to 21 made a number of errors.  Firstly he noted at paragraph  20  that
    there was no evidence to show how the false birth certificate  came  to
    be before the Entry Clearance  Officer.   However  later  in  the  same
    paragraph he noted the Sponsor had told him that she had had to pay  to
    get the document, which at least  provided  some  evidence  as  to  the
    generation of that document in the first instance.  Secondly the  judge
    concluded that there was  no  evidence  the  false  document  had  been
    created by someone operating at arm's length from  the  Appellant,  his
    relatives or agent.  That is somewhat inconsistent with  the  admission
    from the Sponsor outlined above.  Further the judge does not say how he
    arrived at that conclusion or in the absence of all of the  above,  who
    was left to have submitted the document or had any motive in so  doing.
    Thirdly the judge noted that the Appellant or  his  agents  had  to  be
    shown by the Respondent to have been dishonest.  That is not  the  test
    contained within paragraph 320(7A) nor within the terms of paragraph 67
    of AA referred to above.

13. Having concluded the first  birth  certificate  was  patently  a  false
    document and that it  had  been  submitted  by  or  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant as part of the documents for his application  for  settlement
    and concluding as indeed it must be concluded that the document  itself
    was dishonest it was not a material consideration whether the Appellant
    had acted dishonestly himself or knew the document was  dishonest.   It
    was therefore an error for the judge to have  concluded  there  was  no
    merit in the Entry Clearance Officer's refusal under paragraph 320(7A).
     He was bound to have upheld  the  mandatory  refusal  under  paragraph
    320(7A) in respect of that first birth certificate.

14. In respect of his consideration of sole responsibility the second birth
    certificate more properly needed  to  be  considered  as  part  of  the
    evidence as a whole in relation to the question of sole responsibility.
     The judge had considered this matter between paragraphs 24 and  39  of
    the decision.  The judge was entitled to  find  the  Sponsor  to  be  a
    credible witness having had the advantage of  seeing  and  hearing  her
    oral evidence.  However it was incumbent  upon  the  judge  to  provide
    reasons why he reached the conclusion that the  Sponsor  had  had  sole
    responsibility of the Appellant within the terms of sole responsibility
    discussed in the case of  TD  Yemen  [2006]  UKAIT  00049.   The  judge
    referred  to  certain  features  within  the  evidence  concerning  the
    Appellant's upbringing.

15.  Firstly  although  erroneously  referred  to  within  the  context  of
    paragraph 320(7A) the second birth certificate potentially  showed  the
    Appellant's  maternal  grandfather  as  being  named   on   the   birth
    certificate possibly because of  the  finding  made  by  the  judge  at
    paragraph 22 that the maternal  grandfather  had  always  been  in  the
    background to protect his grandson.  The judge had also noted that when
    the Appellant was born the Sponsor was essentially a child herself  and
    wholly unable to care for him and he was therefore looked after by  her
    elder sister.  He had further noted that money transfer  receipts  from
    the Sponsor to the Appellant were restricted to two months in 2011  and
    2012.  It was also noted the Appellant had always lived with  his  aunt
    Juliette.  In terms of schooling the Appellant had  chosen  the  latest
    school himself which had been confirmed by Juliette  and  that  it  was
    Juliette who visited the Appellant at school  during  the  visits  that
    were allowed.  It was further noted that Juliette provided the  day-to-
    day care of the Appellant  and  although  the  judge  referred  to  the
    Sponsor stating that she  had  always  been  responsible  for  the  big
    decisions in the Appellant's life  there  were  no  examples  provided.
    Indeed the only example of a big decision  was  the  choice  of  school
    which was noted to have been a decision taken by the Appellant himself.
     Whilst there was certainly  features  that  demonstrated  the  Sponsor
    having a contact and a care of  the  Appellant  there  were  inadequate
    reasons provided when set against the evidential background of how that
    translated into the Sponsor having  had  sole  responsibility  for  the
    Appellant.  It was further significant that although there was  limited
    evidence of financial support in the period referred to above there had
    been no evidence of financial support throughout the  year  2013  given
    the application itself had been made in September 2013.  There were  in
    this case inadequate reasons given by the judge for  finding  that  the
    Sponsor had exercised sole responsibility particularly when set against
    the evidential background.

Notice of Decision

I find for the reasons given that the judge made a material error of law  in
this case such that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal needs to be  set
aside and a fresh decision made.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 30th December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever
