
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/20794/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23rd January 2015                          |On 5th February 2015          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                      ENTRY Clearance OFFICER - CHENNAI
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             hariet rasanayagam
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss R Frantzis of Counsel instructed by Solidum
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and Background

 1. The Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) appeals against  a  determination  of
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Ghaffar  promulgated  on  5th  August
    2014.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and I will refer to her as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant is a female citizen of Sri Lanka born 23rd June  1926  who
    applied for entry clearance to join her son in the United Kingdom as an
    adult dependant relative.

 4. The application was refused on 16th October 2013 with reference  to  E-
    ECDR.2.5 of Appendix FM which I set out below;


         The applicant or, if  the  applicant  and  their  partner  are  the
         Sponsor's parents or grandparents, the applicant's partner, must be
         unable even with the practical and financial help of  the  Sponsor,
         to obtain the required level of care in the country where they  are
         living, because -
         (a)  it is not available and there is no person in that country who
             can reasonably provide it; or
         (b)  it is not affordable.

 5. The ECO found that the Claimant was currently receiving  the  care  she
    needed from family friends and her son  (the  Sponsor)  in  the  United
    Kingdom was providing financial support.  The  ECO  was  not  satisfied
    that the Claimant would be unable to obtain the required level of  care
    in Sri Lanka.

 6. The appeal was heard by Judge Ghaffar (the judge)  on  3rd  July  2014.
    After hearing evidence from the Sponsor and his wife, the  judge  found
    that the evidence was credible, and that the  Appellant  would  not  be
    able to obtain the required level of care in Sri Lanka and allowed  the
    appeal  on  that  basis  finding  the  criteria  in  E-ECDR.2.5  to  be
    satisfied.

 7. The ECO applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   In
    summary it was contended that the judge had failed to provide  adequate
    reasons for finding that the required level of care was  not  available
    in Sri Lanka and that there is no-one in Sri Lanka who could reasonably
    provide it, and it was not affordable.

 8. It was submitted that the Sponsor's evidence was that care  homes  were
    not of the appropriate standard in the Claimant's area but had made  no
    enquiries as to the availability and standard of care  homes  elsewhere
    in Sri Lanka and there was no evidence that the standard of care  homes
    was not appropriate throughout Sri Lanka.  It would not be unduly harsh
    for the Claimant to move elsewhere in Sri Lanka to  move  into  a  care
    home.

 9. If the Claimant and Sponsor could not afford the cost, it would not  be
    unreasonable for the Sponsor to obtain  extra  employment  and  if  the
    Sponsor could not afford the Claimant's medical costs in Sri Lanka, the
    same would apply in the United Kingdom and  the  Claimant  would  be  a
    burden on public resources.

10. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Levin who found it arguable that the judge had failed to give  adequate
    reasons for his finding  that  the  required  level  of  care  was  not
    available for the Claimant in Sri Lanka.  Judge Levin found it arguable
    that the judge's findings were not adequately explained and evidenced.

11. Following the grant  of  permission  the  Claimant  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.  It was  contended  that  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal disclosed no error of law.  As to the ECO's argument that  the
    Sponsor could obtain extra employment to meet any additional  costs  of
    care, it was pointed out that this was not argued before the judge  and
    the Sponsor was not cross-examined on this point, and  therefore  there
    was no error made by the judge in not referring to this argument  which
    had not been before him.

12. It was contended that the ECO had not placed any  evidence  before  the
    judge as to the cost of private healthcare in Sri Lanka, and as to  the
    Claimant being a burden on public  resources,  reference  was  made  to
    paragraph 22 of  the  Sponsor's  witness  statement  in  which  it  was
    recorded that the Claimant would live with him and his family and there
    would be no cost to the state in respect of care home facilities.

13. In relation to adequacy of reasoning it was contended that the  judge's
    credibility  findings  had  not  been  challenged  and  the  judge   in
    paragraphs 9-11 had detailed the Sponsor's evidence of his income,  his
    search for private individual care and his research into care homes  in
    Sri Lanka.  The judge had made an important and unchallenged finding at
    paragraph  22  of  the  determination  that   the   Claimant   required
    psychological support which she could only obtain if she  is  with  her
    son, and therefore care provided by others would  not  be  'reasonable'
    for the purposes of E-ECDR.2.5.

14. Directions were issued that there should be an oral hearing before  the
    Upper Tribunal to decide whether the First-tier Tribunal  determination
    contained an error of law such that it should be set aside.

Submissions

15. At the hearing before me Mr Harrison relied upon the grounds  contained
    within the application  for  permission  to  appeal  and  had  no  oral
    submissions to make.

16. Miss Frantzis relied upon the rule 24 response.  I was  asked  to  find
    that the credibility findings made by the  judge  in  relation  to  the
    Sponsor's evidence had not  been  challenged.   The  finding  that  the
    Claimant needed psychological support from her son had  also  not  been
    challenged.

17. Miss Frantzis submitted that the challenge to the determination  was  a
    reasons challenge and the judge had given  adequate  reasons,  and  had
    been entitled to accept the Sponsor's evidence and  to  find  that  the
    Immigration Rules were satisfied.

My Conclusions and Reasons

18. The challenge to the First-tier Tribunal  determination  is  not  based
    upon perversity or irrationality, but based upon  the  contention  that
    inadequate reasons for findings have been given.

19. Guidance upon adequacy of reasons has been given by the Upper  Tribunal
    in Budhathoki (reasons for decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC) and I set
    out below the headnote to that decision;

         It is generally unnecessary and unhelpful for  First-tier  Tribunal
         judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised in a case.  This
         leads to judgments becoming overly long and confused and is  not  a
         proportionate  approach  to  deciding  cases.   It   is,   however,
         necessary for judges to identify and resolve key conflicts  in  the
         evidence and explain in clear and brief  terms  their  reasons,  so
         that the parties can understand why they have won or lost.

20. I have to decide whether the judge carried out  the  duty  set  out  in
    Budhathoki  and  whether  he  has  given  adequate  reasons   for   his
    conclusions and findings.

21. In my view the judge has made a decision that some other  judges  might
    not have done, but that is not the  test,  and  not  the  issue  to  be
    decided, neither is the fact that the grounds submitted  on  behalf  of
    the ECO disclose a strong disagreement with  the  judge's  conclusions.
    My role is to decide whether the judge erred in law,  and  if  he  did,
    whether that error was material.

22. The issue to be  decided  by  the  judge  was  relatively  narrow,  and
    amounted to deciding whether the criteria set  out  in  E-ECDR.2.5  was
    satisfied.

23. The judge found in favour of the Claimant  recording  in  paragraph  20
    that he based his findings on "all the evidence before me and have  had
    regard to the oral evidence from the Sponsor and his wife".  The  judge
    found that the Appellant could not obtain the required level of care in
    Sri Lanka.

24. Paragraph 18 of the determination indicates that the judge applied  the
    correct burden of proof, finding that the burden  in  relation  to  the
    Immigration Rules was on the Claimant, and decided the appeal using the
    correct standard of proof, that being a balance of probabilities.

25. The judge  described,  in  paragraph  22,  the  Sponsor's  evidence  as
    credible, recording that the Sponsor was frank in giving evidence,  and
    made concessions not necessarily beneficial to his case.

26. The judge had before him some documentary medical  evidence  sent  from
    Sri Lanka, which detailed the Claimant's medical condition.

27. The judge concluded that the Appellant, at the relevant time, was being
    cared for  by  family  friends  which  he  found  to  be  a  short-term
    arrangement and not a solution to  the  Claimant's  care  requirements.
    The judge found that the Sponsor  could  not  afford  to  pay  for  the
    Claimant to go into a care home, nor could he secure a private carer.

28. The judge's reason for making these findings was that he  accepted  the
    Sponsor's evidence as credible, in other words,  he  believed,  to  the
    correct standard of proof, the Sponsor's evidence.

29. Because he accepted the Sponsor's evidence, which was tested by  cross-
    examination, the judge found the criteria set out in E-ECDR.2.5  to  be
    satisfied and therefore allowed the appeal on that basis.

30. In my view the judge  has  adequately  explained  why  he  allowed  the
    appeal, and this is because he believed, on a balance of probabilities,
    what the Sponsor told him.

31. The grounds make it clear that the ECO disagrees with  the  conclusions
    made by the judge, but the grounds do not disclose an error of law,  as
    I conclude that the judge did give adequate reasons for his findings.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.  The appeal of the Secretary  of  State  is
dismissed.

Anonymity

No order for anonymity was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There has  been
no request for anonymity, and the Upper Tribunal makes no  anonymity  order.




Signed                              Date 29th January 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  stands,  therefore  the
decision to make no fee award also stands.






Signed                              Date 29th January 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

