
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/20703/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 10 July 2014                                 |On 10 September 2014       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                        MRS Elizabeth Hodupe Akinseye
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - LAGOS
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Adbayo Solicitor, David & Vine Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Specialist Appeals Team


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal  against  a  decision  by  an
    Entry Clearance Officer to refuse her entry clearance as the spouse  of
    a person present and settled here on the grounds, inter alia, that  she
    had  previously  contrived  in  a  significant  way  to  frustrate  the
    intention of the Immigration Rules, and therefore her application  fell
    for refusal under paragraph 320(11).  The First-tier Tribunal  did  not
    make an anonymity order, and I do not consider that such  an  order  is
    warranted for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal, having regard to
    the issue in controversy.

 2. The appellant is a national of  Nigeria,  whose  date  of  birth  is  9
    November 1941.  In June 2012 she applied for  entry  clearance  as  the
    spouse of Mr Rufus Akinsey  under  paragraph  281  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  In the covering letter written on her behalf by her then  legal
    representative, she said that she had married her sponsor in the London
    Borough of Lambeth on 23 January 1971.  They had been married for  over
    41 years, and they now had two adult children  who  were  both  British
    citizens.  The sponsor had ILR which was issued to him on 3 March 1999.
     The applicant and the sponsor had  lived  together  in  the  UK  after
    marriage until 1979 when they both moved to Lagos.  In 1989 the sponsor
    returned to the UK for a better life for himself and his  family.   The
    applicant came to visit the sponsor in the UK between  the  years  1990
    and 1991.  She made further attempts to visit the UK  once  again,  but
    was denied entry.  In the meantime, the sponsor had  a  pending  asylum
    application.

 3. In 2002 the applicant became so desperate to come and see the  sponsor,
    her children and grandchildren, that she travelled to  the  UK  with  a
    false passport.  She remained in  the  UK  from  2002  to  2007  whilst
    various applications for leave to remain were pending.  In 2007 she was
    removed to Nigeria after all her appeal rights were exhausted.

 4. The reason why the applicant had not applied for entry clearance  as  a
    spouse in the past five years was because she and the sponsor could not
    agree on where to spend the rest of their lives  together,  whether  in
    Nigeria or in the UK.  Since 2007 the sponsor had  been  travelling  at
    least twice a year to Nigeria to visit the applicant.  He spent two  to
    three months on each occasion he  travelled.   The  sponsor  stayed  in
    Lagos with the applicant in their family home.  The applicant  had  now
    decided to live in the UK with the sponsor as this was  his  wish,  and
    furthermore her children and grandchildren resided in the UK.

 5. On 13 September 2012 an Entry  Clearance  Officer  in  Lagos  gave  his
    reasons for refusing the appellant's application.  He refused it  under
    paragraph 320(7A), 320(11) and paragraph 281 of the Immigration  Rules.
    Her fingerprints had been checked against records held  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  A positive match confirmed that she had previously  used  the
    following names in the UK: Mary Johnson, Ajibode Elizabeth  Madupe  and
    Elizabeth Madupe Williams.  But the appellant had  not  declared  these
    names at section 1.3 on her Visa Application Form.

 6. UK records show that she entered  the  United  Kingdom  and  sought  to
    remain as Mary Johnson, a national of Sierra Leone, on 31  March  2002.
    Her application to remain  was  refused  on  28  August  2005  but  she
    remained in the UK until 24 January 2007.  During her time  in  the  UK
    she also  used  multiple  identities  as  detailed  above.   The  Entry
    Clearance Officer was satisfied the above conduct was  consistent  with
    that described in Entry Clearance  Guidance  Chapter  26.18  as  having
    contrived in a significant way  to  frustrate  the  intentions  of  the
    Immigration  Rules.   It  was  therefore  appropriate  to  refuse   her
    application under paragraph 320(11).

 7. The Entry Clearance Officer was also not satisfied  that  the  marriage
    between her and the sponsor was genuine and subsisting.  She  submitted
    no evidence of telephone bills, correspondence, cards or  visits  since
    February 2010.

 8. He had also considered the application  under  Article  8.   There  was
    nothing to prevent her sponsor from  relocating  to  Nigeria  to  enjoy
    family life or continuing to visit her there.  While  he  accepted  the
    decision constituted limited interference with Article 8,  he  reminded
    himself this was a qualified right, and he was satisfied  the  decision
    was justified and proportionate in  the  interests  of  maintaining  an
    effective immigration control.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 9. The appellant's appeal came before Judge Traynor sitting in the  First-
    tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross on 14 February 2014.  Mr Adbayo  appeared
    on behalf of the appellant, and Mr Graham, Counsel, appeared on  behalf
    of the respondent.  The appellant's husband, her son  Tony  Atkins  and
    her daughter Olayemi Olubunmi adopted their witness statements as their
    evidence-in-chief.  They were not cross-examined.  The judge also  took
    into account an unsigned witness statement from the appellant dated  13
    February 2014.

10. The judge's findings are set out at paragraph 35  onwards.   The  judge
    accepted the appellant's explanation that she  honestly  believed  that
    her circumstances were known to  the  respondent,  including  her  full
    identity.  Having had the opportunity to consider all the evidence,  he
    found the respondent had not discharged the burden of  proof  necessary
    to justify refusal of the application  under  the  terms  of  paragraph
    320(7A).  Given the appellant's explanation, and the fact that her  VAF
    clearly referred to the fact that she had been removed from the  United
    Kingdom and in all other respects was a correct and accurate summary of
    her immigration history, he found that the failure to complete  section
    1.3 was not a dishonest act but a genuine omission.

11. However, the judge found that the respondent had  reasonably  exercised
    discretion to refuse the  application  under  the  terms  of  paragraph
    320(11).  He had carefully considered the IDIs with reference  to  such
    refusals in conjunction with the  decision  of  PS  (paragraph  320(11)
    discretion; care needed) India [2010] UKUT 440 (IAC).   What  was  made
    clear by those instructions and by PS was that  the  respondent  should
    determine whether or not there were aggravating circumstances involving
    a person's  immigration  history  which  should  warrant  a  subsequent
    refusal of applications for entry clearance.  In this respect,  it  was
    noted that the use of an assumed identity or  multiple  identities  for
    deceptive reasons was a factor  that  should  be  taken  into  account.
    Equally, the switching of nationality  was  another  factor  which  was
    considered  as   aggravating.    The   respondent's   decision   notice
    highlighted the fact that the appellant had used  different  identities
    in her dealings with UK immigration officials.

12. The judge found that apart from  her  maiden  and  married  names,  the
    appellant did use at least three identities in  her  dealings  with  UK
    immigration officials.  In addition to  her  own  name,  she  used  and
    relied on a different name in a false passport  which  enabled  her  to
    enter the United Kingdom.  Her subsequent claim for asylum was  in  the
    name of Mary Johnson and she  also  falsely  claimed  that  she  was  a
    citizen of Sierra Leone.  The judge was therefore satisfied that  there
    was reliable evidence to support the claim that she had  used  multiple
    identities with a view to deceiving immigration officials at that time.
     He was obliged to  conclude  that  her  willingness  to  use  a  false
    passport in another name and subsequently claim asylum in  yet  another
    name and nationality which was not her own was serious and  aggravating
    conduct which fell within the criteria set out in RFL 7.3  of  the  IDI
    relating to refusals under paragraph 320(11).

13. At paragraph 40, he noted the IDI required the decision maker  to  give
    consideration to issues of relevant family life in the UK at  the  time
    of the alleged conduct and, in the case of children,  to  consider  the
    level of responsibility for the breach.

14. At paragraph 41, the judge found that the  appellant  had  not  enjoyed
    direct family life in the United Kingdom for a number  of  years.   The
    time when she did enjoy family life here was  when  her  children  were
    much younger.  Her children were now mature adults.   She  entered  the
    United Kingdom in 2001 and she did so in the full  knowledge  that  her
    lawful attempts to  enter  had  been  lawfully  refused  and  that  her
    children were already adults by then and been pursuing their own  lives
    without her.

15. While he accepted that the appellant's husband and children  were  then
    in the United Kingdom, the fact remained  that  her  husband  had  left
    Nigeria almost ten years previously and remained in the United  Kingdom
    unlawfully until such time as he was granted leave to remain.   It  had
    never been explained why it was that the appellant's children  came  to
    the United Kingdom separately or why the  appellant  did  not  make  an
    application for entry clearance at that time to join her husband as his
    spouse.  From her own account it appeared that her  attempts  to  enter
    the UK after her husband and children came here was upon the  basis  of
    visiting the United Kingdom,  rather  than  for  settlement.   She  had
    adduced no evidence  to  suggest  that  she  had  ever  applied  for  a
    settlement visa.  He  found  it  had  been  entirely  inappropriate  to
    conclude that simply because the appellant had  been  lawfully  refused
    entry clearance she was entitled to engage  in  illegal  and  deceptive
    conduct and not bear  the  consequences  of  her  conduct.   There  was
    nothing to suggest that she alerted the respondent to her true identity
    until after her appeal rights  were  exhausted.   Given  the  sustained
    deception, he found that this was a  particularly  aggravating  feature
    which the respondent was entitled to take into  account  in  concluding
    that the appellant's conduct justified refusal of her application under
    paragraph 320(11).  In the circumstances, he found that the  respondent
    had properly taken account of the relevant guidance in the IDI and that
    discretion had been exercised both reasonably  and  proportionately  in
    refusing the appellant's application.

16. With regard to sub-paragraph (iii) of  paragraph  281,  the  judge  was
    satisfied there was  evidence  of  the  appellant's  husband  regularly
    visiting Nigeria,  and  spending  months  at  a  time  there  with  the
    appellant.  So the judge found that the appellant  had  discharged  the
    burden of proving that they had a subsisting  relationship  which  they
    would intend to pursue together as husband and wife.   The  judge  also
    found that the other requirements of paragraph 281 put in issue by  the
    Entry Clearance Officer were met.  Nonetheless, the judge held that the
    appeal under the Rules should be dismissed.

17. The judge considered an alternative  claim  under  Article  8  ECHR  at
    paragraphs 45 to 48.  He noted  that  even  though  the  appellant  was
    removed from the United Kingdom in 2007, her husband chose to remain in
    this country.  He also noted the children at that time were aged 36 and
    30  years  respectively.   He  was  satisfied  no  reasons  would  have
    compelled the appellant's husband to have remained here for the benefit
    of the children who were very mature adults.  It had therefore  been  a
    matter of choice that he remained in the United Kingdom and had visited
    the appellant in Nigeria.  That choice had been made against  the  sure
    and certain knowledge that his wife was not entitled to return to  this
    country  until  she  could  establish  a  lawful  right   to   do   so.
    Essentially,  he  found  that  by   refusing   the   application,   the
    respondent's decision simply maintained the status quo.  He agreed with
    Counsel for the respondent that  the  decision  would  not  effectively
    interfere with that family life because it would  continue  as  before.
    He therefore held that the decision  did  not  engage  the  appellant's
    Article 8 rights.  But if he was wrong about that, he nonetheless found
    that the respondent's decision had been made in accordance with the law
    and was necessary in a democratic society.  He also found the  decision
    was one which was entirely proportionate to the legitimate aim pursued,
    and could not amount to a breach of the appellant's Article 8 rights in
    any event.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

18. The appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,
    arguing that the judge  had  erred  in  law  in  paragraph  46  of  his
    determination.  The judge had placed  undue  weight  on  the  fact  the
    couple had lived apart for a significant period.  Ground 2 was that the
    judge should have found there was a disproportionate interference  with
    family life for the following reasons:

      a) the appellant had met most of the requirements of  the  Immigration
         Rules;

      b) the appellant had been removed from the UK and had stayed away  for
         over five years which was a requirement of  the  Immigration  Rules
         relating to persons removed from the UK;

      c) the Immigration Rules did not envisage a life ban from re-entry for
         persons in the appellant's category;

      d) the appellant's spouse was settled  in  the  UK  and  had  adequate
         accommodation and maintenance for his wife.

The Grant of Permission

19. On 16 May 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge Levin  granted  permission  to
    appeal for the following reasons:

         "The grounds take issue solely  with  the  judge's  findings  under
         Article 8.  Given the judge's findings that the appellant  met  all
         of the requirements of the Rules for entry clearance  as  a  spouse
         and his finding that the respondent was not justified to refuse the
         application under paragraph 320(7A) it is arguable that the judge's
         findings that the refusal was  justified  under  paragraph  320(11)
         which is a discretionary ground  and  that  the  decision  did  not
         constitute  a  disproportionate  breach  of  Article  8  were  both
         irrational.   Both  the  grounds  in  the  determination   disclose
         arguable errors of law."

The Rule 24 Response

20. On 9 June 2014 Lorna Kenny settled a Rule 24 response on behalf of  the
    Entry Clearance Officer.  The Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    directed himself appropriately.  The respondent considered  that  Judge
    Traynor's determination gave thorough reasoning and explanation for his
    findings on paragraph 320(11) and Article  8,  and  the  conclusion  he
    reached  was  justified.   The  grounds  of  appeal   amounted   to   a
    disagreement with the judge's findings.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

21. At the hearing before me, Mr Adbayo said he had nothing to add  to  the
    observations of Judge  Levin  and  the  grounds  of  appeal,  with  one
    exception.  Although the judge had directed  himself  in  paragraph  40
    that the IDIs required the decision  maker  to  give  consideration  of
    relevant family life in the UK at the time of the alleged conduct,  the
    judge had not actually given such consideration.

22. Mr Tufan adopted the stance taken by  his  colleague  in  the  Rule  24
    response.  With regard to the observations  made  by  Judge  Levin,  he
    submitted that a very high test had to be surmounted in order  to  find
    that a  finding  or  conclusion  was  irrational.   There  was  nothing
    perverse or irrational in the judge's reasoning or conclusion.  He  had
    considered Article  8  in  some  detail  as  part  of  a  detailed  and
    comprehensive determination.

Discussion

23. Paragraph  320(7B)  provides  an  alternative  ground  on  which  entry
    clearance or leave to enter the United Kingdom is to be refused.   This
    is where the applicant has previously  breached  the  UK's  immigration
    laws by;

      a) overstaying,

      b) breaching condition attached to his leave,

      c) being an illegal entrant,

      d) using deception in an application for  entry  clearance,  leave  to
         enter or remain...unless the applicant:

          i) overstayed for 90 days or less and left  the  UK  voluntarily,
             not at the expense directly or indirectly of the Secretary  of
             State;

         ii) used deception in an application for entry clearance more than
             ten years ago,

        iii) left the UK  voluntarily,  not  at  the  expense  directly  or
             indirectly of the Secretary of State more than  twelve  months
             ago,

         iv) left the UK voluntarily, at the expense directly or indirectly
             of the Secretary of State more than two  years  ago;  and  the
             date the person left the UK was no more than six months  after
             the date on which the person was given notice of  the  removal
             decision, or no more than six months after the date  on  which
             the person no longer had a pending appeal;  whichever  is  the
             later;

          v) left the UK voluntarily, at the expense directly or indirectly
             of the Secretary of State, more than five years ago; or

         vi) was removed or deported from the UK more than ten years ago.

         Where more than  one  breach  of  the  UK's  immigration  laws  has
         occurred, only the breach which leads  to  the  longest  period  of
         absence in the UK will be relevant under this paragraph.

24. The Entry Clearance Office  did  not  invoke  paragraph  320(7B)  as  a
    justification  for  refusing  the  appellant's  application.   But  its
    relevance for present purposes is  that  it  shows  that  a  period  of
    exclusion of ten years is envisaged under the Rules where the Secretary
    of State has had to remove the applicant.   The  five  year  period  of
    exclusion referred to in  the  grounds  of  appeal  applies  where  the
    applicant has left the UK voluntarily, not where the applicant has  had
    to be removed.

25. As was noted in the course of oral argument, the exemption for  spouses
    contained in paragraph 320(7C) is deleted  in  Phelan  Eighth  Edition,
    which incorporates all changes in  the  Rules  up  to  including  those
    published on 5 September 2012.

26. Arguably, the presence or absence of paragraph 320(7C) has  no  bearing
    against the exercise of discretion under paragraph 320(11).  But if  it
    does have  a  bearing,  its  deletion  only  serves  to  reinforce  the
    propriety of the approach taken by Judge Traynor.  The  fact  that  the
    appellant met the requirements of  paragraph  281  of  the  Immigration
    Rules was not  a  trump  card  in  the  exercise  of  discretion  under
    paragraph 320(11).

27. The requirement under RFL 7.3 is as follows:

         "All cases must be  considered  on  their  merits,  the  activities
         considered in the round to see  whether  they  meet  the  threshold
         under paragraph 320(11), taking into account family life in the  UK
         and, in the case of children, the level of responsibility  for  the
         breach.

         Where an applicant falls to be refused under 320(7A) or 320(7B) the
         ECO must also consider whether it is also appropriate to refuse the
         applicant under paragraph 320(11)."

28. At paragraph 40, the judge was wrong to direct himself that  the  focus
    of the family life consideration was relevant family life in the UK "at
    the time of the alleged conduct".   Under  the  IDI,  consideration  of
    family life is not confined to family life which  was  enjoyed  at  the
    time of the alleged immigration offending.  But the judge does  not  in
    fact confine himself to considering family life in the period  2002  to
    2007.  The judge rightly focuses on the family life which the appellant
    was enjoying with the sponsor at the date of the refusal decision,  but
    also takes into account other phases in the appellant's life, including
    the phase in her life before the sponsor was granted ILR, and the phase
    of her life when she was present in the United Kingdom  illegally  from
    2002 to 2007.

29. There is nothing perverse or irrational in the judge's conclusion  that
    the respondent's discretion under paragraph 320(11) had been  exercised
    both reasonably and proportionately.  If the appellant  had  accrued  a
    ten year period of exclusion following removal, there would be a strong
    argument that the discretion had been unreasonably exercised.

30. It is not suggested by Judge Traynor that the appellant is subject to a
    life ban. In any event his jurisdiction  was  confined  to  considering
    whether a discretion under paragraph 320(11) should have been exercised
    differently at the date of decision, at which time the appellant was  a
    long way short of serving a ten year period of exclusion.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
