
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/20344/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd January 2015                          |On 11th February 2015         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                 MASTER DBB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Lynch of Arndale Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision  of  Judge  Dearden
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 8th August 2014.

Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Jamaica born on 31st  January  2000.   He
    applied to come to the UK as the child of a parent present and  settled
    here on 25th July 2013 but was refused entry clearance on 16th  October
    2013 on the grounds that the Entry Clearance Officer was not  satisfied
    that the  child  was  seeking  to  join  a  parent  who  had  had  sole
    responsibility for his upbringing.

 3. The Sponsor, the child's father, left Jamaica for the UK  in  September
    2000 when the child was 8 months of age.  Thereafter he lived with  his
    mother until she left for the Bahamas some time in 2011, and then  went
    to go to live with the  Sponsor's  brother.   His  mother  returned  to
    Jamaica some time in 2013.  No evidence was put forward as  to  exactly
    when she returned.

 4. The judge wrote as follows:

         "No one could be precise as to the date on  which  the  Appellant's
         mother returned to Jamaica but as the date of decision  is  at  the
         end of the year, on 16 October 2013 I consider it more likely  than
         not that the Appellant's mother returned  to  Jamaica  before  that
         date."

 5. The judge recorded that the evidence was that the Appellant spends  two
    weekends a month with his mother and that she has a continuing interest
    in him.  He concluded that the Sponsor had joint responsibility for the
    child and not sole responsibility.

 6. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had given weight to immaterial matters  and  failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons for findings on material matters.  The grounds record that  the
    Sponsor agreed that he had joint custody of the boy and  the  admission
    of joint custody should not be read as to mean sole responsibility.  By
    treating the period of separation as temporary  the  judge  effectively
    found that the relationship with the mother continued after 2013 as  it
    had been before 2011 whereas there was clear  evidence  of  remittances
    from the father from 2011 to 2013.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Lambert on 20th October 2014.
     Rather mystifyingly the grant refers to the Sponsor having insisted in
    the grounds that his son was in the care of his elderly mother  whereas
    in fact there is no mention of any mother in the grounds and  this  was
    never been a part of the Sponsor's evidence.

 8. The judge also granted permission  on  the  basis  that  there  was  no
    obvious reason to support the judge's view that it was more likely than
    not that the Appellant's mother returned to Jamaica before the date  of
    decision.

The Hearing

 9. Mr Lynch accepted that there  had  been  an  error  in  the  grant.  He
    submitted that since the judge did not know when the mother returned he
    should have found that she returned afterwards since, had  the  Sponsor
    known of the return  beforehand,  he  would  have  been  able  to  give
    evidence  to  that  effect.  He  pointed  to  paragraph   16   of   the
    determination where the judge said that his finding might  be  seen  as
    controversial but even if the Appellant's mother had returned after the
    date of decision, entry clearance would not have been  granted  in  any
    event.

10. It was not necessary to call upon Mr Diwnycz.

Findings and Conclusions

11. This grant is misconceived and  it  may  be  that  the  judge  granting
    permission became confused between two files.

12. Since the standard of proof is the balance of probabilities, and  there
    was no evidence before the judge as to the mother's date of return,  he
    was plainly justified in concluding that it was more  likely  than  not
    that she returned before 15th October 2013 since 44 weeks of  the  year
    had already passed with less than 8 remaining.   The  observation  that
    entry clearance would not have been granted in any event was irrelevant
    to the decision, the  judge  having  reached  his  conclusions  in  the
    preceding paragraph.

13. The grounds  themselves  amount  to  a  simple  disagreement  with  the
    decision.  This is a clear and properly reasoned decision and the judge
    was fully entitled to reach the conclusion that he did for the  reasons
    which he gave.

Decision

14. The original judge did not err in law.  The decision stands.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed        Date 10th February 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

