



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/20044/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 9th October 2013                             |On 26th November 2013      |
|Prepared                                        |                           |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN
                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts

                                   Between

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - CAIRO

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           MRS HANA TAHA ISSA TAHA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Rudd

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal  brought  by  the  Secretary  of  State  against  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal, allowing the appeal of  Hana  Taha
    Issa Taha against the decision of the Entry  Clearance  Officer  Cairo,
    refusing her entry clearance as the spouse of a  British  citizen.  For
    ease of reference in this determination we refer to Hana Taha Issa Taha
    who is a citizen of Sudan, as the Appellant and the Secretary of  State
    as the Respondent.

 2. The Appellant applied to join her husband (the Sponsor) and  made  that
    application in May 2012. The Appellant and Sponsor married in  2009  in
    Sudan and lived together there. They have two sons, Amar  born  January
    2011  and  Mohammed  born  January  2012.  Both  children  are  British
    citizens. Currently Amar is living  in  the  United  Kingdom  with  his
    father while Mohammed remains in Sudan with his mother.

 3. Whilst the Appellant and her Sponsor were  living  together  in  Sudan,
    Amar started suffering from renal problems. He started  passing  kidney
    stones which is very unusual in a child so young. The doctors in  Sudan
    recommended that the  child  seek  treatment  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Consequently the Sponsor and Amar travelled to the  United  Kingdom  to
    access the necessary treatment and the Appellant who at this stage  was
    seven months pregnant with her second child, remained in Sudan.

 4. The Sponsor is the principal carer for Amar and presently he  is  under
    the care of Great Ormond Street Hospital.

 5. The Appellant subsequently gave birth to the couple's second  child  in
    January 2012 and in May 2012 she applied for entry  clearance  to  join
    her husband in the UK.

 6. The Entry  Clearance  Officer  Cairo  considered  her  application  and
    refused it on two distinct grounds.

      i) The Appellant had failed to demonstrate  satisfactory  evidence  of
         her ability to speak English by providing an English language  test
         certificate.

     ii) The Appellant failed to  provide  satisfactory  evidence  that  she
         could be adequately maintained within the meaning of paragraph  281
         of the Immigration Rules.

 7. The Appellant appealed that refusal and her appeal  was  heard  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal on 26th June 2013. In a lengthy  determination  the
    Tribunal summarised the Appellant's claim. They heard evidence from the
    Sponsor whom they found to be wholly credible and took account (perhaps
    not surprisingly in  view  of  the  HOPO's  "apparent"  concessions  at
    paragraph 33) that the Appellant had now passed  the  English  language
    test.

 8. Even so the Tribunal concluded correctly that the Appellant  could  not
    meet  the  Immigration  Rules  because  she  could  not   satisfy   the
    maintenance requirement. Therefore they considered Article 8  ECHR  and
    concluded that the Appellant's  appeal  could  be  allowed  under  that
    provision.

 9. The Respondent sought permission to appeal. This was  granted  on  20th
    August 2013 and thus the matter comes before us.

10. Pausing there it  is  correct  to  say  that  following  the  grant  of
    permission, directions were issued to both parties, directing them that
    they should prepare for the hearing before us on the basis that  if  we
    decided to set aside the determination of the First-tier Tribunal,  any
    further evidence including supplementary oral evidence that we may need
    to consider could be considered at the hearing before us. In the  event
    there was no further evidence served upon us and no Rule  24  response.
    We heard submissions from both representatives.

11. Mr Wilding on behalf of the Respondent addressed us on what  he  termed
    the concerns raised  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  determination.  The
    central issue and the one which the Tribunal  had  fallen  into  error,
    revolved around its reasoning in paragraph  43  of  the  determination.
    That paragraph states,

         "It seems to me likely that the entry of the  mother  would,  as  a
         matter of fact, lead to a decrease in the amount  of  public  funds
         being expended rather than an increase. I accept  the  evidence  of
         the Sponsor that he has worked in the past as a machine operator. I
         accept that he cannot work at present due to the fact that  he  has
         to care for his child. It seems to me likely that,  if  the  mother
         were to arrive, with the other child, then she would be responsible
         for the childcare  and  the  husband  would  be  free  to  take  up
         employment as he has had in  the  past.  Of  course  there  are  no
         guarantees that he  would  obtain  such  employment  or  obtain  it
         immediately, but overall it seems that there is more likelihood  of
         the family as a whole being less dependent on public funds  if  the
         mother is admitted than if she is not admitted.  The  second  child
         is, of course, entitled to come to the UK in any event".

12. Having found that the Appellant cannot meet the financial  requirements
    of the Rules, the Tribunal speculated on what may or may not happen  in
    the future; but there is no  evidential  analysis  of  the  Appellant's
    financial situation, nor any proper evidential analysis of any prospect
    that the Sponsor may obtain employment in the future and thereby enable
    the Appellant to meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

13. Mr Wilding continued that in any Article  8  proportionality  test  the
    financial requirements must be factored into the balance and  this  the
    Tribunal had failed to do. Therefore they had erred  and  the  decision
    must  be  remade  as  it  is  vitally  important  that  the   financial
    consideration be factored in.

14. Mr Rudd drew our attention to paragraph 28  of  the  determination  and
    submitted that it was quite clear that it  had  been  accepted  by  the
    Tribunal that the Appellant could not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules and that this  was  an  Article  8  claim  only.  The
    Judge's findings at paragraph 42 and  43  showed  that  the  Judge  had
    factored into his consideration the fact that the Appellant may well be
    a financial burden upon the State but this case fell into one of  those
    which rendered it exceptional. He said there is no reason  to  overturn
    to the findings and decision of the First-tier.

15. We had canvassed with the parties, whether in the event we  found  that
    the First-tier Tribunal has erred, we would be in a position to  remake
    the decision. We reminded the representatives that directions had  been
    served and that no further evidence had been forthcoming and that there
    had been no Rule 24 responses. Both representatives agreed  that  there
    was no challenge to the facts of this appeal.

Error of Law

16. Having considered matters we are satisfied that  the  determination  of
    the First-tier Tribunal should be set aside for error of  law.  We  are
    satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to make findings on
    the Appellant's ability to meet the financial  requirements  under  the
    Immigration Rules. This failure means that he  did  not  properly  take
    into account the public interest element when assessing proportionality
    under Article 8 ECHR. The decision is therefore  incomplete  as  a  key
    element in the assessment is missing. As there is no challenge  to  the
    facts found by the First-tier Tribunal Judge we propose to  remake  the
    decision. All facts are preserved.

Remaking the Decision

17. Our starting point is that there is no challenge to the facts found  by
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge. We note in  particular  that  the  child
    Amar has suffered serious medical problems for one so  young.  We  into
    account that he is separated from his mother and  younger  sibling.  We
    bear in mind that although not  a  paramount  consideration,  the  best
    interests of a child are  a  primary  consideration.  This  means  that
    Amar's interests (and those of his younger sibling) must be  considered
    first but they can be outweighed by  the  cumulative  effect  of  other
    considerations. SS Nigeria [2013]  following ZH Tanzania [2012]

18. We are satisfied that in this appeal Article 8 ECHR is engaged  because
    there is evidence of family life between the Appellant, her husband and
    two children. As the representatives correctly  pointed  out  the  real
    focus in this case is that of proportionality under the Razgar test set
    out below.

     Razgar -v- Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] UKHL 27

     a) Is there an interference with the Appellant's right to respect  for
        his family/private life etc?

     b) If so will such interference have consequences of such  gravity  as
        potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?

     c) If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

     d) If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic society?

     e) If so, is such interference proportionate to the legitimate  public
        end sought to be achieved.

19. We accept that Amar continues to require  medical  treatment  and  that
    must weigh heavily in the balance. However we also keep  in  mind  that
    Amar is well cared for, by  his  father  and  as  a  British  child  is
    receiving the medical care and attention to which he is entitled. There
    was no evidence before us that Amar's day-to-day needs were  not  being
    met by his father. His  father  sees  to  the  large  amount  of  daily
    medication that he has to take and manages the  difficult  side-effects
    which the medication produces. This is all  continuously  monitored  by
    Amar's medical team and the periodic treatment  he  receives  at  Great
    Ormond Street Hospital.

20. We reject however the proposition that the entry of the Appellant would
    in all likelihood lead to a decrease in  the  amount  of  public  funds
    being expended rather than an increase. We also reject the  proposition
    that the Appellant's arrival would likely free her husband the  Sponsor
    to take up employment. There was simply no evidence upon which to  base
    those suppositions. Rather the reverse. The evidence before us is  that
    the Sponsor last worked as a machine operator and a pay slip  for  2005
    was produced. That is a substantial period without employment.

21. The reality is that entry of the Appellant would entail this family  of
    two adults and two children being dependent upon public funds and  thus
    a burden on the tax payer.

22. We are strengthened in our view of this by reference to AAO [2011] EWCA
    Civ 840 where it was stated,

         "Strasbourg and domestic jurisprudence has consistently  emphasised
         that States  are  entitled  to  have  regard  to  their  system  of
         immigration control and its generally consistent application, and a
         requirement that an entrant should be maintained  without  recourse
         to public funds is an ultimately fair and necessary  limitation  on
         what would otherwise become a possibly overwhelming burden  on  all
         of its citizens".

23. It is important to bear in mind that the  consequences  of  a  negative
    decision in this appeal does not necessarily mean that the family  will
    always be kept apart even if the UK based family members do not  return
    to Sudan.

24. There remains a possibility that the circumstances of the  Sponsor  may
    change and perhaps through finding suitable childcare arrangements  for
    Amar and the obtaining of employment, that in due course may lead to  a
    successful entry  clearance  application  being  made  in  the  future.
    Therefore continual separation is not inevitable.

25. For the purposes  of  this  determination  however,  we  conclude  that
    weighing all the evidence as we must,  in  the  circumstances  of  this
    particular  case,  the  decision   of   the   Respondent   is   not   a
    disproportionate interference with the family life of the Appellant.









DECISION

26. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law. We set aside  that  decision.  We
    remake the decision. The appeal is dismissed.


No anonymity direction is made


Signature                                             Dated
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Fee Award

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signature                                             Dated

