

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/20913/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 23 January 2015                   |On 3 February 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL DRABU CBE


                                   Between

                       MRS SHABABA BEEVI SYED IBRAHIM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                    THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, CHENNAI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     No appearance.
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of India and date of birth is 29th of  July
    1989. The respondent refused her an entry clearance as  a  point  based
    spouse. Judge Carroll heard the appeal at Taylor  House  on  2  October
    2014.  Mr  Solomon  of  Counsel  represented  the  appellant  and   the
    respondent was not represented  at  the  hearing.  In  a  determination
    promulgated on 16 October 2014. The Judge dismissed the appeal and gave
    reasons for doing so.

 2. The appellant sought and was granted  permission  to  appeal  to  Upper
    Tribunal by Judge  Robertson,  a  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Grounds seeking permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal are dated 14
    November and are drafted by the Counsel who represented  the  appellant
    before Judge Carroll.

 3. However at the hearing before me no one  appeared  for  the  appellant.
    After being satisfied that the appellant  had  been  duly  served  with
    notice of hearing  and  had  not  provided  any  explanation  for  non-
    appearance, I agreed with Mr Walker that there was no good  reason  for
    not proceeding with the appeal.

 4. In his customary fairness Mr Walker conceded that the determination  of
    Judge Carroll was in material error of law and that error could only be
    remedied by re-making the decision  against  which  the  appellant  had
    brought  her  appeal.  Mr  Walker  agreed  that  the  outcome   of   my
    consideration would be to allow the appeal as  at  the  time  when  the
    appellant was refused entry clearance her husband, who  she  wished  to
    join, had valid leave to remain in the UK as a  Tier  1  Migrant  until
    Many 2016.

 5. Unfortunately Judge Carroll's decision to dismiss the appeal was  based
    on facts and considerations which had no relevance to  the  law  as  it
    applied to the case. As  Judge  Robertson  has  said  in  his  decision
    granting permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, "The  Sponsor  had
    leave, which is valid until curtailed by the Secretary of State. If the
    ECO was concerned about the validity of the  Sponsor's  leave,  it  was
    open to him  to  defer  the  decision  and  refer  the  matter  to  the
    Respondent for proper investigations to be undertaken." I agree. It was
    not for the Entry Clearance Officer or Judge Carroll to go  behind  the
    Sponsor's Residence permit, which established that, he had valid  leave
    as a Tier 1 Migrant.Paragraph319C (b) (i)(ii) simply requires it to  be
    established that the relevant PBS migrant has valid leave

 6. The appeal is therefore allowed under Immigration Rules.



K Drabu CBE
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal.
2 February 2015


DIRECTIONS REGARDING ANONYMITY NOT MADE.

ORDER ON FEES:
The appeal having been allowed and it having been found  that  the  impugned
decision was fundamentally flawed, I direct that the fees paid  be  refunded
to the appellant in full.


K Drabu CBE
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

