
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/20308/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 January 2016                   |On 28 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

                             Mr Dalwinder Singh
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Fripp, Counsel instructed by Maliks and Khan
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Judge  Ferguson
    dated 23 February 2015 in which the Judge dismissed an  appeal  against
    refusal of entry clearance to the Appellant, who had applied for  entry
    clearance to join his wife, Mrs Indu Sharma, a British national.

2.   The Entry Clearance Officer refused that application for  a  number  of
    reasons.  Firstly it was asserted that during an interview  in  support
    of that application conducted on 6 August 2013 the Appellant had made a
    false statement when asked whether  he  had  ever  used  any  different
    identity or date of birth.  He had at first asserted that he had  never
    done so but later in that interview, and it is not any longer disputed,
    he accepted that he had used a different date of birth  in  the  United
    Kingdom when he was here at an earlier stage when  he  used  a  driving
    licence issued by the DVLA in a different date  of  birth.   The  Entry
    Clearance Officer held that this was a false statement indicating  that
    the Appellant failed to meet the suitability requirements  set  out  in
    paragraph S-EC.2.2.(a) of Appendix FM.

3.   The Entry Clearance Officer  also  invoked  Immigration  Rule  320(11),
    which provides that:

         "In addition to the grounds of refusal of entry clearance or  leave
         to enter set out in Parts 2 - 8 of  these  Rules,  and  subject  to
         paragraph 321 below, the following grounds for the refusal of entry
         clearance or leave to enter apply:

         ...

         Grounds on which entry clearance  or  leave  to  enter  the  United
         Kingdom should normally be refused

         ...

         (11) where the applicant has previously contrived in a  significant
             way to frustrate the intentions of the Rules by:

             (i)  overstaying; or

             (ii) breaching a condition attached to his leave; or

             (iii)    being an illegal entrant; or

             (iv) using deception in an application  for  entry  clearance,
                  leave to enter or remain or in order to  obtain  documents
                  from the Secretary of State or a third party  required  in
                  support of the application (whether  successful  or  not);
                  and there are other  aggravating  circumstances,  such  as
                  absconding,  not  meeting  temporary   admission/reporting
                  restrictions or bail conditions, using an assumed identity
                  or  multiple  identities,  switching  nationality,  making
                  frivolous applications  or  not  complying  with  the  re-
                  documentation process."

4.   The Entry Clearance  Officer  invoked  that  discretionary  ground  for
    refusing entry clearance on the basis that it  was  asserted  that  the
    Appellant had engaged in activity meeting the definition of  contriving
    in a significant way to frustrate the  intentions  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and that there were aggravating circumstances.

5.   Those matters are that the Appellant  entered  the  United  Kingdom  in
    2000 on a visit visa but did not return to India.  He  ultimately  left
    the United Kingdom voluntarily on 19 December  2011.   However,  during
    his extensive period of overstaying the Entry Clearance Officer records
    that he was encountered in 2006, 2008, 2009 and 2011  and  served  with
    papers as an overstayer.  It was observed that he had lodged an  appeal
    against a decision to remove him in 2006 on human  rights  grounds  and
    that this appeal was dismissed.

6.   It was said that when the  Appellant  was  encountered  on  the  second
    occasion  he  was  released  with  reporting  conditions  and   removal
    directions were set for his return to India but the Appellant  admitted
    in an interview with the entry Clearance Officer on 6 August 2013  that
    he did not attend the  airport  to  take  that  flight.   It  was  also
    asserted that Home Office records noted  that  in  2009  he  was  again
    encountered and absconded.  It  was  observed  that  in  interview  the
    Appellant admitted that he stopped reporting because he thought that he
    would be deported back to India.

7.   The Entry Clearance Officer also recorded that the Appellant  presented
    himself to the authorities in early 2011  stating  that  he  wished  to
    voluntarily return to India.  However, he then asked representatives to
    issue a judicial review  objecting  to  his  removal  from  the  United
    Kingdom.   The  Appellant  ultimately  did  voluntarily  depart  on  19
    December 2011.  The  Appellant  had  also  obtained  medical  treatment
    during his time in the United Kingdom.  In summary, the Entry Clearance
    Officer relied  upon  the  Appellant's  use  of  different  identities,
    working in breach of conditions, seeking medical treatment, failing  to
    comply with reporting conditions of temporary admission, absconding and
    obstructing removal and failing to comply with  removal  directions  in
    order to justify the Entry Clearance Officer's view that the  Appellant
    had  previously  contrived  in  a  significant  way  to  frustrate  the
    intentions of the Immigration Rules.

8.   The Entry Clearance Officer also addressed his mind as to  whether  the
    applicant satisfied the relevant Immigration  Rules.   Entry  clearance
    was refused under Appendix FM under the route of entry clearance  as  a
    partner on the basis that the Entry Clearance Officer was not satisfied
    that the Appellant would be  adequately  maintained  and  accommodated.
    The  financial  eligibility  criteria  were  not   relevant   in   this
    application because the Appellant's wife, Mrs Sharma, is in receipt  of
    disability living allowance.  However, it remains a condition  of  such
    an  applicant  that  they  must  still  be  adequately  maintained  and
    accommodated.  That issue  was  ultimately  successfully  held  in  his
    favour during the appeal before the Judge.  It was  observed,  however,
    that the Appellant did not have a relevant English language certificate
    in support of his application for leave to remain under Appendix FM.

9.   The Appellant appealed, that appeal being  heard  at  Birmingham  on  2
    February 2015.  Mrs Sharma, the Sponsor, gave evidence  in  support  of
    the appeal.  There was a  very  considerable  volume  of  documentation
    before the Judge.  My attention  has  been  brought  to  the  essential
    elements of that documentation.

10.  The Judge held that as a result of the Appellant's immigration  history
    the Entry Clearance Officer's decision to invoke paragraph 320(11)  was
    appropriate but the Judge also  considered  the  Appellant's  exclusion
    from the United Kingdom under Article 8  ECHR  and  held  that  it  was
    proportionate to continue to refuse  entry  clearance.   The  Appellant
    sought permission to appeal against that decision in grounds originally
    drafted on 22 March 2015 but permission was refused by Judge Saffer  on
    7 May 2015.  Renewed grounds  of  appeal  were  drafted  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal in which the original grounds were not adopted but a  distinct
    series of arguments were  advanced  in  grounds  dated  11  June  2015.
    Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Goldstein on 18 August 2015.

11.  I have heard legal argument from Mr Fripp on behalf  of  the  Appellant
    today.  I have not found it necessary to ask for the assistance  of  Ms
    Everett by way of response from the Respondent.  The grounds of  appeal
    challenging the First-tier decision are as follows.  The  first  ground
    is in summary that in invoking the provision of  paragraph  320(11)  of
    the Immigration Rules the Secretary of State and in turn the First-tier
    Judge erred in law in  failing  to  acknowledge  and  to  consider  the
    possible permanent exclusion that  might  result  from  that  provision
    being invoked.  Mr Fripp invited me to consider the period of time that
    has passed since the relevant behaviour of the Appellant, raised by the
    Entry Clearance Officer.  Those acts span a number of years from 2000.

12.  The parties agreed that the aggravating behaviour that lasted  for  the
    period of the Appellant's absconding from 2009  to  early  2011  ceased
    when  he  brought  himself  to  the  attention   of   the   immigration
    authorities.  It is argued that the period of time between  that  point
    in time, early 2011, and the date of the decision being 8 October  2013
    and therefore a period in excess of eighteen months is a period of time
    which the Immigration Judge should have  had  specific  regard  to  and
    should have at least considered whether that passage of  time  resulted
    in it no longer being appropriate for the Entry  Clearance  Officer  to
    seek to rely upon paragraph 320(11).

13.  The Judge, I find, was fully aware of the chronology of  the  behaviour
    of the Appellant complained of by the  Entry  Clearance  Officer.   The
    Judge also consciously excluded the Appellant's act of bringing a legal
    challenge to his proposed removal in  the  middle  period  of  2011  as
    amounting to aggravating behaviour making  a  finding  at  the  end  of
    paragraph 26 that such action did not amount to vexatious behaviour.

14.  When considering this ground of appeal I  consider  it  appropriate  to
    consider alongside  the  Appellant's  third  ground  of  appeal,  which
    relates to the application  of  the  reported  case  of  PS  (paragraph
    320(11) discretion: care needed) India [2010] UKUT 440 (IAC).  That was
    an appeal heard by the Upper Tribunal in relation to an  Appellant  who
    had been refused entry clearance by an Entry Clearance Officer  on  the
    basis that he had overstayed previously in the United Kingdom  and  who
    was suspected of having worked unlawfully in the  United  Kingdom.   In
    allowing that Appellant's appeal the Upper  Tribunal  held  that  those
    actions did not amount to behaviour as set out in paragraph 320(11) and
    gave the following advice in its head note:

         "In exercising discretion under paragraph 320(11)  of  HC  395,  as
         amended, to refuse an application for entry  clearance  in  a  case
         where the automatic prohibition on the grant of entry clearance  in
         paragraph 320(7B) is disapplied by paragraph 320(7C), the  decision
         maker  must  exercise  great  care  in  assessing  the  aggravating
         circumstances said to justify refusal and must have regard  to  the
         public interest in  encouraging  those  unlawfully  in  the  United
         Kingdom to  leave  and  seek  to  regularise  their  status  by  an
         application for entry clearance."

15.  It is apparent from the Judge's decision  that  the  provisions  of  PS
    were brought to his attention (see paragraph  17).   I  find  that  the
    potential problem that Mr Fripp identifies by invocation  of  paragraph
    320(11), that is the potential permanent exclusion of an applicant  for
    entry clearance, is the subject  of  the  advice  given  in  PS.   That
    judgment  provides  caution  about  over-liberal  application  of  that
    provision, particularly for persons such as the present applicant,  who
    has applied  under  Appendix  FM  and  is  therefore  not  excluded  by
    operation of 320(7A) or (7B).

16.  I do not find that  there  is  any  material  misdirection  in  law  or
    failure  to  take  into  account  a  material  consideration   by   the
    Immigration Judge in upholding the Entry Clearance  Officer's  reliance
    upon 320(11) in the present case, even taking into account  the  period
    of time that Mr Fripp refers me to being early  2011  until  8  October
    2013 as representing the period of time that  the  Appellant  has  been
    excluded from the United Kingdom.

17.  I further note that early 2011 would in any event be  an  inappropriate
    point in time to declare the applicant as last having  contrived  in  a
    significant way to frustrate the intentions of the Rules or engaged  in
    other aggravating behaviour because, as I  have  mentioned,  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer invoked paragraph S-EC.2.2.(a) of Appendix FM,  which
    is a discretionary power now built into Appendix  FM  to  refuse  entry
    clearance on the basis of suitability.  The Entry Clearance Officer had
    done  this  on  the  basis  that  the  Appellant  had  made   a   false
    representation in the course  of  the  present  application  for  entry
    clearance.

18.  The Judge was aware that that was one of the  grounds  that  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer had relied upon as it is referred to at paragraph  13
    of the decision.  It is right to acknowledge that the  Judge  does  not
    appear to rely upon that false representation in his conclusion on  the
    proportionality issue towards the end of his decision.  However,  given
    that the applicant appeared at the end of his interview with the  Entry
    Clearance Officer on 6 August 2013 to accept  that  he  had  previously
    used a false date of birth, this also amounts to an acceptance that his
    assertion at the beginning of that same interview that he had not  done
    so was false.

19.  If I had been in any way persuaded by Mr Fripp's  submission  that  the
    period of time between early 2011 and 8 October  2013  was  a  specific
    consideration which the Immigration Judge had failed to have regard  to
    in upholding the Entry  Clearance  Officer's  invocation  of  paragraph
    320(11), and if it  had  been  necessary  for  me  to  set  aside  this
    decision, then I would have been obliged in remaking  the  decision  to
    have regard to what I find to be the last act of aggravating  behaviour
    employed  by  the  Appellant,  that   being   the   Appellant's   false
    representation on 6 August 2013, in the  application  process  for  his
    present application.  That factor would have strongly militated against
    the applicant in any challenge to the invocation of paragraph  320(11).
    I find that ground 1 of the Appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  does  not
    disclose any material error of law.

20.  The second ground relied upon by the Appellant is that the Judge  erred
    in law in treating the weight to be attached to the family life enjoyed
    between the Appellant and his wife as having little weight.  It appears
    to be accepted by the Appellant that the Judge was obliged by operation
    of Section 117B(4) Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002,  to
    attach little weight to the family life that  was  formed  between  the
    Appellant and his wife whilst the Appellant was in the  United  Kingdom
    unlawfully.  Mr Fripp seeks to draw a distinction between the weight to
    be attached to that period of family life and the weight to be attached
    to the continued family life enjoyed between the Appellant and his wife
    since the Appellant's departure from the United Kingdom.  Indeed  since
    the Appellant's departure Mrs Sharma travelled to India in 2012,  which
    was the point in time in which the couple actually married.

21.  Mr Fripp argues that in failing to attach greater weight  than  'little
    weight' to that additional period of family life as between the couple,
    the Judge errs in law.  Respectfully I disagree with Mr Fripp  in  that
    regard.  It does not seem to follow that greater weight deserves to  be
    attached to a family life that is pursued after the  departure  of  one
    party to the couple from the United Kingdom compared  with  the  weight
    that is to be attached to the family life enjoyed by the couple  whilst
    in the United Kingdom.  The Appellant departed the  United  Kingdom  in
    2011  in  the  knowledge  that  his  immigration  status   was   highly
    precarious.

22.  Mrs Sharma must also inevitably have been aware of that.  In the  light
    of that the parties  still  in  2012  resolved  to  marry.   They  both
    therefore would have been aware that the issue of whether the Appellant
    would be ever permitted to enter the United Kingdom was something  that
    was very much in question.  I do not find  that  it  logically  follows
    that  the  period  of  their  family  life  following  the  Appellant's
    departure is deserving of greater weight than the period of family life
    which was enjoyed within the United Kingdom and  I  disagree  with  the
    Appellant's second ground.

23.  The third ground of appeal  is  that,  if  I  summarise  it  correctly,
    inadequate consideration  has  been  given  by  the  Judge  as  to  the
    proposition of law articulated in the head note of the reported case of
    PS India.  I have already set this  out  in  my  consideration  of  the
    Appellant's first ground.  I had also mentioned that I thought that the
    first and third grounds were connected with each other.  I rely upon my
    observations in response to the Appellant's first ground and I  do  not
    find that the Immigration Judge either misdirected himself  in  law  or
    failed to take into account the advice provided by the  Upper  Tribunal
    in the case of PS.

24.  It cannot properly be said in my view that the  Judge  in  the  present
    appeal did not proceed with  care  in  reviewing  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer's invocation of paragraph 320(11).   The  Judge's  decision  is
    detailed and sets out in some detail the extent of the Appellant's poor
    immigration history and provides  adequate  reason  for  his  decision,
    which was that it remained appropriate for the Appellant to be  refused
    entry clearance under paragraph 320(11).

25.  The final ground of appeal is  in  relation  to  the  medical  problems
    experienced by the Appellant's wife, Mrs Sharma.  Mrs Sharma is a woman
    who does not enjoy good health and that was known  to  the  Immigration
    Judge.  He referred to her health problems at paragraphs 36 and 37.  As
    I understand the Appellant's ground, it is that  the  medical  evidence
    that was before the Judge should have been taken into account  for  the
    purposes of determining any adverse effect on Mrs Sharma resulting from
    the continued exclusion of the Appellant from the United Kingdom.   The
    Judge considered the medical evidence in the following way:

         "36. Evidence of Mrs Sharma's medical records is contained  in  her
             statement  and  in  the  medical  evidence  contained  in  the
             bundles.  The GP report at  page  1029  from  15  August  2014
             describes that she is 'receiving treatment through  psychology
             department and on drug therapy for depression.  She  is  known
             to suffer with depression for fairly long  time.   At  present
             she receives counselling for this weekly.'  The GP letter from
             19 February 2013 states that  the  depression  dates  back  to
             2006.  The August 2014 letter also confirms that  she  suffers
             from type 2 diabetes, asthma, lower back pain  and  a  painful
             right knee following a knee  replacement  operation  in  2011.
             She is on medication set out  at  page  1030.   These  medical
             issues entitle her to disability living allowance with a  care
             component at the lower level and a mobility component  at  the
             higher level.

         37.  The medical evidence showed that Mrs Sharma had been diagnosed
             with depression from as long ago as 2006,  covering  the  time
             that she was in a relationship with Mr Singh and  living  with
             him in the United Kingdom.  Although her statement conveys her
             hope that her health would improve if Mr Singh joined  her  in
             the United Kingdom (paragraph 34) and her  doctor  is  of  the
             opinion that she needs physical and psychological support from
             her family (page 1030) her history does not suggest  that  the
             two issues are as closely linked as she suggests nor does  the
             evidence establish that she cannot  maintain  family  life  in
             India with her husband if that is as important to her  as  she
             claims.  She may prefer to remain in the  United  Kingdom  but
             the couple married in the knowledge that they may not be  able
             to reside together in the United Kingdom unless they meet  the
             requirements of the Immigration  Rules  and  contrary  to  her
             evidence both their families are now 'going out their  way  to
             help' them as a couple."

26.  It seems to me apparent from that passage  that  the  Judge  had  fully
    appraised himself of the medical evidence relevant to  Mrs  Sharma.   I
    have also had my attention drawn to the text of the  GP  letter  of  15
    August 2014.  It is right to acknowledge,  I  believe,  that  there  is
    nothing  contained  within  it  which  specifically   says   that   the
    Appellant's presence  in  the  United  Kingdom  is  necessary  for  the
    wellbeing of Mrs Sharma.  I do not find  that  there  is  any  relevant
    element of that evidence which  the  Judge  has  failed  to  take  into
    account for any purpose.   The  finding  that  the  evidence  does  not
    establish that she cannot  maintain  family  life  in  India  with  her
    husband is one which was open to the Judge on the evidence.

    Notice of Decision

27.  In conclusion I find that the Appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  do  not
    disclose any material error of law within the Judge's decision.

28.  I make no comment as to what the prospects  may  be  of  the  Appellant
    succeeding in any further application for entry  clearance,  but  I  do
    note that if I am right that the last occasion when  the  Appellant  is
    recorded as having engaged in aggravating behaviour was  his  interview
    of 6 August 2013, then that is now approaching  some  two  and  a  half
    years ago; a relatively long period of time.  That period of  time  may
    be something which the applicant can make reference to if he chooses to
    make any further application for entry clearance.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 27.1.16

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan



I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 27.1.16

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan

