
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/20204/2013
                                                               OA/20224/2013
                                                               OA/20227/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 August 2015                    |On 7 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH


                                   Between

                                MD RAJU AHMED
                                fARZANA BEGUM
                           MUHAMMAED RAYHAN AHMED
                       (NO anonymity directionS MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, DHAKA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S. Karim, Counsel instructed by Taj Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms. A. Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The 1st Appellant, who was born on 24th December 1996,  is  a  national
    of Bangladesh. The 2nd Appellant, who was also born  on  24th  December
    1996 and is a national of Bangladesh. The 3rd Appellant, who  was  born
    on 20th May 1998, is also a national of Bangladesh.

2.   Their mother, Afia Khatun, who was born on 10th June 1963, was  granted
    a certificate of entitlement to a right of abode on 2nd August 2012 and
    entered the United  Kingdom  on  9th  September  2012.  The  Appellants
    remained in Bangladesh in the care of their father, Sundor Ali.

3.   Sundor Ali  died  on  20th  April  2013  and  on  16th  July  2013  the
    Appellants applied for entry clearance to  join  their  mother  in  the
    United Kingdom for the purpose of settlement.  Their applications  were
    refused on 23rd October 2013. The Entry Clearance Officer asserted that
    the death certificate, which they relied upon, was not genuine and that
    their mother did not have sole responsibility for them for the purposes
    of paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules. He also  asserted  that  the
    decision to refuse them entry clearance did not give rise to  a  breach
    of Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

4.   They appealed and their  appeals  were  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Whalan on 6th November 2014.   He  dismissed  their  appeals  and
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Fisher refused them permission to  appeal  on
    2nd February 2015.  But Upper Tribunal  Judge  Goldstein  granted  them
    permission to appeal on 22nd May 2015 on the basis that the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge may have made  an  error  of  law  in  his  approach  to
    paragraph 297(i) of the Immigration Rules in the light of TD (Paragraph
    297(i)(e): "sole responsibility") Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049.

5.   In her Rule 24 response the Respondent  asserted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had directed himself appropriately and that the  grounds
    amounted to a mere disagreement with the Judge's findings.

ERROR OF LAW HEARING

6.    The  Appellants'  counsel  had  submitted  a  skeleton   argument   in
    preparation for the appeal hearing, which was dated 25th  August  2015.
    He also sought to amend the Appellants' grounds on the basis that under
    paragraph 297(i)(d) of the Immigration Rules should have been  applied.
    The Home Office Presenting Officer did not object to him doing so  and,
    therefore, I found that it was fair and just to use my case  management
    powers under Rule 5(3)(c) of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 to permit the Appellants to amend their grounds of appeal.

7.   This then became the ground of appeal on which the  Appellants  relied.
    It is clear from the wording of sub-paragraph 297(i) of the Immigration
    Rules that there a number of alternative basis upon which the  children
    of a parent settled in the United Kingdom may seek entry clearance  for
    the purpose of settlement. As  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  did  not
    accept that the Appellants had provided a genuine death certificate for
    their  father,  he  had  considered  their  case  under  sub-paragraphs
    297(i)(e) and (f) of the Immigration Rules. However, at paragraph 24 of
    this decision and reasons the First-tier Tribunal Judge found  that  he
    was "satisfied on a balance of probabilities that  the  Appellants  are
    the children of Mrs Afia Khatun  and  Mr.  Sundor  Ali.  Mr.  Ali  died
    suddenly in 2013, about eight months after Mrs Khatun  left  Bangladesh
    and settled in the United Kingdom. The written,  oral  and  documentary
    evidenced in this regard his not challenged by Ms Lecointe"  [the  Home
    Officer Presenting Officer].

8.   Therefore, at that point the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  should  have
    gone  on  to  consider  the  Appellants'  appeals  under  sub-paragraph
    297(i)(d) which applies when one parent is present and settled  in  the
    United Kingdom and the other parent is dead". The fact that he did  not
    do so is a material error of law.

9.   However, this error of law did not vitiate other findings of fact  made
    by the First-tier Tribunal Judge in relation to sub-paragraphs  297(ii)
    to (vii) of the Immigration Rules. In particular, he found in paragraph
    25  of  his  decision  and  reasons  that  the  Appellants   would   be
    accommodated adequately without recourse to public funds and that  they
    would also be adequately maintained without recourse to  public  funds.
    The Respondent had accepted that they met the other requirements of the
    Rule and did not seek to  challenge  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    findings on accommodation and maintenance.  Therefore,  I  do  not  set
    these factual findings aside but retain them as the factual basis  upon
    which to remake the decision.

10.  In the light of the factual findings made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge and now that it is accepted that the Appellants do  not  have  to
    show that their mother had sole responsibility for them,  I  find  that
    the Appellants are entitled to  entry  clearance  as  their  mother  is
    settled here, their father is dead and they meet the other requirements
    of paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules.

Notice of Decision

1.   The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  decision  and  reasons  did  include
    material errors of law and I set aside his decision.

2.   However, these  errors  did  not  undermine  the  positive  credibility
    findings made by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  in  his  decision  and
    reasons and I do not set these aside.

3.   I remake the decision under  Section  12(2)(b)(ii)  of  the  Tribunals,
    Courts and Enforcement Act  2007  and  allow  the  Appellants'  appeals
    against the decision by the Respondent to refuse to grant  them   entry
    clearance to join their mother in the United Kingdom for the purpose of
    settlement.

[pic]
Signed   Date 27th August 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch
