
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/20610/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Determination Promulgated           |
|On 18 March 2015                       |On 22 April 2015                    |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                       Entry Clearance Officer - Shefo
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Adetola Adedeji Ogunjimi
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the claimant: Mr M Iqbal, instructed by Frederick Rine Solicitors
For the appellant:     Ms A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This  is  the  appeal  of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  against  the
    determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Coutts promulgated  1.12.14,
    allowing the claimant's appeal  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent to refuse him entry  clearance  to  the  United  Kingdom  to
    settle with his wife and  sponsor.   The  Judge  heard  the  appeal  on
    14.11.14.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Nicholson granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    25.1.15.

 3. Thus the matter came before me on 18.3.15 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 4. For the reasons set out herein I find that there was an error of law in
    the making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  such  that  the
    determination of Judge Coutts should be set aside.

 5. The application was refused on 28.2.14 because the claimant  failed  to
    meet the specified evidence requirements of Appendix FM-SE in  relation
    to the maintenance requirements.

 6. Judge Coutts purported to dispense with those requirements,  expressing
    satisfaction from the sponsor's oral evidence that the sponsor's income
    met the requirements. However, the judge has no discretion to  dispense
    with or override the mandatory financial requirements of  Appendix  FM-
    SE. To do so was an error of law such that the  decision  cannot  stand
    and must be set aside to be remade.

 7. Mr Iqbal accepts  that  documentary  evidence  demonstrating  that  the
    claimant  met  the  strict  requirements  of  Appendix  FM-SE  was  not
    submitted with the application.  Neither  was  the  necessary  evidence
    before the Entry Clearance Officer when the decision was made, nor  was
    it before the First-tier Tribunal at the appeal  hearing.  However,  he
    sought leave to adduce this evidence before me,  with  a  bundle  under
    cover of letter dated 6.2.15. His argument is that as section 85A(2) of
    the 2002  Act  permits  the  Tribunal  to  consider  the  circumstances
    pertaining at the date of decision, I should now, even in the error  of
    law assessment, consider this material. I do not accept his submission.
    The issue is whether there was an error of law in  the  making  of  the
    decision of the Tribunal. I cannot assess that by reference to material
    which was not put before the First-tier Tribunal.

 8. He further wished to submit that the reason the evidence he  sought  to
    rely on was not submitted with the application, or at any time  earlier
    than 6.2.15, was because of failure  on  the  part  of  the  claimant's
    representatives. However,  that  was  not  put  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and I note that there has been no  Rule  24  response  by  the
    claimant making any such assertion.

 9. Whilst the grounds of appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  included  a
    generic claim that the decision was incompatible  with  the  claimant's
    rights under ECHR, that does not appear to have been  advanced  at  the
    First-tier Tribunal hearing and was not raised before me in  the  error
    of law hearing.

10. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary
    fact finding to the Upper Tribunal. Where the facts are  unclear  on  a
    crucial issue at the heart of an appeal, as  they  are  in  this  case,
    effectively there has not been a valid determination of  those  issues.
    The errors of the First-tier Tribunal Judge vitiates all other findings
    of fact and the conclusions from those facts so that there has not been
    a valid determination of the issues in the appeal.

11. In all the circumstances, I relist this appeal for a fresh  hearing  in
    the First-tier Tribunal, on the basis that this is a case  which  falls
    squarely within the Senior President's Practice Statement at  paragraph
    7.2. The effect of the error has been to deprive the parties of a  fair
    hearing and that the nature or extent  of  any  judicial  fact  finding
    which is necessary for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such
    that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2 to deal  with
    cases fairly and justly, including with the avoidance of delay, I  find
    that it is appropriate to remit this appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal
    to determine the appeal afresh.

Conclusions:

12. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

     I set aside the decision.

     I remit the decision to be remade afresh in the First-tier Tribunal.
Signed: [pic]     Date: 18 March 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Consequential Directions

 1. The appeal is remitted to be remade afresh in the  First-tier  Tribunal
    at Hatton Cross;

 2. No findings of fact are preserved;

 3. It has been listed for 26.8.15 with a time estimate of 2 hours;



Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the  Asylum  and
Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.


Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
(rule 23A (costs) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
2005 and section 12(4)(a) of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007).

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The outcome of the appeal remains to be decided.

Signed: [pic]     Date: 18 March 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

