
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/20745/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 4 July 2016                            |On 15 July 2015                   |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF

                                   Between

                                 Wu, Erbing
                         (anonymity Order NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                      Entry Clearance Officer - BEIJING
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Adophy of Rana & Co, solicitors, agents for
Saintta
     International Lawyers
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad of the Specialist Appeals Team




                            DECISION AND REASONS


The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of the People's  Republic  of  China  (PRC),
    born on 8 May 1996.  On 13 August 2013 he applied to the Respondent for
    entry clearance to join his father, Wu, Fu Hai who is his  Sponsor  and
    is a citizen of the PRC who on 26 February 2011 was granted  indefinite
    leave to remain.  On 17 October 2013 by a deed of  change  of  name  he
    changed his name to Wu, Wenfu.

 2. The Respondent asserts and the Sponsor  has  not  challenged  that  the
    Sponsor left the PRC in  1999  and  that  the  Appellant's  mother  was
    granted entry clearance as a visitor in  2007.   At  about  that  time,
    2007, the Appellant went to live with his paternal  grandparents  where
    he remains.  The Appellant states he believes  his  mother  is  in  the
    United Kingdom but neither he nor the Sponsor know where she is.  There
    is no other material evidence about her in the Tribunal file and  there
    is no evidence at all from her.

The ECO Decision

 3. On 7 November 2013 the Respondent conducted a telephone interview  with
    the Appellant and on the same day refused his application  because  the
    Appellant had not shown that his Sponsor had consistently supported him
    emotionally and financially since the Sponsor had left the PRC.   Until
    2007 the Appellant had been cared for by his mother and subsequently by
    his grandparents.  The Respondent concluded the  Sponsor  had  not  had
    sole responsibility for the Appellant and therefore could  not  satisfy
    the requirement of paragraph 297(i)(e) of the Immigration Rules.

 4. The Respondent further considered there were no serious  or  compelling
    family or other circumstances making the Appellant's exclusion from the
    United Kingdom undesirable so that he did not meet the requirements  of
    paragraph 297(i)(f).

 5. On 9 December 2013 the Appellant through Saintta International  Lawyers
    lodged  notice  of  appeal  under  Section  82  of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended (the 2002 Act).  The grounds
    assert the Sponsor has had sole responsibility for  the  Appellant  and
    that the Respondent had accepted the Sponsor had  latterly  established
    contact with him.  The Respondent had been wrong  in  law  to  consider
    that  the  Appellant  needed  to  show  the  Sponsor   had   had   sole
    responsibility for the Appellant during his entire life.  This was  not
    in accordance with the  determination  in  TD  (para  297(i)(e):  "sole
    responsibility")  Yemen  [2006]  UKAIT  00049.   The  grounds   further
    asserted the Respondent had  failed  to  take  into  account  the  best
    interests of the  Appellant  as  a  minor  and  had  not  followed  the
    jurisprudence in Mundeba (s.55 and  para  297(i)(f))  DRC  [2013]  UKUT
    00088 (IAC).

The First-tier Tribunal Proceedings

 6. By a decision promulgated on 31 December 2015 Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Thorne dismissed the Appellant's appeal on  all  grounds.   In
    particular, he found that there  was  inadequate  reliable  independent
    evidence to show the  Sponsor  had  had  sole  responsibility  for  the
    Appellant since 2007 and that there was  scant  evidence  of  financial
    support and no reliable independent evidence that  he  had  played  any
    part in the Appellant's upbringing since he had left the PRC  in  1999.
    He found that the Appellant was in good health and had  been  attending
    school and there  were  no  serious  and  compelling  family  or  other
    considerations making his exclusion  undesirable.   He  considered  the
    Appellant's best interests and noting that the Appellant had  grown  up
    in the PRC and that continuity of residence  was  an  important  factor
    concluded it was in his best interests for his  existing  circumstances
    to be maintained.

 7. On 2 June 2016 Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Osborne  granted  the
    Appellant permission to appeal on the basis it was arguable  the  Judge
    had  erred  in  considering  that  the  Sponsor  needed  to  show  sole
    responsibility since 2007 and had treated the Appellant as  a  19  year
    old adult.  It was also arguable he had erred in his  approach  to  the
    assessment of the Appellant's best interests as a child  and  that  his
    conclusions on that issue were inadequately reasoned.  Further  he  may
    have erred in his application of the factors  referred  to  in  Section
    117B(2) of the  2002  Act  because  it  was  not  applicable  to  child
    applicants.  It was  further  arguable  the  Judge  had  erred  in  his
    consideration of the Sponsor's financial circumstances and the date  at
    which those  circumstances  were  to  be  assessed.   Finally,  it  was
    arguable these matters had  infected  the  Judge's  assessment  of  the
    proportionality of the decision.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 8. The Sponsor attended the hearing.  Mr Adophy advised me the Sponsor had
    very little English and this was evident from his apparent  failure  to
    understand any part of my introduction of the  Tribunal.   He  was  not
    able to confirm his current address which Mr Adophy did for him.   Both
    representatives agreed the only issues before the Tribunal  were  those
    expressly identified  in  the  grant  of  permission  to  appeal.   The
    Respondent had filed a notice under Rule 24 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 submitting that  the  Judge  had  correctly
    referred to the definition of "sole responsibility" at paragraph 23  of
    his decision and had given ample reasons to support  his  finding  that
    the Sponsor had not had sole responsibility.

Submissions for the Appellant

 9. Mr Adophy relied on his skeleton argument.  This argued that the  Judge
    had erred in doubting the Sponsor's credibility because he was a failed
    asylum seeker.

10.  Although  the  Judge  had  correctly  quoted   the   test   for   sole
    responsibility from TD (Yemen) he had erred  in  considering  that  the
    requirement of sole responsibility at all material times needed  to  be
    established.  In particular, sole responsibility  might  have  been  of
    only a short duration.  He further argued that  the  Sponsor's  control
    and direction of the Appellant's life were evidenced by sole  financial
    contributions since  2007,  a  school  certificate  and  the  Sponsor's
    payment for the application leading to the decision  under  appeal  and
    the legal costs and medical testing costs.  It was the Sponsor who  had
    decided the Appellant should live with the Sponsor's parents  and  that
    he should apply to come to the United Kingdom.

11. At interview the Appellant had stated he was seeking entry clearance so
    that he could come to live with his father.  The Appellant  would  have
    considered the potential  challenges  that  relocation  to  the  United
    Kingdom would pose and there was no evidence to undermine the wishes of
    the Appellant and the Sponsor to be re-united in  the  United  Kingdom.
    The Sponsor had no passport and had not seen the  Appellant  since  the
    Appellant was aged 3.  He  could  not  return  to  the  PRC  and  these
    amounted to serious and compelling circumstances making  the  exclusion
    of the Appellant undesirable.

12. The Judge's proportionality  assessment  under  Article  8  was  flawed
    because he had taken account of the  fact  that  by  the  time  of  the
    hearing the Appellant was no longer a child and had similarly erred  in
    considering  the  documents  relating  to   the   Sponsor's   financial
    circumstances to be out of date.  They were relevant to the date of the
    Respondent's decision which was the date at which the  evidence  needed
    to be assessed.  Further, the Respondent had never challenged that  the
    Sponsor  was  able  to  maintain  and  accommodate  the  Appellant   in
    accordance with the Immigration Rules.  Finally, the Judge had erred in
    applying Section 117B of the 2002 Act since it was not applicable to  a
    minor.

Submissions for the Respondent

13. Ms Ahmad submitted that at paragraph 23 of the decision the  Judge  had
    correctly identified the "sole responsibility" test in TD  (Yemen)  and
    at paragraph 16 he had correctly  identified  the  date  at  which  the
    evidence was to be assessed and the criteria for its admissibility.  At
    paragraph 28, he had made his findings as to sole responsibility on the
    basis that he  took  the  Appellant's  account  at  its  highest  (most
    favourable to him).  The Judge had found that  there  was  insufficient
    evidence the Sponsor had assumed sole  responsibility  and  if  he  had
    erred in referring to sole responsibility throughout  since  2007  that
    error was not material because the Judge had found that the Sponsor had
    not assumed  sole  responsibility  at  the  date  of  the  Respondent's
    decision as the Judge correctly stated at paragraph 29 of his decision.
     At paragraph 48 he had dealt with the appeal on the alternative  basis
    that the Appellant should be considered as a minor and had proceeded to
    apply the jurisprudence of Mundeba.  The Judge's treatment  of  Section
    117B of the 2002 Act was otiose and therefore any error there might  be
    in the fact the Judge had considered it was not material.

Response for the Appellant

14. Mr Adophy submitted that the tenor of the whole decision was  that  the
    Judge had treated the Appellant as an adult.  He had not dealt with the
    Appellant's reply at interview that he wanted to  come  to  the  United
    Kingdom to live with his father.  The Appellant was at an age  when  he
    made the application and was interviewed that he would have  considered
    the challenges that relocation to the  United  Kingdom  would  present.
    The Judge had erred in considering Section  117B  because  it  was  not
    applicable to a child.

Consideration and Decision

15. I start by noting that at paragraph 16  dealing  with  the  burden  and
    standard of proof the Judge also dealt with and  correctly  stated  the
    relevant date for assessment of the evidence.

16. The Judge quoted from the relevant parts of  the  determination  in  TD
    (Yemen) at paragraph 23 of his decision.  At paragraph 24 he went on to
    say that the sole responsibility test had to be  met  at  all  material
    times.  He did not specify at that stage what the "all material  times"
    were. The word "all" qualifies the expression "material times" not just
    the  word  "times".  At  paragraph  28  he  considered  the  role   the
    Appellant's father had taken in his upbringing since 2007 when  it  was
    claimed his mother had left him with his paternal grandparents and  had
    come to the United Kingdom and in the next paragraph  he  came  to  the
    conclusion that the Sponsor had not had  sole  responsibility  for  the
    Appellant at the date of the Respondent's decision.  It is  clear  from
    paragraph 30 that the Judge appreciated the Appellant was at  the  date
    of the hearing over the age of 18 but  nevertheless  it  was  clear  he
    considered him as a child because  he  went  on  to  say  in  the  same
    paragraph that he concluded that there were no serious  and  compelling
    family  or  other  considerations  making  exclusion   of   the   child
    undesirable.

17. Even if, as the Appellant asserts, there was some confusion because the
    Judge in his decision used different expressions to refer to the period
    during which he was assessing whether the Appellant's  father  had  had
    sole responsibility for him, it is clear, particularly  from  paragraph
    28, that the Judge was focusing on circumstances  following  from  2007
    when the  Appellant's  mother  had  left  him  with  his  grandparents,
    circumstances which continued  beyond  the  date  of  the  Respondent's
    decision.  I do not find with regard to the assessment of the  position
    under the Immigration Rules, the Judge has made a material error of law
    such that his decision should be set aside.

18. I turn  to  the  Judge's  consideration  of  the  claim  based  on  the
    Appellant's best interests as a child with regard to section 55 of  the
    UK Borders Act 2007 as applied in foreign cases by the jurisprudence in
    Mundeba (s.55 and para 297(i)(f)) [2013] UKUT 00088 (IAC).   The  Judge
    explained at paragraph 31 that for the Appellant as a  minor  close  to
    the attainment of his majority continuity of residence was an important
    factor.  Coupled with the Judge's findings that the Appellant's  father
    had not had sole responsibility for him based on  an  insufficiency  of
    evidence and lack of contact referred to in paragraphs  27  and  28,  I
    find the Judge gave adequate reasons for his conclusion in paragraph 31
    that maintenance of the Appellant's status quo would  be  in  his  best
    interests.

19. I turn to the challenges to the Judge's treatment  of  the  Appellant's
    claim under Article 8 of the European Convention.  The Judge dealt with
    the claim on the basis that the Appellant was still a minor, even if it
    was an alternative basis as he stated in paragraph 48.  He  relied,  as
    he was entitled  to,  on  his  findings  made  at  paragraph  31.   His
    assessment of the proportionality of the  decision  to  the  legitimate
    objective of the maintenance of proper immigration control is contained
    in paragraph 60.

20. The Judge may be criticised for having taken  into  account  irrelevant
    issues such as the lack of evidence  of  the  Appellant's  facility  in
    English.  However, there is nothing to show that  the  crucial  finding
    made by the Judge at paragraph 60(vi)  is  not  sound.  On  that  basis
    coupled with the factors referred to in  paragraphs  60(i)  and  60(ii)
    together with the other aspects of the  proportionality  assessment  at
    paragraphs 61-63 the Judge's conclusion  is  adequately  supported  and
    reasoned. The Appellant has not shown that the Judge  made  a  material
    error of law such as to justify the setting aside of his decision.   No
    differently  constituted  Tribunal  would  have   reached   any   other
    conclusion.  The decision shall therefore stand.

Anonymity

21. There was no request for an anonymity order and having  considered  the
    appeal find that none is warranted.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The First-tier Tribunal's decision did not contain  any  error  of  law
    sufficient to justify it being set  aside  in  whole  or  in  part  and
    consequently it shall stand.

    No anonymity direction is made.

Signed/Official Crest                            Date 14. vii. 2016




Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

