
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
             (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: OA/20294/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision and Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                    |
|On 1st December 2014                          |On 3rd December 2014           |
|                                              |                               |

                                   Before


                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                           Ifeyichukwu Lawrencia Ezekwem
                        (No Anonymity Direction Made)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                           Entry Clearance Officer
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     The Sponsor Ignatius Onyekashi Esekwem
For the Respondent:    Mr M Shilliday, Home Officer Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, a citizen of Nigeria born on 11th December 1985, applied
     for entry clearance to join her spouse and sponsor, Ignatius Onyekashi
    Esekwem a person present and settled in the UK.   The  application  was
    refused by the respondent on 24th October 2013 in  part  on  the  basis
    that the  first  appellant  had  not  fulfilled  the  English  language
    requirement further to paragraph  E-ECP  4.1  of  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  The ECO also asserted that the marriage was  not  a
    genuine subsisting marital  relationship  that  the  accommodation  and
    maintenance requirements were not met under Appendix FM.

 2.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hussain  dismissed  the   appeal   in   a
    determination promulgated on 18th September 2014.  He  found  that  the
    appellant succeeded under the Immigration Rules in  all  respects  save
    for the English language requirement. It was conceded at the hearing by
    the Home Office Presenting Officer before the First Tier Tribunal  that
    the  appellant  met  the   requirements   of   the   relationship   and
    accommodation and the judge found that the maintenance requirement  was
    met.  This was not challenged by the respondent on appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 3. However the appellant made an application for permission to  appeal  on
    the basis that the judge had ignored the evidence in  relation  to  the
    English language qualification.  The judge had heard the appeal on  1st
    August 2014 but did not decide the appeal until  18th  September  2014.
    In the meantime the sponsor stated he had forwarded a further  document
    to the Tribunal which was confirmation  from  UK  NARIC  regarding  the
    status of the appellant's qualification.

 4. At paragraph 9 of the determination Judge Hussain stated as follows

    'As noted earlier, the only live issue in  this  case  is  whether  the
    appellant is able to satisfy the requirement of the  Immigration  Rules
    concerning English.  In this regard, the appellant  provided  a  letter
    dated 13th May 2014 from UK NARIC which stated that  the  qualification
    possessed  by  the  appellant  in  Bachelor   of   Science   in   Maths
    Communication from the Imo State University was comparable to a British
    Bachelor Degree.  That of course does not satisfy  the  requirement  of
    the Immigration Rules'

 5. The judge did not  identify  in  what  way  this  did  not  fulfil  the
    requirements of the rules and further proceeded in error in  describing
    the degree as a qualification in 'Maths Communication' when in fact  it
    was 'Mass Communication'.  The appellant stated that evidence was faxed
    to the Tribunal on 1st September 2014 and again scanned to the Tribunal
    via email on 8th September 2014.  There was no reference to the further
    documentation said to be sent by the appellant's sponsor which included
    a letter dated 30th July 2014 from Imo State University confirming that
    the degree was taught in English. Despite  the  production  of  the  UK
    NARIC letter to the  Tribunal,  I  find  therefore  that  there  was  a
    procedural error, possibly owing to no error by the judge if the papers
    were not linked  to  the  file,  and  the  findings  of  the  judge  at
    paragraphs 9 and 10, in relation to English language, be set aside.   I
    preserve the findings in relation to the remainder of  the  Immigration
    Rule requirements.

 6. Having set aside the determination of Judge Hussain in respect  of  the
    English language findings, Mr Shilliday accepted at the hearing  before
    me that the two NARIC letters produced, the first dated 13th  May  2014
    and the second the 28th August 2014, with attachments,  indicated  that
    the appellant did fulfil the Immigration  Rules.  In  other  words  the
    documents showed that  the  appellant  had  an  academic  qualification
    recognised by NARIC UK to be equivalent to the standard of a Bachelor's
    or Master's degree or PhD in the UK, which was taught in English.  This
    fulfilled Rule E-ECP 4.1. Indeed all the documentation on the  file  in
    relation to the Imo State University Degree was in English.  There  was
    a further letter on file from Imo State University dated 30th July 2014
    confirming that the appellant used English as a study language for  her
    degree.  The letter from UK NARIC dated 28th August 2014 referred to  a
    degree completed in 2011 and  confirmed  that  the  'level  of  English
    language for  the  above  degree  course  is  considered  to  meet  the
    requirement of CEFR level C1'.

Conclusions

 7. I find that the judge was in error when he found that the appellant did
    not meet the English language test requirements and I allow the  appeal
    further to the Immigration Rules E-ECP1.1(d).

Order

I therefore find an error of law in the  determination  of  the  First  Tier
Tribunal Judge and I remake the decision and I allow the  appeal  under  the
Immigration Rules.


Signed                                             Date 2nd December 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


Fee Award

In the light of the decision to  re-make  the  decision  in  the  appeal  by
allowing it, I have considered  whether  to  make  a  fee  award  (rule  23A
(costs) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)  Rules  2005  and
section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007). I  have
had  regard  to  the  Joint  Presidential  Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards   in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011). I  make  no  whole  fee  award  as  the
matter was complex.

