
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/20012/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On  6 November 2013                           |On 19 November 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                                  LORD BOYD
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                               mortiza delavar
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER-STOCKHOLM

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr A. Eaton, Counsel instructed by Irving & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr I. Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


    1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran, presently living in  Norway.  He
       was born on 14 May 1983. His application for entry  clearance  as  a
       child of a refugee  was  refused  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
       ("ECO") on 12 September 2012. His appeal against that  decision  was
       dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Clayton after a hearing on 13
       June 2013.

    2. The ECO refused the application with reference to paragraph 352D  of
       HC 395 (as amended). Judge Clayton decided that the appellant  could
       not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules and did not  come
       within the terms of what was described as "the policy", although  it
       was not more specifically identified and its terms are not  set  out
       in the determination. She also rejected  the  Article  8  ground  of
       appeal.

Submissions

    3. Mr Eaton relied on the grounds of appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.  In
       so far as his  submissions  repeated  what  is  contained  in  those
       grounds we do not repeat them. In relation to paragraph 317  of  the
       Rules, that was never a basis on which the appeal was  advanced  and
       the judge was therefore wrong to consider the appeal with  reference
       to it, this illustrating a lack of care in the determination.

    4. Grounds 2 and 3 were suggested to be the stronger grounds. The judge
       had not given appropriate consideration to the documents which dealt
       with the appellant's asylum appeal in Norway. It was conceded by  Mr
       Eaton however, that there was no  documentary  evidence  before  the
       First-tier judge which showed that the appellant had  exhausted  his
       appeal rights in  Norway  (where  his  claim  for  asylum  had  been
       refused). Nevertheless, that was the evidence of the  witnesses  who
       gave evidence before the First-tier Tribunal and their evidence  was
       accepted as credible. The First-tier judge  was  wrong  to  conclude
       that the appellant's family in the UK  could  visit  him  in  Norway
       where his status was at  least  highly  precarious.  The  judge  did
       conclude that there was no possibility of physical  contact  if  the
       appellant was returned to Iran.

    5. The assessment  of  family  life  did  not  take  into  account  the
       circumstances in which the family were separated, they having had to
       flee Iran. We were referred to the decision in  H  (Somalia)  [2004]
       UKIAT 00027. Judge Clayton had accepted that there was  family  life
       before the family left Iran but had failed to take into account  the
       circumstances in which that family life was disrupted.

    6. Mr Jarvis relied on various authorities, although we have not  found
       it necessary to refer to them in this  determination.  He  submitted
       that it  was  accepted  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the
       appellant was not able to meet the requirements  of  the  Rules  and
       therefore if there was  an  error  on  the  part  of  the  judge  in
       considering paragraph 317, it was not material. The judge was in any
       event entitled to consider any Rule that might apply.

    7. The evidence put before the judge so far as it related to  the  date
       of the refusal of entry clearance, which is the relevant  date,  did
       not establish that the appellant had no further right of  appeal  in
       Norway. The documentary evidence only established  that  he  may  be
       liable to be removed to Iran. In so far as the  evidence  post-dated
       the decision it could not be taken into account. H  (Somalia)  could
       be distinguished because that was a decision about a  family  living
       illegally as refugees in Kenya.

    8. In reply, Mr Eaton suggested that Judge Clayton  having  found  that
       there was no family life because of the family fleeing Iran, it  was
       wrong for her to refer to the family having had any choice in  where
       their family life was conducted.

Our assessment

    9. It is not suggested on behalf of the appellant that the  ECO  failed
       to consider the applicable refugee  family  reunion  policy,  albeit
       that the ECO's decision is brief. It is said in  the  decision  that
       there are no "compelling,  compassionate  circumstances",  which  is
       what lies at the heart of the application  of  the  policy  in  this
       case.

   10. The first ground of appeal relates to the  First-tier  judge  having
       apparently decided the appeal, under the Immigration Rules at least,
       with reference to paragraph 317 which is concerned  with  entry  for
       dependent relatives, including children over the age of  18.  It  is
       said that the application was not made under that paragraph  of  the
       Rules and the ECO's decision was not made with reference to it.

   11. We are satisfied that the First-tier judge did err in this  respect.
       The application was plainly made on  the  basis  of  refugee  family
       reunion. At [1] of the determination the  judge  incorrectly  stated
       that the appeal was against the refusal  to  grant  entry  clearance
       under paragraph 317. At [24] and [25] she dismissed the appeal under
       the Rules with reference to paragraph 317. There is  no  mention  in
       the determination of paragraph 352D.  The notice of decision  itself
       only makes reference to paragraph 352D and not  317.  Paragraph  317
       contains  requirements,  for   example   as   to   maintenance   and
       accommodation that 352D does not.

   12. In passing we note that when considering paragraph 317 the judge  at
       [24] in referring to paragraph 317(1)(f) used the phrase "compelling
       and compassionate circumstances" when in fact that  subparagraph  of
       the Rules states that the applicant must be  living  alone  "in  the
       most exceptional compassionate circumstances."

   13. Whilst a judge may sometimes be  entitled  to  consider  whether  an
       applicant who does not meet the requirements of  a  particular  Rule
       meets the requirements for entry clearance in respect of a different
       Rule, that was not the basis on which paragraph 317  was  considered
       by the judge in this case.

   14. However, it is not suggested that  he  was  in  any  event  able  to
       succeed under any provision of the Immigration Rules. In respect  of
       paragraph 352D he needed to have been under the age  of  18  at  the
       date of application, which he was not.

   15. Whilst therefore, we have concluded that the  First-tier  judge  did
       err in law in relation to her consideration of paragraph 317, it  by
       no means inevitably follows that her decision should be set aside.

   16. Mr Eaton accepted that the importance of the complaint in  ground  1
       in  relation  to  paragraph  317  should  not   be   overemphasised,
       submitting that this issue really relates more to the level of  care
       that is evident in the determination. The real focus for the  appeal
       before us was said to be grounds 2 and 3. These grounds overlap.

   17.  At  [19]  Judge  Clayton  accepted  that  the  appellant's   asylum
       application in Norway had been  refused,  going  on  to  state  that
       "there was no evidence as to whether he had further rights of appeal
       or whether all his rights had  been  exhausted  and  he  was  facing
       removal from Norway." In so finding it is said that the judge failed
       to have regard to the oral evidence that this  was  the  appellant's
       only level of appeal.  Judge  Clayton  accepted  at  [18]  that  the
       witnesses were credible.

   18. The summary of the oral  evidence  in  the  determination  does  not
       reveal that evidence was given as to the extent of  the  appellant's
       further appeal rights in Norway. The appellant's brother and  father
       adopted their witness statements but were  not  cross-examined,  and
       the cross-examination of the appellant's mother  does  not  indicate
       that she was asked about that issue, at least not in  direct  terms.
       She did state that the appellant's money (from the State)  had  been
       halved, and Mr Eaton asked us to infer that that was because he  had
       no further right of appeal.

   19. We do not have the benefit of  the  judge's  record  of  proceedings
       which is not on the Tribunal file. Having said that,  no  record  of
       proceedings was provided to us on behalf of the appellant  in  terms
       of any notes of evidence that were taken by his  representatives  at
       the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal. The  witness  statements
       that were adopted by the  witnesses  at  that  hearing  do  not  say
       anything about the appellant's appeal rights in Norway,  and  as  we
       have indicated only the appellant's mother was  cross-examined.  The
       record of that cross-examination in the determination similarly does
       not state that his appeal rights have been exhausted.

   20. On the Tribunal file is a translation of the  determination  of  the
       appellant's asylum claim, (or  appeal)  in  Norway.  That  does  not
       indicate one way or another what appeal rights he  had  or  has.  Mr
       Eaton referred us to another document  that  was  served  separately
       from the appellant's main bundle. That is a letter to the  appellant
       from the Immigration Appeals Board in Norway. It appears to be dated
       19 February 2013 and  is  headed  "Information  regarding  departure
       deadline". It states in effect that the appellant must leave  Norway
       on 19  March  2013.  It  further  states  that  questions  regarding
       postponing the departure date are to  be  addressed  to  the  Police
       Immigration Unit. It does also state that  complaint  regarding  the
       date "cannot be made according to the immigration act."

   21. It is apparent that notwithstanding the departure date of March 2013
       the appellant has not been removed from  Norway,  that  having  been
       confirmed to us at the hearing. The evidence given before the First-
       tier Tribunal indicates that he was still there  then.  Having  said
       that, we are concerned,  as  was  the  First-tier  judge,  with  the
       position as at the date of decision in September 2012.

   22. At [22] the judge stated that if the  appellant  remains  in  Norway
       there will be nothing to prevent the family here from visiting  him.
       That, it seems to us, is entirely correct. If he remains there  they
       can visit, and it was not suggested that there was  any  reason  why
       they could not, albeit that that would involve some expense.

   23. Whether under the Immigration Rules, the policy or  Article  8,  the
       position of the appellant must be  looked  at  as  at  the  date  of
       decision. The decision was made on 12 September 2012.  The  decision
       on his asylum  claim  in  Norway  was  made  on  11  February  2013,
       according to  the  translation  of  the  judgement.  On  that  basis
       therefore, Judge Clayton would have been entitled to find  that  the
       family could visit him in Norway. In any event,  albeit  that  Judge
       Clayton did not refer  to  the  Norwegian  documents,  they  do  not
       establish that he is about to be removed from  Norway.  As  we  have
       already said however, at the date of decision his asylum  claim  had
       not been determined.

   24. The grounds state that it is only a  matter  of  the  administrative
       convenience of the Norwegian authorities that the appellant  is  not
       removed to Iran, but that can only be speculation.

   25. The refugee reunion policy is not set out in the determination. Both
       parties agreed that the policy as it applied at the date of decision
       is as set out in SS (Jurisdiction - Rule  62(7);  Refugee's  family;
       Policy) Somalia [2005] UKAIT 00167, at [35]. It is entitled  "Family
       Reunion". The only part of it relevant to the appeal  before  us  is
       the following:
                      "ELIGIBILITY OF APPLICANTS FOR FAMILY REUNION
             Only pre-existing families are eligible for family reunion i.e.
             the spouse and minor children who formed part of the family
             unit prior to the time the sponsor fled to seek asylum.
             We may exceptionally allow other members of the family (eg
             elderly parents) to come to the UK if there are compelling,
             compassionate circumstances.
             The parents and siblings of a minor who has been recognised as
             a refugee are not entitled to family reunion. Such applications
             are considered under the criteria above, ie there must be
             compelling, compassionate circumstances in order for the family
             to be granted entry to the UK.
             Family reunion may be refused if family members fall within the
             terms of one of the exclusion clauses in the 1951 UN
             Convention."

   26. The significant part of that extract from the policy is  the  second
       paragraph which requires  there  to  be  "compelling,  compassionate
       circumstances". Judge Clayton was referred to two authorities on the
       possible meaning of that phrase, although unhelpfully no citation is
       given for either case in the determination. Ex parte  Joseph  [1988]
       Imm  AR  329  and  Mohamed  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  331   both   involved
       consideration  of  the  phrase   "most   exceptional   compassionate
       circumstances" but it is not suggested that  Judge  Clayton  decided
       the case with reference to that higher test.

   27. The judge correctly identified that the  phrase  in  the  policy  is
       "compelling,   compassionate   circumstances",    and    she    gave
       consideration to the evidence on that issue. We have  already  dealt
       with the complaint about her consideration of whether the  appellant
       was to be removed from Norway. As part  of  her  assessment  of  the
       appellant's  circumstances  and  whether  they  could  be  said   to
       compelling and/or compassionate, contrary to what is asserted in the
       grounds she was entitled to take into account that, as she stated at
       [21], he was living in a country where there is a high  standard  of
       living with good medical facilities. She noted that he was living in
       a refugee camp and it is  apparent  from  [20]  and  [24]  that  she
       appreciated that this is not an ideal living  circumstance  for  any
       individual, including the appellant.

   28. In our judgment the consideration of the appeal  with  reference  to
       the family reunion policy was free from any error  of  law.  In  any
       event, we are inclined to agree with  Mr  Jarvis's  submission  that
       given that the ECO had considered the relevant policy, the judge had
       no jurisdiction to interfere with the ECO's decision on it. It would
       be different, for example, if the judge had found that  the  factual
       basis on which the decision on the policy was made  was  flawed.  Mr
       Jarvis's submission is what prompted us to observe at [9] above that
       it was not contended that the ECO had not considered the  applicable
       policy, albeit that the reference to  the  policy  is  indirect  and
       brief.

   29. In ground 3 it is suggested that the First-tier judge accepted  that
       the appellant had enjoyed family life with his family in Iran  which
       was curtailed when the family had  to  flee.  Paragraph  [14]  of  H
       (Somalia) is relied on, wherein it states as follows:

              "It cannot be right to approach the disruption to family life
              which is caused by someone having to flee  persecution  as  a
              refugee as if it were of  the  same  nature  as  someone  who
              voluntarily leaves, or leaves in the  normal  course  of  the
              changes to family life which naturally occur as children grow
              up."

   30. Although not the subject of submissions to us, it is  apparent  that
       there is some ambiguity in the judge's  assessment  of  family  life
       between the appellant and  his  family  in  the  UK.  She  concluded
       initially when dealing with the policy that  the  evidence  did  not
       indicate that the appellant had family life with  his  relatives  in
       the UK, noting at [23] that he was age 29 at the date of application
       and concluding that there was no evidence  that  their  relationship
       extended  beyond  ordinary  emotional  ties  between   close   adult
       relatives [19]. Again at [23] she found that although the family may
       well be close and have lived together as  a  single  unit  in  Iran,
       there was nothing to suggest that their relationship  "was  anything
       over and above  that  to  be  expected  between  close  adult  blood
       relatives" (our emphasis). Given the reference to  his  age  at  the
       date of application and the use of  the  past  tense  "was",  it  is
       apparent that she did not in fact find that there  was  family  life
       (in the legal sense) in Iran.

   31. In the assessment of Article 8, she stated at [26] as follows:

             "as already stated I am not persuaded  that  the  relationship
             between the Appellant, his parents and brother  was  over  and
             above that to be expected between adult close blood relatives.
             "

   32. In the next sentence however, she said that "They did  enjoy  family
       life together [in] Iran, which was unfortunately curtailed when they
       fled from the country." Although these two sentences  together  are,
       on the face of  it,  inconsistent  the  repetition  of  the  earlier
       finding  that  there  were  no  additional  elements  of  dependency
       indicates that her conclusion was that there was no family  life  in
       Iran when the application was made, and that consequently there  was
       none at the date of decision.

   33. We note that at [18] the judge did conclude that but for the  family
       fleeing Iran they would still be together. At that  point  at  least
       she did not conclude that there had been a deliberate choice for the
       family to separate or that that was in the natural order of  things,
       an approach in refugee reunion cases  which  had  been  found  in  H
       (Somalia) to be a flawed. On the other hand, the observation at [26]
       in terms of Article 8 not giving an "unfettered choice" as to  where
       family life may be enjoyed would, we accept,  otherwise  indicate  a
       wrong approach in  circumstances  where  separation  was  caused  by
       having to flee persecution, as per [14]  of  H  (Somalia).  However,
       that aspect of the judge's determination does not detract  from  the
       primary finding that there was no pre-existing family  life  between
       them.

   34. It is not contended that the judge left out  of  account  any  other
       material factual matter in  her  consideration  of  Article  8.  For
       completeness we note that she took into account the Article 8 rights
       of the other family members. In relation to his mother's health,  at
       [27] she did not accept that the  appellant's  mother's  health  was
       deteriorating because the appellant had been denied entry clearance.

   35. In conclusion, whilst we are satisfied that the judge did err in law
       in relation to paragraph 317, that is  not  an  error  of  law  that
       requires the decision to be set aside. We are not satisfied that the
       grounds of appeal establish any other error of law.

Decision

   36. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  an
       error on a point of law. However, the decision is not set aside  and
       the decision to dismiss the appeal under the Immigration  Rules  and
       under Article 8 of the ECHR stands.






Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek
                                                 7/11/13
