
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/20611/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 30 July 2014                                 |On 5 August 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                          mr ZOHAIB SHAMIN SIDDIQUI
                          (no anonymity order maDE)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N. Bramble, Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    none


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The SSHD appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Symes  sitting  at  Richmond  on  29  April  2014)
    allowing the claimant's appeal against the  decision  by  the  SSHD  to
    refuse to vary his leave to remain in the United Kingdom as  a  Tier  4
    Student Migrant, and to make directions for his removal.

 2. The ground  of  refusal  was  that  on  13  August  2013  he  had  been
    encountered working illegally, and so his application was refused under
    paragraph 322(3) for a failure to comply with conditions  attaching  to
    his leave to enter as a student. In the refusal notice dated 14  August
    2013 he was informed that he had no right of appeal.

 3. The claimant was removed on  12  October  2013,  and  appealed  out  of
    country on 30 October 2013. His case was that he had been misled by his
    college into thinking that he was allowed to work. He asked that he  be
    granted another visa.

 4. Judge Symes proceeded with the hearing on the false understanding  that
    the claimant had proposed voluntary departure, but no arrangements  had
    been made (paragraph 4). So he believed that the claimant was still  in
    the country, albeit that he had not made an appearance. He accepted the
    explanation given by the claimant in his grounds of appeal, and allowed
    his appeal against the refusal to vary his leave on the ground that the
    decision was not in accordance with the law as there was no sign in the
    refusal letter that the decision-maker had recognised the existence  of
    the discretion inherent in  Rule  322.   He  also  allowed  the  appeal
    against removal on the same ground.

 5. Permission to appeal on error of  law  grounds  was  granted  by  Judge
    Colyer on 23 June 2014.

    Discussion

 6. The decision to remove the claimant was made on  the  13  August  2013,
    which was the day before his extant application for leave to remain was
    refused. It was for this reason that he had no right of appeal  against
    the refusal to vary leave, as  the  effect  of  the  decision  to  give
    directions for his removal invalidated any leave to enter or remain  in
    the UK which was given to him before the directions were given. So  the
    judge had no jurisdiction to hear an appeal against the refusal to vary
    the claimant's  leave,  and  he  erred  in  law  in  holding  that  the
    claimant's application to vary leave  to  remain  remained  outstanding
    before the Secretary of State for a lawful decision.

 7. The judge also erred in law in allowing the appeal against  removal  on
    the ground that "there can be no power to remove a person  where  there
    their variation application was inadequately dealt  with".   The  judge
    failed to recognise that the removal decision preceded the decision  to
    refuse to vary the claimant's leave.

 8. It is acknowledged in the SSHD's grounds of appeal to the UT  that  the
    claimant had an out of country right  of  appeal  against  the  removal
    decision. But the judge failed to recognise that the claimant  had  not
    in fact purported to exercise a right of  appeal  against  the  removal
    decision. He had only sought to appeal against the decision  to  refuse
    to vary his leave.



Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly the following decision is  substituted:  the  claimant's  appeal
against the decision to refuse to vary his leave to remain is  dismissed  on
the ground that he has no right of appeal against this decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made no anonymity order.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
