
-[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/20205/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 27 June 2013                               |On 4 July 2013               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                               BANAFSHEH MANI

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs M Gore, Counsel, instructed by J Benson
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. The appellant, who was born on 28 December 1980, is a national of Iran.
    She applied under the Immigration Rules for leave to enter  the  UK  as
    the spouse of Mr Ojahangir Noori, who is a British citizen.

 2. This application was refused by the respondent on 1 October 2012, for a
    number of reasons. For the purposes of this determination,  it  is  not
    necessary to recite these reasons in full.

 3. The appellant appealed against this decision and her appeal  was  heard
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Seelhoff, sitting at Hatton Cross on 2
    April 2013.   The  appellant  was  represented  by  Mrs  Gore  on  that
    occasion, and her husband, the sponsor, Mr Noori,  gave  evidence.   At
    the hearing, Mrs Gore apparently accepted that  the  appeal  could  not
    succeed under the Immigration Rules, but submitted that  it  should  be
    allowed on Article 8  grounds  (at  paragraph  7  of  Judge  Seelhoff's
    determination).

 4. In a  determination  promulgated  on  10  April  2013,  Judge  Seelhoff
    dismissed the appellant's appeal.

 5. The appellant now appeals against this decision pursuant to  permission
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson on 16 May 2013.

 6. The appeal was listed before me on 27 June 2013 and I heard submissions
    on behalf of both parties.  These submissions have  been   recorded  in
    the Record of Proceedings and so I shall refer below only  to  such  of
    the  submissions  as  are  necessary   for   the   purposes   of   this
    determination.  I have, however, had regard  to  everything  which  was
    said to me during the course of the hearing  as  well  as  to  all  the
    material contained within the file.

 7. In the grounds, it was asserted  in  robust  terms  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant, that there were clear errors  of  law  in  Judge  Seelhoff's
    determination.  It has been accepted on behalf of the  respondent  that
    there is some force in some of these submissions.  In the  respondent's
    Rule 24 response it is conceded (at paragraph 3) that Judge  Seelhoff's
    determination "could have been a  little  clearer  in  its  reasoning",
    while at paragraph 4 it is conceded  further,  with  reference  to  the
    judge's consideration of the  appellant's  Article  8  claim,  that  at
    paragraph 14, Judge Seelhoff had "erred in finding no  interference  in
    refusing the application".  The highest the respondent's case could  be
    put in the Rule 24 response was that "the judge's small errors  in  the
    determination are not material to the outcome of the  appeal".   Before
    me, although Mr Avery, on behalf of the  respondent,  sought  to  argue
    that the errors in the determination were  not  material,  because  the
    judge had proceeded to consider the appeal  on  the  basis  that  there
    would be interference in the family relationship if the sponsor did not
    go to Iran, he did accept that when  considering  proportionality,  the
    judge did not mention any other factor beyond financial reasons.

 8. In my judgment, there has been a failure to  consider  the  appellant's
    appeal insofar as it is founded on her Article 8 rights,  properly.  As
    accepted on behalf of the respondent, the  assertion  at  paragraph  14
    that "the appellant" (by which  Judge  Seelhoff  presumably  meant  the
    spouse) "could simply move to  Iran"  is  inadequately  reasoned.   The
    finding (in respect of a British citizen with a  son  who  lives  here)
    that his "connections to the UK are limited" - essentially  because  he
    is not currently employed - is clearly not adequately  reasoned;  there
    is no mention in the determination of his medical condition and nor  is
    there any proper consideration of his personal circumstances.

 9. Judge Seelhoff sets out his finding that "the sponsor's  connection  to
    Iran as someone of Iranian origin are in many ways  as  strong  as  his
    connection to the UK", but in the absence of any  proper  consideration
    either of the appellant's circumstances in this country or of what  his
    circumstances would be in Iran, this finding is not sustainable.

10. Further, having appeared to find at  paragraphs  15  and  16  that  the
    financial basis justifying exclusion is at best marginal,  the  judge's
    finding at paragraph 19 that "on the basis of the financial evidence  I
    am satisfied that the interference is proportionate" does  not  suggest
    that the judge has given proper  (or  any)  consideration  to  all  the
    relevant factors when considering proportionality.

11. Although, as was argued before me on behalf of the respondent,  it  may
    well be that  following  full  and  proper  consideration  of  all  the
    factors, the appellant's appeal should still be dismissed, but  without
    considering these factors properly, it cannot be said that this  result
    would have been inevitable.  Further, the appellant was,  and  remains,
    entitled to have her case properly considered, which in my judgment, it
    was not.  For these reasons, I consider that  Judge  Seelhoff's  errors
    were material ones.

12. Having regard to  paragraph  7  of  the  Practice  Statements  for  the
    Immigration and Asylum Chamber of the Upper Tribunal, I  consider  that
    the effect of the errors contained within  the  determination  is  that
    this appellant was effectively deprived of  a  fair  hearing.   I  also
    consider that the nature and extent of the judicial fact-finding  which
    will now be necessary in order for the decision to be re-made  is  such
    that, having regard to the overriding objective, it is  appropriate  to
    remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal,  which  I  shall  order.   I
    shall also make directions with regard to this re-hearing.

Decision

I set aside the determination of Judge Seelhoff  as  containing  a  material
error of law.

I direct that this appeal be remitted for a  re-hearing  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal, sitting at Hatton Cross, to be put before  any  judge  other  than
First-tier Tribunal Judge Seelhoff.





Signed                                  Date: 3 July 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Craig

