
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/20915/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3 September 2012                           |On 10 July 2013              |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY

                                   Between

                                 fouzia riaz

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Ms E O'Bryan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  On 14 June  2011  she  applied
    for entry clearance as a spouse on the basis of  her  marriage  to  her
    sponsor on 16 April 2011.  She stated that the  nika  nama  took  place
    over the telephone as her husband was in the UK at  that  time.   On  9
    August 2011 the respondent refused her application  pointing  out  that
    the appellant  had  failed  to  provide  any  satisfactory  documentary
    evidence to show that  the  couple  had  physically  met  or  that  she
    intended to live permanently with the sponsor and that the marriage was
    subsisting,  or  that  there  would  be  adequate  accommodation.   The
    appellant appealed, but wished the appeal to be decided on the  papers.
    In a determination sent on 6 January, 2012, First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Seifert dismissed the appellant's appeal.   He  was  satisfied  in  the
    light of what had been said in the Entry Clearance Manager's Review and
    the further  documentary  evidence  that  the  appellant  met  all  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules save for para 281(i)(a).   Noting
    that the couple had conducted a  "telephone  marriage",  he  stated  at
    [17]:

         "Such a marriage is not valid under UK law.  The formal validity of
         a telephone marriage is determined according to  the  laws  of  the
         countries in which both parties are  physically  present  when  the
         marriage takes place.  Therefore, a telephone  marriage  celebrated
         whilst one of the parties is  in  the  UK  will  not  be  valid  as
         telephone marriages are not valid in this country."


2.   Despite grounds of appeal which simply requested "a chance  to  provide
    comprehensive evidence to remove any misconceptions and assist  a  just
    conclusion", Designated Judge Coates granted permission because:-

         "Although not raised in the grounds of appeal, having regard to the
         decision of the Outer House, Court of Session in MRA v  NRK  [2011]
         CSOH 101, it was argued the Tribunal Judge  had  erred  in  law  in
         concluding that the parties had not contracted a valid marriage."


3.   At the hearing Ms O'Bryan pointed out that according to  her  file  the
    appellant and her sponsor had since  married  in  person  in  Pakistan,
    although  that  was  a   post-decision   fact   not   appertaining   to
    circumstances as at the date of decision.  She  pointed  out  that  the
    details of the telephone marriage were insufficient to enable  positive
    findings of validity to be made, even if the marriage was valid.

4.   After I heard this case the file was misplaced and it has only come  to
    light after a search by Tribunal administration concerned with  overdue
    determinations.   Whilst  the  total  lack  of  any  follow-up  by  the
    appellant or her sponsor has not helped,  the  responsibility  for  the
    delay is mine and I greatly regret it.

5.   Having considered the case of MRA V NRK, whilst  it  affords  a  useful
    summary of relevant authorities, it does not decide in  any  definitive
    way the general question as to the  validity  of  telephone  marriages,
    although in that respect it rather mirrors what is said in Dicey Morris
    and Collins, The Conflict of Laws 14th Edition 2006  at  17.013-17.015.
    However, the case also  highlights  that  there  are  other  components
    necessary to make the telephone marriage valid, e.g. a  suitable  vakil
    to act as proxy and evidence of consent by the bride.  I agree with  Ms
    O'Bryan that even assuming there is nothing inherently invalid about  a
    telephone marriage,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  appellant  failed  to
    establish that the ceremony conducted between her and her sponsor  over
    the telephone fully complied with the law of  Pakistan  governing  nika
    nama marriages.

6.   For the above reasons my decision  can  only  be  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge did not err in law.

7.   It may be, as intimated by  Ms  O'Bryan,  that  this  appeal  has  been
    rendered academic by the fact that the appellant and her  sponsor  have
    since married in Pakistan, in person.  In case entry clearance is still
    an issue, I would record that the respondent is bound by the favourable
    findings made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge as to the ability of the
    appellant to meet as at the date of decision all requirements  of  para
    281 save for that relating to the validity of marriage.

8.   For the above reasons, the First-tier Tribunal Judge  did  not  err  in
    law and his decision to dismiss the appeal must stand.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Storey

