

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                                Appeal Number: OA/20853/2013
                                                               OA/20855/2013
                                                               OA/20863/2013
                                                               OA/20856/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Phoenix House, Bradford              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 6th November 2014                          |On 7th November 2014         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER


                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                              SHAKUNTALA BHUSAL
                                ASMITA BHUSAL
                                ANJANA BHUSAL
                                AAYUSH BHUSAL
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr I Ali, counsel, instructed by Equity solicitors



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant (hereafter the ECO) appeals a decision of the  First-
         tier Tribunal,  which  allowed  the  appeals  of  the  respondent's
         (hereafter the claimants) against the decision of the ECO to refuse
         to grant them entry clearance as the wife  and  three  children  of
         their husband/father of a Tier 2 Migrant  under  paragraph  319C(d)
         and (e) of HC 395. The mother had been refused entry  clearance  on
         the grounds that she had failed to show she was in  a  genuine  and
         subsisting marriage with her husband  and  the  children  had  been
         refused in line.


      2. The Rules in so far as relevant to this appeal are as follows:


             319C. Requirements for entry clearance or leave to remain

             To qualify for entry clearance or leave to remain as the
             Partner of a Relevant Points Based System Migrant, an
             applicant must meet the requirements listed below. If the
             applicant meets these requirements, entry clearance or leave
             to remain will be granted. If the applicant does not meet
             these requirements, the application will be refused.

             Requirements:

             (a)...

             (b) ...

             (c) ...

             (d) The marriage or civil partnership, or relationship similar
             to marriage or civil partnership, must be subsisting at the
             time the application is made.

             (e) The applicant and the Relevant Points Based System Migrant
             must intend to live with the other as their spouse or civil
             partner, unmarried or same-sex partner throughout the
             applicants stay in the UK.

             ......



      3. The First-tier Tribunal judge set  out  the  evidence  before  him,
         which included the oral evidence of the sponsor husband/father.  He
         concluded


             "..... Having looked at the evidence on the  whole  I  believe
             that this is a genuine and subsisting  marriage.  There  is  a
             genuine reason why the Sponsor has not been to Nepal to  visit
             but this does not indicate that the marriage  is  not  genuine
             and subsisting or that they do not intend to live together.


             14. Taking into account all the evidence I have before me  the
             appeal is allowed".


      4. Permission to appeal had been sought by  the  ECO,  and  permission
         granted, on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal judge had failed
         to identify and apply the correct burden and standard of  proof  or
         give adequate reasons why, given the paucity of evidence, the  case
         was made out. The ECO pleaded that the burden was on the  appellant
         to prove what she asserts and not for the judge to seek reasons  to
         disprove or diminish that burden.


      5. The judge had  documentary  evidence  before  him.  He  heard  oral
         evidence, which he found credible. He considered the evidence as  a
         whole. The reference by the judge to the acceptance by him  of  the
         reason why the sponsor has not gone to Nepal is not a  reversal  of
         the burden of proof but a finding in favour of  the  appellants  on
         the basis of the evidence of the sponsor.

      6. The mere fact that there is a paucity of documentary evidence  does
         not mean that a finding adverse to an appellant must  follow.  This
         judge heard the oral evidence  of  the  sponsor  and  accepted  its
         credibility and made findings considering the evidence as  a  whole
         (see [14] determination). Although the judge did  not  specifically
         self direct himself as to the burden and standard of proof,  it  is
         plain that he approached the evidence "as a whole",  made  findings
         on that evidence "as a whole" and in the  light  of  that  evidence
         concluded that the marriage was genuine  and  subsisting.  Although
         there is a comment that there was a genuine  reason  not  to  visit
         Nepal this does not indicate a reversal of the burden of proof  but
         rather a comment as to the reasons given. There is  no  requirement
         for a judge to self direct as to the burden and standard of  proof;
         particularly  an  experienced  judge  who  can  be  considered   to
         understand this and apply it unless it is plain and clear  that  he
         has not.

      7. Mr Diwnycz did not seek to argue that there had been a reversal  of
         the burden  of  proof  and  stated  that  he  considered  that  the
         application of  the  correct  burden  and  standard  of  proof  was
         intrinsic to the document.


      8.  I am satisfied that there has been no error of law in  the  First-
         tier Tribunal determination. I do not set it aside. I  dismiss  the
         appeal by the ECO.

    Conclusions:


    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.


    I do not set aside the decision


    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.



                                    Date 6th November 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
