
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/20255/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre|Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 18 August 2015                    |On 26 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between
                                guanhao chen
                            (NO ANONYMITY ORDER)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                   ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (eco), BEIJING
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Rutherford, instructed by Line & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. At the end of the hearing I informed both parties that I did  not  find
    legal error in First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  A  W  Khan's  decision  and
    reasons statement  that  was  promulgated  on  29  September  2015.   I
    reserved my reasons, which I now give.

 2. The appellant was born on 26 October 1999 and is a  citizen  of  China.
    On 7 October 2013,  the  ECO  refused  to  grant  the  appellant  entry
    clearance  because  he  was  not  satisfied  the  appellant   met   the
    requirements of paragraph 297 of the immigration rules.  The  appellant
    has applied to join his father who was and is settled in the UK but the
    ECO  was  not  satisfied  that  the   appellant's   father   had   sole
    responsibility for his  upbringing  or  that  there  were  serious  and
    compelling family or other considerations which  made  the  appellant's
    exclusion undesirable.  In other words, the ECO was not satisfied  that
    paragraphs 297(i)(e) or (f) were met.

 3. In his decision and reasons statement, Judge Khan  concluded  that  the
    evidence failed to show that at the date of decision it was more likely
    than not that the appellant's father had sole  responsibility  for  his
    upbringing or that there were serious and completing factors that  made
    his  exclusion  undesirable.   Judge  Khan  set  out  his  reasons   in
    paragraphs 12(a) to (h) of his decision and reasons statement.

 4. Five grounds of appeal are mounted (the grounds having been settled  by
    Mr Adam Pipe of Counsel on 12 December 2014).  They seek  to  challenge
    the findings made by Judge Khan in  paragraphs  12(a)  to  (f)  of  his
    decision and reasons statement.  As the grounds are a matter of record,
    there is no need to rehearse them in detail.  In  summary,  they  argue
    that Judge Khan misdirected himself, failed to give  adequate  reasons,
    made contradictory findings and failed to consider material evidence.

 5. Ms Rutherford relied on all the grounds except the last, conceding that
    it was not possible to sustain an argument that Judge Khan  had  failed
    to consider material  evidence  in  paragraph  12(f)  of  his  decision
    because it was clear from  his  findings  that  he  had  accepted  that
    Chinese law gave the appellant's  mother  visitation  rights  upon  her
    divorce.   Ms  Rutherford  highlighted  the  following  from  the  four
    remaining grounds.  Judge Khan had  failed  to  deal  fairly  with  the
    documentary evidence, drawing inferences from what  the  documents  did
    not say rather than what they contained.  As such, he failed to take  a
    holistic approach to the evidence.  She  submitted  that  at  paragraph
    12(f) Judge Khan said that there was no evidence from  the  appellant's
    mother that she had abandoned the  appellant,  which  contradicted  his
    finding at paragraph 12(b) where he had recorded that  the  appellant's
    mother had provided a letter to this effect.

 6. Mr Mills responded to each ground.  He submitted that when the findings
    in paragraph 12 were read as a whole, they covered all the issues  that
    had to be determined and the reasoning as a  whole  was  adequate.   It
    could not be overlooked that just two years before the appeal was heard
    in the First-tier Tribunal, the appellant had applied with  his  mother
    for  entry  clearance  to  join  his  father,  her  husband.   In  such
    circumstances, it was not plausible that  the  appellant's  mother  had
    abrogated  all  responsibility  for  him.   The   evidence   from   the
    appellant's mother and aunt was very limited and it  was  open  to  the
    judge in these circumstances to find that  it  was  not  sufficient  to
    discharge the burden of proof.

 7. Mr Mills submitted that it was open to Judge Khan to have regard to the
    weakness of the documents.  Judge Khan's observations  about  what  was
    not contained in the documents were merely his expression  of  how  the
    documents  were  deficient.   As   to   the   allegation   that   there
    contradictory findings about whether the mother provided  any  evidence
    about her abandonment of the appellant, this was a  semantic  argument.
    It was clear that Judge Khan was aware of the mother's letter  and  had
    found it wanting.  His comments in paragraph  12(f)  had  to  be  read,
    therefore, to meant there was no other evidence.

 8. Having heard the submissions and having examined Judge Khan's  decision
    and reasons statement and the evidence that was presented in the appeal
    he heard, I am not satisfied that the grounds of  appeal  identify  any
    legal error.  In paragraphs 1 to 11, Judge Khan clearly  sets  out  the
    evidence presented in the  appeal  together  with  the  cases  for  and
    against  the  appellant.   In  those  paragraphs  he  reminds   himself
    correctly of the relevant law and legal tests  that  applied.   Reading
    paragraphs 12 to 15 as a whole, it is evident that Judge  Khan  engaged
    with all the evidence and arguments to come to a reasoned decision.

 9. The grounds appear to take exception to Judge Khan's turns of phrase in
    paragraph 12(a) and  (b).   In  the  former  he  says,  "It  is  simply
    unbelievable to claim that [the appellant's mother] did  not  want  the
    burden of looking after her son because she did  not  want  her  future
    marriage prospects to be affected."  In the  latter,  he  said,  "I  am
    simply not prepared to accept this statement as it stands on  its  own.
    No  reason  was  given  as  to  why  she  did  not  wish  to  have  any
    responsibility over her son and there  is  no  evidence  that  her  ex-
    husband  was  responsible  for  his  maintenance   and   welfare."    I
    acknowledge that the turns of phrase could indicate that Judge Khan was
    merely stating his opinion of the evidence rather  than  analysing  it.
    But such a conclusion is only possible if these phrases are  taken  out
    of context.  In context each  is  supported  by  clear  reasoning;  the
    evidence relied upon was not enough to discharge the  burden  of  proof
    that lay  on  the  appellant.   Judge  Khan  was  presented  with  bald
    statements which he was entitled to give minimal weight given the known
    history of the family from the earlier entry clearance application.

10. With regard to the third ground, I do not find that the  appellant  has
    shown that Judge Khan acted unfairly in drawing  inferences  from  what
    the documents from the appellant's mother and aunt did not contain.  In
    so doing, Judge Khan was merely giving reasons as to why he  found  the
    documents to be weak evidence.  He  was  entitled  -  in  fact  he  was
    required - to make findings as to the strength  of  the  evidence.   To
    show that the weight given to the documents was not correct in law, the
    appellant would have to argue that the Judge's  reasons  were  perverse
    and because the submissions come nowhere near that level I  find  there
    is no legal error.

11. As to the allegation of contradictory findings, I am satisfied that  by
    the time Judge Khan came to his findings  at  paragraph  12(f)  he  had
    already indicated that he rejected  the  letter  from  the  appellant's
    mother.  If that is kept in mind, then he was right to say  he  had  no
    evidence.  It may be that Judge Khan  could  have  written  this  in  a
    different way but I find that the argument mounted by the appellant  is
    one of semantics and not one that identifies a legal error.

12. As the grounds are not made out, I conclude there is no legal error  in
    Judge Khan's decision and it stands.

Decision

The decision and reasons statement of Judge A W  Khan  does  not  contain  a
legal error and stands.


                               Signed   Date


                               Judge McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
