
[pic]
S-T

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/20426/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 28 September 2015                 |On 9 October 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

                         DHULHANNISA SHASHATH BASHA
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                    THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, CHENNAI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Richardson, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant is a citizen of India, born on 23  February  1940.  She
       has appealed with the permission of  the  Upper  Tribunal  against  a
       decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Caswell, promulgated  on
       26 November 2014, dismissing her appeal against  a  decision  of  the
       respondent, made on 21 August  2013,  refusing  to  issue  her  entry
       clearance to enable her to join her adult daughter,  Ms  Fathimunnisa
       Nazeer Ahamed ("the sponsor"), in the UK.

    2.  The  respondent  refused  the  application  by  reference   to   the
       Immigration Rules for adult dependents relatives, found  in  Appendix
       FM[1]. The appellant is a widow and lives alone in India. She suffers
       from a number of health problems. The respondent  was  not  satisfied
       that she required, due to  age,  illness  or  disability,  long  term
       personal care to perform everyday tasks. (E-ECDR.2.4).  Nor  had  she
       shown that care could not be provided in India by employing help  (E-
       ECDR.2.5). The appellants submitted grounds  of  appeal  arguing  the
       rules were met.

    3. The appellant was represented by a  solicitor  at  the  hearing.  The
       judge heard evidence from the sponsor and her husband and  considered
       the documentary evidence,  including  two  letters  from  the  doctor
       treating the appellant in India, Dr P Rammohan. These  were  dated  7
       August 2013 and 25 October  2014  respectively.  The  judge  directed
       herself to consider the circumstances appertaining  at  the  date  of
       decision and  held  as  follows.  At  the  date  of  application  the
       appellant was suffering  from  hypertension  and  dyslipidemia,  both
       controlled by medication, and her heart and kidneys were  functioning
       normally. She was also suffering from depression and had  "withdrawal
       symptoms".  The  judge  accepted  also  that   appellant   also   had
       osteoporosis and pain in her knee. She was getting forgetful. By  the
       date of hearing the appellant's physical condition was  deteriorating
       and her emotional stress was more concerning. She was  being  treated
       for depression and  was  showing  acute  symptoms  of  dementia.  The
       appellant had had the services of a maid since 2009.

    4. The judge found it had not been shown  that  the  appellant  required
       long term personal care to perform everyday tasks as at the  date  of
       decision. Furthermore, even if such care were required, the appellant
       had not shown it was not available in  India.  The  maid  washes  the
       appellant's clothes, cooks and cleans the  house  but  that  was  not
       personal care, as opposed to general household help.

    5. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Storey  to
       argue the following points:  (1) that the judge may  have  failed  to
       take account of the actual nature of the care  provided  and  whether
       this amounted to personal care for the purposes  of  the  rules;  (2)
       that there may have been procedural unfairness in that the judge make
       findings in relation to matters which were not raised in  the  notice
       of decision, namely whether the financial requirements of  the  rules
       were met.

    6. The respondent filed a response opposing the appeal. This argued  the
       judge's findings were sustainable.

    7. I heard submissions from the representatives as to whether the  judge
       made a material error of law in her decision.  I  have  recorded  the
       submissions in full in my record of the proceedings and  I  only  set
       out a summary here.

    8. Mr Richardson accepted that the judge was entitled  to  look  at  the
       earlier medical letter and that she had  to  disregard  post-decision
       deterioration. However, he argued the rule,  which  referred  to  the
       need for long term care, was necessarily  forward-looking.  He  noted
       the judge had fully set out the evidence but argued she had not given
       adequate reasons for rejecting it.

    9. Mr Richardson also relied on the fact  the  Upper  Tribunal  had  not
       refused permission to appeal any of the grounds seeking permission to
       appeal and he therefore argued that the judge's decision on article 8
       was  also  erroneous.  The  judge  had  wrongly  applied  a  test  of
       exceptional circumstances, which was only  applicable  in  precarious
       family life cases (see SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ  387).  Whilst  the
       judge had made a proportionality assessment in  any  case,  this  was
       inevitably tainted by  her  perception  that  there  was  a  test  of
       exceptionality. In conducting that assessment the judge had failed to
       consider whether family life could be continued in India. Finally, he
       argued the judge had made comments about the question of whether  the
       financial requirements of the rules were met,  without  these  having
       been  in  issue.  This  must  have   affected   her   proportionality
       assessment.

   10. Mr Melvin relied on the rule 24 response. He likened the challenge to
       the judge's findings as mere  disagreement  with  the  decision.  The
       judge had made reasoned findings based on the evidence. The judge had
       also made an adequate assessment of article 8. The judge had not made
       findings about the financial requirements.

   11. I reserved my decision as to whether the judge made a material  error
       of law such that her decision has to be set aside.

   12. I find the judge made a careful assessment of the available  evidence
       and, in  particular,  was  careful  to  limit  her  findings  to  the
       circumstances appertaining at the date of decision. She was right  to
       rely primarily on the first medical letter. The fact the rule  refers
       to the need for long term care does not alter the fact that the focus
       of enquiry is the date of decision. The applicant must show  she  has
       personal care needs which, as at the date of decision, are likely  to
       endure. It does not mean judges must build  in  to  their  assessment
       recognition that the applicant's condition will deteriorate. The rule
       is plainly intended to rule out reliance on short  term  disablement,
       such as might occur after an accident or surgery.

   13. That said, I agree the judge erred by apparently limiting  the  scope
       of personal care so as to exclude help  with  washing,  dressing  and
       cooking. The judge appears to have accepted  the  appellant  received
       help with such matters from a maid. They are precisely  the  examples
       given of personal care in the IDIs. I find the judge erred by finding
       the  appellant  had  failed  to  show  she  required  personal  care.
       Additionally, I agree with Mr Richardson that  the  judge  failed  to
       give any reasons for rejecting the  evidence  that  she  recorded  in
       paragraphs 3 and 4 of her decision. It would have been  open  to  the
       judge to make a negative finding on this point and she does refer  to
       the absence of any confirmation from the doctor  that  the  appellant
       needed "physical support". However, no reasons are given for  finding
       the  sponsor's  evidence  about  her  mother's  care  needs  was  not
       accurate.

   14. That said, any such error would not have been  material  because  the
       contemporaneous medical evidence, that is the first  medical  letter,
       did not confirm the appellant could not perform  everyday  tasks,  as
       required by paragraph 34 of Appendix FM-SE. The mandatory requirement
       for specified evidence was not met.

   15. Moreover, I do not agree with Mr Richardson that the judge's findings
       with respect to the availability of the required  level  of  care  in
       India were unreasoned and  therefore  erroneous.  The  personal  care
       required by the appellant was of a kind which could be provided by  a
       maid, as opposed to a trained nurse. The judge  heard  evidence  that
       such care was provided by a nurse, albeit she  could  be  unreliable.
       The judge took  careful  note  of  the  evidence  on  this  point  at
       paragraphs 16 to 19. The reasons Mr Richardson suggested were  absent
       from the judge's consideration are found at paragraphs 21 and 22. The
       judge reasoned that, if the current provision was  not  adequate,  it
       was reasonable to expect to see the sponsor taking steps to meet  the
       shortfall, which had not been done. The appellant had been  receiving
       care from the same maid for five years and was therefore more  likely
       than not to be satisfied.  The judge was entitled  to  come  to  this
       conclusion on the evidence.

   16. Even if I were wrong about that, the  error  would  not  be  material
       because the requirements of paragraph 35 of Appendix FM-SE, that  the
       evidence of the unavailability of the required level of  care  should
       come from a professional source, were  not  met  in  any  event.  The
       contemporaneous  medical  evidence  was  silent  on  the  point.  The
       application did not meet the mandatory evidential requirements of the
       rules and the appeal was therefore bound to be dismissed.

   17. The judge's decision on article 8 was that  there  were  no  arguably
       good grounds for saying there  were  compelling  circumstances  which
       were not fully recognised under the rules  (see  paragraph  24).   Mr
       Richardson argued there was a misdirection of law because  the  judge
       had been seeking exceptional circumstances where none were  required.
       I assume he derived that view from the sentence in  paragraph  24  in
       which the judge says the appellant's position does not appear  to  be
       exceptional in any way. The argument would be that she had  conflated
       the test of compelling circumstances with a higher one of exceptional
       circumstances.

   18. In SS (Congo) the Court considered the correct threshold for engaging
       article 8 outside the rules.  In  general,  compelling  circumstances
       would need  to  be  identified,  which  was  lower  than  a  test  of
       exceptional circumstances. However,  it  was  nonetheless  a  "fairly
       demanding test", reflecting the reasonable relationship  between  the
       rules and the proper outcome of the  application  of  article  8.  In
       cases in which family life  was  begun  under  conditions  of  "known
       precariousness" (because family life could not be resumed in  the  UK
       unless and until the rules were met), it is appropriate  to  apply  a
       similar test to exceptional circumstances (see paragraphs 37 and 67).



   19. I see no misdirection of law in paragraph 24 of the judge's decision.
       SS (Congo) had not been handed down when the judge made her decision,
       although the judgment can be viewed as revealing what the law  always
       should have been. The judge clearly  directed  herself  in  terms  of
       compelling  circumstances  and  the  following  sentence   does   not
       necessarily mean she was applying too high a test. It is plain  that,
       having failed to show she met the very demanding  test  contained  in
       Appendix FM, it was difficult for the appellant to demonstrate  there
       were compelling circumstances not covered by the correct  application
       of the rules. The sponsor had chosen to live in the UK far  from  the
       appellant and therefore the  family  life  between  them  could  only
       resume if the entry clearance rules  were  met.  If  there  had  been
       deterioration in the appellant's health and therefore an increase  in
       her care needs since the decision, she had the option of  re-applying
       for entry clearance and providing up  to  date  evidence.  The  judge
       directed herself correctly and was entitled to reach  the  conclusion
       that there was no requirement  to  consider  article  8  outside  the
       rules. That was her primary finding. Any errors in the assessment  of
       article 8 outside the rules could not therefore be  material  to  the
       outcome of the appeal.

   20. As far as the judge's comments  in  paragraph  29  on  the  financial
       requirements are concerned, there is a danger that the judge could be
       perceived as making adverse findings on  points  not  raised  by  the
       respondent without giving the appellant the  opportunity  to  present
       evidence in rebuttal. However, in my judgment, the judge  did  enough
       in paragraph 30 to make it  clear  she  was  not  influenced  by  the
       matters she noted in relation to finances when making her decision.

   21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  a  material
       error of law and shall stand. The appellant's  appeal  is  dismissed.



NOTICE OF DECISION

       The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not make a material error of
       law and her decision dismissing the appeal shall stand.




                               Signed   Date 29 September 2015


                               Judge Froom,
                               Sitting as a Deputy Judge of the Upper
                               Tribunal
-----------------------
      [1] "E-ECDR.2.4. The applicant or, if the applicant and their  partner
      are the sponsor's parents or grandparents,  the  applicant's  partner,
      must as a result of  age,  illness  or  disability  require  long-term
      personal care to perform everyday tasks.

      E-ECDR.2.5. The applicant or, if the applicant and their  partner  are
      the sponsor's parents or grandparents, the applicant's  partner,  must
      be unable, even with the practical and financial help of the  sponsor,
      to obtain the required level of care in the  country  where  they  are
      living, because-

           (a) it is not available and there is no person in  that  country
           who can reasonably provide it; or

           (b) it is not affordable."



