
 [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
OA/20116/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On 9 October 2014                        |On 9 October 2014         |
|                                         |                          |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between


                              Mr LAWRENCE OBASI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M A Hay, Counsel
      (instructed by Samuel Louis Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer







                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
           Tribunal  Judge  Nicholson  on  12  August  2014   against   the
           determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Oliver  who  had
           dismissed the Appellant's appeal  against  the  refusal  of  his
           application for entry clearance as a spouse in  a  determination
           promulgated on 11 July 2014.


      2.    The Appellant is a national of Nigeria,  born  on  10  September
           1979.   His history is involved.  It is set out fully at [3]  to
           [9] of Judge Oliver's determination so need no be repeated here.
            The Appellant had most recently  applied  for  entry  clearance
           under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules as the husband of Mrs
           Kathleen Lewis ("Mrs Lewis"), a British Citizen, on 2 July 2013.
            The Entry Clearance Officer had doubted the subsistence of  the
           marriage  and  decided  that  the   income   and   accommodation
           requirements had not been met.


      3.    Permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  as  sought  by  the
           Secretary  of  State  was  granted  because  it  was  considered
           arguable that the judge had erred in his credibility  assessment
           by referring to section 8 of Asylum and  Immigration  (Treatment
           of Claimants, etc) Act 2004 at [26] of his  determination,  when
           it was an entry clearance appeal, not  an  asylum  appeal.   The
           other grounds raised by the Appellant were  considered  to  have
           little merit.


      4.    A rule 24 notice in letter form was served by the  Secretary  of
           State, indicating that the onwards appeal was opposed.


      5.    Directions were made by the Upper Tribunal in standard form.  It
           was directed that the appeal would be reheard immediately in the
           event that a material error of law was found.




      Submissions - error of law


      6.    Mr Hay for the Appellant relied on the grounds and the grant  of
           permission to appeal.  The credibility assessment  made  by  the
           judge was erroneous.  The judge had concentrated  on  background
           matters such as the past unfounded asylum claims made in Austria
           and in the United Kingdom, rather than the marital relationship.
            The judge had given too much weight to irrelevant matters.   As
           to income, the judge had wrongly excluded post decision evidence
           such as the form P60.  Nor had the judge  adequately  considered
           the accommodation issue, providing sparse  reasons  for  finding
           that local authority approval was needed for the husband to join
           the Appellant in her flat.   The  determination  should  be  set
           aside and the decision remade, allowing the appeal.


      7.    Mr Bramble indicated that he wished to add nothing to  the  rule
           24  notice.   There  was  no  material  error  of  law  in   the
           determination.




      The no error of law finding


      8.     The  tribunal  gave  its  decision  at  the  hearing  that  the
           Appellant's appeal would be dismissed and briefly explained  its
           reasons and stated that detailed reasons would  be  given  which
           now follow.


      9.    There was nothing of substance in any of the grounds of  appeal.
           On a fair reading of [26]  of  the  determination,  the  judge's
           reference to section 8 of Asylum and Immigration  (Treatment  of
           Claimants, etc) Act 2004  was  at  least  partly  correct.   The
           context shows that judge was there referring to the  Appellant's
           unfounded asylum application in the United Kingdom, made after a
           similarly unfounded application in Austria.  Section 8 obviously
           did not apply to the Appellant's intention to  live  permanently
           with his wife, but that was a minor  and  peripheral  slip.   At
           [25] the judge had directed himself  to  the  relevant  law,  GA
           ("subsisting" marriage Ghana* [2006] UKAIT 00046, which he  then
           applied.  He gave detailed reasons at [25] for finding that  the
           marriage  was  not  subsisting,  which  included  the  lack   of
           attention which had been given to  the  assembly  of  elementary
           supporting evidence for the entry clearance application, such as
           providing a letter of consent from the Appellant's wife's  local
           authority landlord to the husband's occupation.  That point  had
           been taken by the Entry Clearance Officer, so  it  was  for  the
           Appellant  to  address  it,  and  also  required   the   judges'
           attention.  It was not a matter which was open to some  form  of
           judicial  notice  or  inference,  since  practice  varies   from
           authority to authority.  The judge thus gave sufficient  reasons
           for his findings as to accommodation.


      10.   The terms of Appendix FM-SE to which the judge referred at  [27]
           required him to disregard the specified documents, such  as  the
           sponsor's P60, which as the judge recorded, were  produced  only
           at the  hearing.   That  was  too  late.   The  reason  why  the
           specified documents have to be provided with the entry clearance
           application is to  enable  them  to  be  checked  by  the  Entry
           Clearance  Officer.    The  failure  to  provide  the  specified
           documents with the entry clearance  application  was  in  itself
           fatal to the appeal.


      11.   The judge's consideration of Article 8 ECHR was also challenged,
           albeit weakly, in the grounds of appeal.  The judge's Article  8
           ECHR findings at [27] were inevitable and were adequate.


      12.   Accordingly the tribunal finds that the  determination  contains
           no material error of law.  The Appellant's appeal to  the  Upper
           Tribunal is dismissed.


      DECISION


      The making of the previous decision did not involve the making  of  an
error on a point of law.  The original determination stands unchanged.

      Signed                                 Dated


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell




