
[pic]

UPPER TRIBUNAL


IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER    Appeal No. OA/20568/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Bennett House              |Decision Promulgated                  |
|On: 20th March 2015                  |On: 13th April 2015                   |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury


                                   Between

                          Mr Fortune Amel Moumpossa
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Markus, of counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Johnstone, a Home Office Presenting Officer



              DECISION AND REASONS FOR FINDING NO ERROR OF LAW


Introduction

 1. In this appeal  I  will  refer  to  the  parties  throughout  by  their
    designations in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (FTT)  notwithstanding  the
    reversal of their roles in this Tribunal.

 2. The present appeal is against  the  decision  of  Judge  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Smith (the Immigration Judge). In a determination  promulgated
    on 11th  July  2014  the  Immigration  Judge  decided  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision  to  refuse  entry
    clearance to the appellant to join his father (the sponsor) in the  UK.
    On  18th  September  2014  Immigration  Judge  Warren  Grant  gave  the
    appellant permission to appeal that decision because he thought  it  at
    least arguable that  the  Immigration  Judge  mistakenly  drew  adverse
    inferences from the fact that the witness Mr Juslain Bilunga  had  made
    late changes  to  his  witness  statement  and  had  mistakenly,  as  a
    consequence, gone on to  make  adverse  findings  about  the  sponsor's
    credibility also. The respondent filed  a  rule  24  response  on  30th
    September 2014 asking the Upper Tribunal to uphold the decision of  the
    FTT stating that there was  a  lack  of  evidence  to  demonstrate  the
    sponsor's alleged sole responsibility for his son.  In  particular  the
    Immigration Judge had rightly  concluded  that  there  was  a  lack  of
    evidence from Western Union to back up  certain  alleged  payments.  It
    should have been obvious to the appellant and  the  sponsor  that  such
    documentation would have been needed given the basis of the refusal.

Background

 3. The appellant, who was born on 16th February 1999, is from  the  Congo.
    On 2nd October 2013 he applied under paragraph 297 of  the  Immigration
    Rules for settlement to  join  his  father,  Fortune  Venant  Moumpossa
    (FVM), the sponsor, who is a British citizen. The sponsor was  said  to
    have left the Congo on 10th January 2000 and migrated to  the  UK.  The
    appellant stated on his application for entry clearance that he had not
    seen his mother since he was 2 years old. He claimed to have lived with
    his paternal grandmother since then.

 4. The ECO was not satisfied that the documents supplied were adequate.  A
    purported birth certificate was dismissed having  regard  to  the  ease
    with which such documents could be obtained from  Congo.  The  ECO  was
    therefore not satisfied that the appellant was related  as  claimed  to
    the sponsor. Nor did the ECO accept that the appellant had  ever  lived
    as part of the sponsor's  family  unit.  As  far  as  the  evidence  of
    financial responsibility on the part of the sponsor was concerned,  the
    ECO was not satisfied that the sponsor had financial responsibility for
    the appellant. 2 letters were  submitted  and  a  further  letter  from
    Justin Bikounga that stated that money was regularly transferred to the
    appellant. The ECO  was  not  satisfied  that  evidence  submitted  was
    satisfactory. It did not constitute independent verifiable evidence.  A
    subsequent review  by  the  ECM  did  not  bring  about  any  different
    conclusion.

The hearing

 5. At the hearing I heard submissions by both representatives  which  were
    noted in the file. A preliminary point arose as to two  faxes  sent  to
    the Tribunal on 18th March 2015 and 20th March 2015. Mr Markus  pointed
    out that the reason for  this  late  evidence  was  to  deal  with  the
    respondent's rule 24 response dated 30th September  2014.  Those  faxes
    contained second witness statement from Mr Bikunga under  para.  15(2A)
    of the 2008 rules and  the contents of  Ms  Mair's  notebook  from  the
    hearing before the FTT on 27th June 2014 together with a short  witness
    statement from her. I will deal with the relevance of those  additional
    documents later but they are principally aimed  at  addressing  alleged
    shortcomings in the approach of the FTT.

 6. Mr Markus pursued all four grounds of appeal but  later  accepted  that
    some were more powerful than others. The  appeal  before  the  FTT  was
    under paragraph 297 of the  Immigration  Rules  which  deals  with  the
    requirements that must be met by a person seeking settlement of a child
    of a parent, parents or relatives present and settled or being admitted
    for settlement in the UK where that parent, parents or relatives has or
    have sole responsibility for the child in question. Mr Markus relied on
    the cases of Nmaju [2001] INLR 26 and  TD  [2006]  UKIAT  00049.  Those
    cases established, he said, that there was no minimum  period  of  sole
    responsibility required in order to satisfy rule 297. It was  a  matter
    of fact in each case and it would be an error of law to find  that  the
    child did not require entry into the UK. Mr Markus also submitted  that
    the correct date for determining whether  the  evidence  satisfied  the
    requirements of the rule was the date of the application.  However,  in
    fact, the correct date is the date of the decision pursuant to  section
    85A (2) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as this was
    an application for entry clearance.  He said by reference to  paragraph
    50 in TD that the "touchstone" of "sole responsibility"  would  be  the
    important decisions in relation to the child  such  as  taking  him  to
    school, putting him to bed and ensuring he eats on time. The fact  that
    these tasks rest with someone abroad is  not  conclusive  of  the  sole
    responsibility test not being  met.  However,  if  the  UK  parent  has
    allowed some of the decisions about the child's upbringing to be shared
    this may indicate joint responsibility. Others in a non-parenting  role
    may also be involved in the child's upbringing.

 7. Paragraph 18 of the determination was criticised because it was said by
    Mr Markus to focus on a period well before the  application.  Paragraph
    19 went onto deal with the situation ten years  before  and  subsequent
    paragraphs, in his submission, displayed a similar error  of  approach.
    Paragraph 24 of the determination was criticised for  not  focusing  on
    the past level of financial support rather than  the  position  at  the
    date of the application (the date Mr Markus claimed  was  the  relevant
    one). Mr Markus then went on to deal with the specific grounds :

      1) He said  there  were  flawed  findings  in  relation  to  financial
         support. His colleague (Miss Mair) had met Mr  Juslain  Bikunga  at
         court on 27th June 2014. He had indicated to her that his statement
         was materially inaccurate  in  relation  to  the  manner  in  which
         payments had been made by the sponsor for the benefit of his child.
         Apparently, he had mistakenly referred to bank  transfers  when  he
         intended to refer to payments being made by the  sponsor  in  cash.
         Although this was not  before  the  FTT  it  was  relevant  now  to
         consider this evidence. The  assertion  that  the  Juslain  Bikunga
         converts money into goods as a means of transferring money from the
         sponsor to the benefit of the appellant appears  not  to  be  dealt
         with in the witness statements or in the oral evidence  before  the
         FTT but it was a concern of the Immigration Judge.

      2) There was also a request to adduce a late witness statement from Mr
         Bikunga under paragraph 15 (2)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Procedure
         Rules.  According to his statement Mr Bikunga  (also  known  as  Mr
         Juslain) did not  pick  up  on  the  discrepancy  in  this  witness
         statement until he arrived at the hearing and  met  Ms  Mair.   The
         statement, supported by a statement of  truth,  confirms  that  the
         sponsor gave him cash to  "use  when  needed".  It  seems  that  Mr
         Bikunga's mother forwards the money onto the appellant's mother  in
         Congo. Mr Bikunga lives in the UK. He says that he did not need  to
         send money to his own mother in Congo because  she  had  sufficient
         income of her own.

      3) Next Mr Markus criticised the Immigration Judge for  attaching  too
         much weight to the manner in which money was  transferred  and  not
         enough to the fact that money was transferred. He  maintained  that
         the way that money  had been transferred was to  send  goods  which
         had value. Western Union transfers, he said, were expensive and the
         sponsor did not wish to expend money unnecessarily.

      4) The Immigration Judge was criticised  for,  effectively,  rejecting
         all the documents.

      5) The Immigration Judge was said to have reached  an  inaccurate  and
         unfair view of the lack of contact  between  the  sponsor  and  the
         appellant. There was  an  adequate  explanation  in  the  sponsor's
         witness statement, it was submitted.

      6) There was a failure to consider the child's best interests. In this
         context I was referred to Moayed [2013] UKUT 00197 (IAC).  In  that
         case the Upper Tribunal explained the duty on the tribunal  dealing
         with a case in which the welfare of a child is involved. The  seven
         years from aged four are likely to be important to a child  whereas
         short  periods  of  residence  are  unlikely  to   give   rise   to
         considerations about private life.  The Upper  Tribunal  would  not
         interfere with decisions which were only marginally wrong. However,
         Mr Markus argued that the Immigration Judge had not considered  the
         rights of the child appellant adequately  and  there  had  been  an
         interference with the rights of the child both under section 55  of
         the 2009 Act and article 8 of them ECHR.

 8. In her final submissions Ms Johnstone said the  findings  were  neither
    perverse nor irrational and  should  not  be  lightly  set  aside.  The
    Immigration Judge had made sufficiently  robust  findings  on  the  key
    points for the determination to stand.  The Upper  Tribunal  should  be
    reluctant to interfere with the case  which  the  FTT  decided  on  the
    evidence presented to it, and the Upper Tribunal should  not  set-aside
    its decision.

 9. Mr Markus submitted that the decision of the FTT was wrong in principle
    and on the facts and that the grounds on which the decision  was  based
    were, essentially, undisputed. The grounds  on  which  the  Immigration
    Judge's  decision  was  reached  were   unsatisfactory   in   all   the
    circumstances.

Conclusions

10. It is clear from paragraph  46  of  TD  (quoted  by  the  appellant  at
    paragraph 4 of his skeleton argument before the FTT) that for  a  claim
    that that the UK parent  had  "sole  responsibility"  for  a  child  to
    succeed the foreign parent had  to  be  shown  to  have  abdicated  any
    responsibility for the child so as to have become "totally  uninvolved"
    in the child's upbringing. The situation, if established, was therefore
    an exceptional and, one might say, unusual one.

11. As Mr Markus submitted, there appears to be no  minimum  period  during
    which the  foreign parent has abdicated responsibility  for  his  child
    but I do not find any prohibition in the authorities on looking at  the
    whole history of the matter in determining whether  or  not  the  "sole
    responsibility" test is  met.  Indeed  Schiemann  LJ  pointed  out  (at
    paragraph 24 in Nmaju) that "time may often be a relevant factor".   As
    the UT pointed out in TD the function of paragraph 297 (i)  (e)  is  to
    deal with the situation where there is a parent in the UK and a  parent
    abroad. The term "sole responsibility" acts as a control  mechanism  in
    preventing applications which are  designed  to  remove  children  from
    their parents. Such a step can only be  justified  in  the  exceptional
    case of sole responsibility vesting with the UK parent. This  can  only
    be justified where it is necessary and in their best interests.

12. Having regard to section 85A (2) of the 2002 Act the correct  date  for
    determining this issue is the date of the decision because this was  an
    entry clearance application,  but there appears to be no discussion  of
    that issue in the authorities. Mr Markus only referred  in  passing  to
    section 85A but did not cite any authority to  support  his  submission
    that the date of the application was the correct date. The  application
    here was on 2nd October 2013 and the refusal was 22nd October 2013 (see
    ECM's review). Therefore it  appears  to  make  no  difference  to  the
    outcome in any event.

13. The Judge was concerned that much of the evidence of financial  support
    between sponsor and appellant only began in 2012 (See paragraph  18  of
    his determination). That was essentially a credibility point,  however.
    The judge drew attention to the lack of Western Union  transfers  prior
    to 2012. Given that the financial support was said  to  have  continued
    for 12 years I do not see any reason why the judge should not  consider
    the absence of such documentation to  be  a  serious  deficiency  which
    adversely impacted on the credibility of the application.

14. The Immigration Judge also had regard to the lack  of  contact  between
    the sponsor and the appellant over many  years  (see  paragraph  21  et
    seq.). There appears to have been  contact  over  Skype  but  the  only
    regular contact was between February and July 2013, the decision  being
    on 22nd October 2013. The Immigration Judge took account  of  the  fact
    that the sponsor had only seen the appellant once in the 13 years prior
    to the application and these points seem highly relevant. These,  I  am
    satisfied, were also matters the judge was entitled to take account of.

15. On balance the Immigration Judge was entitled to reject the evidence of
    Mr Juslain, who appeared to provide  an  account  of  having  been  the
    conduit of money from the sponsor to the appellant by  converting  cash
    into goods. It was perhaps unfair of the Immigration Judge  to  dismiss
    Mr Juslain's attempt to put right a  defect  in  his  is  statement  so
    lightly. However, I am satisfied that the Immigration judge  adequately
    considered Mr  Juslain's account as part of his overall assessment  and
    was  entitled  to  reject  it  as  being    implausible   and   largely
    uncorroborated. I am not persuaded that the criteria for adducing fresh
    evidence before this tribunal is met nor am I satisfied  that  it  will
    make a material difference to the outcome.

16. There were some matters that the  Immigration  Judge  attached  greater
    weight to than other judges would have done and other matters he  could
    gave attached more weight to. However, the Immigration Judge's  overall
    conclusion that the appellant is not entitled to  entry  clearance  for
    settlement seems sound.  There  was  very  limited  evidence  that  the
    sponsor had sole responsibility for the  appellant  even  for  a  short
    period of time and this justified the conclusion the Immigration  Judge
    came to.

Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error on a
    point of law such that it has to be set aside and the decision  of  the
    FTT stands.

18. The Immigration Judge made no fee  award  or  anonymity  direction  and
    there is no challenge to those decisions in this Tribunal.



Signed:     Date: 2nd April 2015

W.E.Hanbury

