

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/20540/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre    |           Decision and Reasons       |
|                                         |Promulgated                           |
|On 18 August 2015                        |           On 04 September 2015       |
|                                         |                                      |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                         MUNEER KHALIL ABDULNOOR ALI
                       (anonymity order NOT CONTINUED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, CAIRO
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr O Shoker, SH & Co Solicitors Birmingham
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Preliminary



    The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction in relation to  the
    appellants because of the nature of the case.  There was no application
    to continue this direction or for me to make a  similar  order  in  the
    Upper Tribunal.  Given the facts and legal issues in this appeal, I  do
    not find any reason to make such an order of my own volition.

 1. At the end of the hearing, I told those present what I had decided.



Decisions

 2. First, I found a legal error in the way  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  C
    Lloyd assessed proportionality in relation to article 8  of  the  human
    rights convention in her determination  promulgated  on  2  July  2013.
    This was because it was unclear if Judge Lloyd had taken  all  relevant
    factors into consideration.  Most notably was her lack of reference  to
    the best interests of the appellant's British citizen children.

 3. Second, I found the error to be one that required me to set  aside  her
    decision on that matter because it was possible that  consideration  of
    the best interests of the children and  other  relevant  factors  might
    result in a different outcome.

 4. Third, after rehearing the appeal against the immigration  decision  of
    20 September 2012 refusing to grant the appellant  entry  clearance  to
    join his wife in the UK, I concluded that taking into account the  best
    interests of the children and all other relevant factors, including the
    statutory public interest considerations,  the  original  appeal  still
    fell to be dismissed.

 5. Although I announced my decisions at the end of the hearing, I was only
    able to give a brief indication of my reasons.  I now give  my  reasons
    in full for the decisions I have made.

Background information

 6. Before giving my full reasons, it is useful to set  out  the  available
    information about the appellant's family life.  None of  the  following
    facts is disputed, any previous dispute having been resolved  by  Judge
    Lloyd.

 7. The appellant applied  for  entry  clearance  on  29  June  2012.   His
    application was considered under paragraph 281 of the immigration rules
    and not under appendix FM to the rules because that was introduced only
    in  July  2012  and  transitional   provisions   applied   to   pending
    applications such as the appellant's.

 8. In his visa application  form  the  appellant  provided  the  following
    details.

 9. He married Risala Saleh Abdulla on 10 February 2006.  Although his wife
    was born in Yemen and grew up there,  she  is  a  British  citizen,  as
    confirmed by her passport which was issued on 16 September 2007.

10. The couple lived together in Yemen  from  when  they  married  until  4
    December 2010 when Mrs Abdulla came to the UK.  During that  time,  the
    couple had two children, Deyala (who was born on  15  March  2007)  and
    Khalil (who was born on 4  March  2009).   Both  children  are  British
    citizens and came to the UK with their mother on 16 December 2010.

11. In the UK, Mrs Abdulla and the children lived with her parents.  It was
    intended  that  the  appellant  would  join  his  family  in  the  same
    accommodation, which was  adequate  under  the  applicable  immigration
    rules.

12. The couple maintained contacted through  phone  calls.   The  appellant
    received financial support each month from his wife.

13. The appellant did not apply for entry clearance until his wife  started
    working and met the  "adequate  maintenance"  test  in  the  applicable
    immigration rules.  He also had to wait until his wife had saved enough
    to pay his visa fee.

14. The appellant was unable to meet the English  language  requirement  of
    the applicable immigration rules.

15. There was further evidence before Judge Lloyd, which  she  recorded  in
    her determination.

16. When coming to the UK, Mrs Abdulla was pregnant.   The  couple's  third
    child, Kaleem, was born in the UK on 22 January 2011.

17. Mrs Abdulla was unable to work whilst pregnant and only started work in
    April 2011, initially on a part-time basis but her job became full-time
    in April 2012.  Her income at the date of decision was adequate to meet
    the maintenance requirements.

18. Mrs Abdulla had not returned to Yemen because of  having  to  look  for
    work and because that country was no longer safe.

19. The FCO advice to British citizens living in Yemen, since  March  2011,
    has been to leave because of safety concerns.   Those  who  remain  are
    advised to minimise travel within the country  and  to  follow  various
    precautions.

Error of law finding

Submissions

20. Mr Shoker relied on the grounds of application for permission to  apply
    for judicial review, which are reproduced at pages 15  and  16  of  the
    appellant's latest bundle.  They focus on the alleged failure of  Judge
    Lloyd to assess the best interests of the children who are affected  by
    the refusal to grant their father entry clearance.

21. Mr Shoker acknowledged that there was no  challenge  to  Judge  Lloyd's
    findings that the appellant was unable to meet the immigration rules at
    the date of decision.  His arguments focused on paragraphs 37 and 38 of
    her determination.  Mr Shoker said that these were  inadequate  because
    the judge failed to deal with relevant issues, most  notably  the  best
    interests of the children.

22. Mr Shoker relied on the determination of Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    French  in  an  appeal  which  involved  the  husband  of  one  of  the
    appellant's  sister-in-law.   Judge  French  found  that  it  was   not
    proportionate to refuse to  admit  that  person  because  of  the  best
    interests of the sponsor and children.  Mr Shoker argued that the facts
    were almost identical with  this  case  and  therefore  Judge  French's
    decision should be followed.

23. Mr Mills reminded me that the judge had found that  the  appellant  did
    not meet the language requirements of the  immigration  rules  and  the
    Court of Appeal R (Bibi & Anor) v SSHD  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  322,  [2013]
    ImmAR  1007  had  confirmed  that  the  language  requirements  of  the
    immigration rules were  objectively  justified  and  therefore  it  was
    proportionate to require a person to meet them even if it meant keeping
    a family apart.

24. Mr Mills acknowledged that Judge Lloyd  had  not  considered  the  best
    interests of the children but even if this was a legal error  it  could
    not be material since the appellant had provided no evidence about  the
    best interests of his children.

25. As to  whether  it  would  be  appropriate  to  follow  Judge  French's
    decision, Mr Mills identified that the facts  were  not  identical  and
    that it was permissible for  different  judges  to  come  to  different
    conclusions even on similar facts.

Decision and reasons

26. There is no dispute that Judge Lloyd  was  correct  to  find  that  the
    appellant enjoyed family life with his wife and children.  At paragraph
    26 Judge Lloyd recorded her findings that the relationship between  the
    appellant and his wife was subsisting  because  they  were  in  regular
    contact and committed to each other and to their children.  Judge Lloyd
    found the evidence also showed the couple  intended  to  live  together
    permanently as husband and wife.

27. At paragraph 33, Judge Lloyd reminded herself  of  the  classic  Razgar
    approach to article 8.  In respect of the first two steps, Judge  Lloyd
    concluded that family life existed between the appellant, his wife  and
    their children but was not satisfied that the decision  refusing  entry
    clearance interfered with that family life since the  appellant's  wife
    and children had "chosen to separate in December 2010 when the  sponsor
    returned to the UK with the children."

28. At paragraphs 36 and 27, Judge Lloyd considered the alternative in case
    she was wrong in concluding there was no interference.  She  found  the
    immigration decision to be lawful  because  it  was  necessary  in  the
    interests of immigration control.

29. When assessing whether the  decision  was  proportionate,  Judge  Lloyd
    reminded herself that it was important  to  facilitate  family  reunion
    where possible and that she should consider no only the rights  of  the
    appellant but also those of his wife and children, recognising they are
    British citizens.  However, she concluded that in this case it was open
    to the family to resume family life together in Yemen as they had lived
    together there between 2006 and 2010.  The fact  the  English  language
    requirement was lawful meant this was a case where the need to maintain
    immigration control outweighed the personal choices of the family.

30. I am satisfied this reasoning is defective in two areas.

31. In paragraph 33, when deciding that  the  second  Razgar  step  is  not
    engaged, Judge Lloyd failed to have regard to  Mrs  Abdulla's  evidence
    that it was not safe in  Yemen.   Judge  Lloyd  had  recorded  this  at
    paragraph 13.  This was a factor that could only have raised  questions
    as to whether Mrs Abdulla's departure from Yemen in 2010 with  her  two
    oldest children was simply by choice or whether it was  a  response  to
    changing circumstances in that country.  Judge Lloyd  made  no  finding
    and therefore I can only consider her reasoning  to  be  inadequate  on
    this issue.

32. This  error  might  not  have  been  significant  if  Judge  Lloyd  had
    considered the issue when assessing proportionality  in  paragraph  38.
    Yet, even though Mrs Abdulla had given evidence about why she had  left
    Yemen and the expert evidence from  Dr  Helena  Wray  had  referred  to
    various travel advice, including from the FCO, at paragraph 16  of  her
    report,  Judge  Lloyd  made  no  findings  about  whether  that  advice
    prevented the family from resuming their life together in  Yemen.   The
    failure to make findings on relevant issues  is  itself  another  legal
    error, particularly in the  context  of  a  proportionality  assessment
    where the jurisprudence is clear in requiring a decision maker, even  a
    judicial one, to have regard to all relevant factors.

33. Before moving on to consider whether the errors  are  material,  it  is
    appropriate to discuss why  I  do  not  accept  Mr  Shoker's  arguments
    relating to Judge French's determination.  Not only was it  made  after
    Judge Lloyd made her decision and therefore she could not have given it
    any consideration at the date of hearing, I remind myself of article 11
    of the Senior President of Tribunal's  Practice  Directions  about  the
    citation of unreported determinations.  There has been  no  application
    under article 11 and this undermines Mr Shoker's argument.

34. Even if there had been an application under article 11,  I  would  have
    concluded that no inferences can be drawn from that determination.  Not
    only has the understanding of article 8 developed since it was written,
    I  am  aware  that  Judge  French's  conclusions  were  reached   after
    considering factors not present in this appeal.  The  sponsor  in  that
    appeal had health concerns which when added to the  other  factors  led
    him to find that the refusal of entry clearance was not  proportionate.
    In this appeal Mrs Abdulla has  not  presented  any  evidence  of  such
    additional factors.

35. But this does not change my finding that  Judge  Lloyd's  determination
    contains legal error.

Is the error material?

36. Mr Mills submitted that any error was not material because the evidence
    regarding why Mrs Abdulla and her  children  left  Yemen  and  had  not
    returned and regarding the  children's  best  interest  (including  the
    child born in the UK) was very weak.  Therefore, Judge Lloyd could have
    come to no other decision.

37. I did not need to hear from Mr Shoker on  this  point  because  for  Mr
    Mills's argument to be sustained it would require me to  make  findings
    on the evidence.  This is not a case where there was no  evidence.   It
    is a case where there was some evidence but no decision had  been  made
    on the quality of that evidence.  As further findings are necessary,  I
    can only assume that the error might  be  material  and  therefore  the
    errors I have identified require me to set aside Judge Lloyd's decision
    in relation to article 8.

Remaking the decision

38. Being aware of the very limited evidence presented  in  the  appeal,  I
    asked Mr Shoker and Mr Mills if they were ready to proceed.  They  both
    confirmed they were.

39. I checked with Mr Shoker that this  was  correct  because  I  had  very
    limited evidence in relation to article 8.  There  was  no  independent
    evidence regarding the best  interests  of  the  children.   Mr  Shoker
    indicated that he would be relying on the general principle that it was
    in the best interests of children to be brought up by both parents.  Mr
    Shoker reminded me that he would be relying on the  FCO  travel  advice
    which said that British citizens  should  leave  Yemen  and  that  this
    advice existed prior to the date of decision.  Mr Shoker did  not  seek
    to call Mrs Abdulla to give  evidence  even  though  she  attended  the
    hearing.

40. I heard submissions from Mr Mills and Mr Shoker in  turn.   It  is  not
    necessary to record them in detail as the content will become clear  in
    what I say below.  I add that in addition to the formal submissions,  I
    engaged both representatives in a detailed discussion about the  issues
    arising in this appeal.

Relevant legal provisions

41. As  indicated  above,  the  outcome  of  this  appeal  depends  on  the
    assessment of the family life rights of the  appellant,  his  wife  and
    their three children.  To decide the outcome I use the  classic  Razgar
    approach, which sets the following structured questions.

        (1)  Will the proposed removal be  an  interference  by  a  public
        authority with the exercise of the applicant's right to respect for
        his private or (as the case may be) family life?
        (2)  If so, will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such
        gravity as potentially to engage the operation of article 8?
        (3)  If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?
        (4)  If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic society
        in the  interests  of  national  security,  public  safety  or  the
        economic well-being of the country, for the prevention of  disorder
        or crime, for the protection  of  health  or  morals,  or  for  the
        protection of the rights and freedoms of others?
        (5)  If so, is such interference proportionate to  the  legitimate
        public end sought to be achieved?
42. I remind myself that I have to consider the situation at  the  date  of
    decision although I can take into consideration  later  evidence  which
    appertains to the situation at that date.  It is for the  appellant  to
    show that article 8(1) is engaged and therefore has the burden of proof
    in relation to the first two Razgar questions.  If he  discharges  that
    burden, then it is for the ECO to show that the immigration decision is
    lawful, necessary and proportionate.  The standard of  proof  does  not
    matter in this case because the facts have been  agreed,  but  where  a
    party has to prove any fact it  has  to  be  proven  to  a  balance  of
    probabilities.

The first four Razgar questions

43. I have heard no argument that Judge Lloyd erred  in  finding  that  the
    appellant, his wife and children are a family unit  and  I  adopt  that
    part of her assessment.  This means that the first Razgar step is found
    in the appellant's favour.

44. I find that the immigration decision prevents the  family  unit  living
    together in the UK and this is of  sufficient  gravity  to  potentially
    engage the operation of  article  8.   This  is  because  the  evidence
    suggests that at the date of decision it was not safe for  Mrs  Abdulla
    and the  children  to  live  in  Yemen  and  the  immigration  decision
    prevented the appellant joining them in the UK.  This  means  that  the
    second Razgar step is found in the appellant's favour.

45. Neither party has argued  that  the  interference  resulting  from  the
    immigration decision is not in accordance with the law.   The  European
    Court of Human Rights has routinely confirmed that it is for States  to
    control migration. Parliament has authorised the Secretary of State  to
    make immigration rules.  The immigration decision appealed against  has
    been upheld by Judge  Lloyd.   I  conclude  that  the  decision  is  in
    accordance with the law, and I move to the fourth Razgar question.

46. Since this appeal was previously determined, statute has changed and it
    is  necessary  for   me   to   consider   statutory   public   interest
    considerations  that  are  set  out  in  s.117B  of  the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, as  amended  by  the  Immigration  Act
    2014).  This is not an exhaustive list of factors that might have to be
    considered (see Forman  (ss  117A-C  considerations)  [2015]  UKUT  412
    (IAC)).  As it has  been  established  that  the  appellant  could  not
    succeed under the immigration rules at the date of decision, it  is  in
    the public interest that he should not be admitted in order to maintain
    effective immigration controls.  As the appellant is not facing removal
    or deportation, he  cannot  benefit  from  s.117B(6)  even  though  his
    children are British citizens in the UK.

47. In addition to these statutory provisions, I bear in mind the  judgment
    of the Court of Appeal in R (Bibi &  Anor)  v  SSHD  cited  above  that
    confirm that it is proportionate to  keep  a  family  apart  where  the
    English language requirements were not met at  the  date  of  decision,
    subject to their being some  other  compelling  factor.   I  also  take
    account of the more recent judgment, SSHD v SS  (Congo)  &  Ors  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 387, which highlights the importance of maintaining  effective
    immigration control even where it might result in a family being unable
    to live together in the UK.

48. I also remind myself that article 8 is not to  be  used  to  circumvent
    that control (see Patel & Ors v SSHD [2013] UKSC 72, [2014] ImmAR 456).



The fifth Razgar question

49. In light of these considerations, I  am  satisfied  that  the  proposed
    interference is necessary and that I need to move to  the  last  Razgar
    question.  In effect, the question  is  whether  there  are  compelling
    reasons why the appellant should be admitted  to  the  UK  despite  his
    failure to meet the immigration rules.

50. The appellant has proposed two such factors.  First, the best interests
    of his children require the family unit to be together so he can  share
    in their upbringing.  Secondly, it is not possible for the family  unit
    to be together in Yemen because of the current and past safety concerns
    in that country.

51. Before undertaking the necessary proportionality  exercise  I  need  to
    assess the facts relating to these two factors.

The best interests of the children

52. There is a well developed corpus of case law relating to the assessment
    of best interests of children in immigration cases.   I  summarise  the
    key provisions which emerge through the cases listed in  the  annex  to
    this decision and reasons statement.

53. When assessing the proportionality of an immigration decision, although
    the best interests of a child will be the  primary  consideration,  all
    other relevant factors must be balanced including the  public  interest
    in maintaining effective immigration controls. In  other  words,  other
    factors can outweigh what is found to be in a child's best interests.

54. When determining the best interests of a child, any factor which  might
    affect a child's wellbeing must be considered.  There is no  prescribed
    or exhaustive list of  what  factors  are  to  be  considered  but  the
    following factors can be drawn from the various authorities  listed  in
    the annex.

      . The child's identity (including nationality and ethnicity);
      . the ties the child has to a particular society and culture;
      . the ability of the child to adapt to life in another country;
      . the child's emotional needs;
      . the ability of the child to have direct contact with both parents;
      . the stability and continuity of the child's care arrangements;
      . the child's access to health, education and other services  helping
        their development;
      . provisions relating to the child's security and safeguarding; and
      . the impact any decision is likely to have on the child's future.

55. The various authorities also provide the following guidance.

56. All things being equal, it will be in the best interests of children to
    live with both their parents.  It is  generally  in  the  interests  of
    children  to  have  both  stability  and  continuity  of   social   and
    educational provision and the benefit of growing  up  in  the  cultural
    norms of the society to which they  belong.   In  addition,  a  British
    citizen child should not be deprived of the enjoyment  of  rights  that
    derive from that citizenship.

57. The child should be consulted about their wishes where  their  maturity
    permits.  If that is not possible, then the views of their parents  and
    others close to the child should be considered.

58. Although in some cases a judge may  have  to  explore  whether  further
    information about a child's best interests  needs  to  be  obtained  or
    inquiry to be made, the judge primarily acts on the evidence in a case.
     Where that evidence gives no hint of a suggestion that the welfare  of
    the child is threatened by the immigration  decision  in  question,  or
    that the child's best interests are undermined  thereby,  there  is  no
    basis for any further judicial exploration on the matter.

59. Assessing what is actually in  the  best  interests  of  a  child  will
    usually require some compromise because it will not be possible to give
    the same weight or prominence to  all  the  factors  that  have  to  be
    considered.  In addition, there may be  situations  where  an  external
    factor means it is not possible to create a  situation  where  a  child
    lives in  circumstances  that  are  assessed  as  securing  their  best
    interests and an alternative has to be accepted, which  should  be  the
    next best option.

60. In immigration cases, the external factors are usually  the  result  of
    the proposed expulsion of a parent or both parents from the UK  or  the
    refusal to admit a parent or both parents from outside the UK.  In such
    situations there must be cogent evidence and/or reasons to show why the
    best  interests  of  the  child  outweigh  the  measures   to   control
    immigration.

61. In general, the assessment of whether the best  interests  of  a  child
    outweighs the need to maintain effective immigration  controls  differs
    between those cases where the child is in the UK and  those  where  the
    child is outside the UK.  In cases involving expulsion, the focus  will
    be on the reasonableness of expecting the child to leave  the  UK.   In
    cases involving entry clearance, an appeal is only to be allowed  where
    compelling circumstances exist (which are not  sufficiently  recognised
    under the Immigration Rules) to require the grant of such permission.

62. Because of the tension between the various factors, the best  interests
    of the child are to be determined  by  reference  to  the  child  alone
    without reference to  the  immigration  history  or  status  of  either
    parent.

63. Having identified the relevant guidance, I move on to decide  the  best
    interests of the children  affected  by  the  decision  to  refuse  the
    appellant entry clearance.

64. There is  very  limited  evidence  about  the  best  interests  of  the
    appellant's three children.  Using the above list as a  starting  point
    for assessing their best interests at the date of decision, I make  the
    following findings.

65. As the children  are  British  citizens,  it  is  important  for  their
    identity to be in the UK which is the country of their nationality.  It
    is also important for them to remain within a Yemeni  family  group  as
    that is another part of their identity.  These aspects are met  by  the
    children remaining in the UK with their mother.

66. At the date of decision, it is likely that the children were too  young
    to develop ties to a particular culture or society.  In any  event,  no
    evidence to the contrary has been provided.

67. There is no need to consider how the children might adapt to life in  a
    different country since it is not proposed that they will leave the UK.
     I assume that they have adapted to life in the UK since  there  is  no
    evidence to the contrary.

68. There is some evidence that the  children's  emotional  needs  are  not
    fully met because of the absence of their father.  The evidence of this
    comes from Mrs Abdulla who states in her first witness  statement  that
    her children miss their  father  and  Judge  Lloyd  recorded  that  Mrs
    Abdulla said the children would ask where their father was.  However, I
    find this evidence to be weak  because  it  lacks  detail  and  is  not
    supported by any independent evidence.  I conclude  there  is  no  good
    evidence to show that the children's emotional  needs  were  not  being
    adequately met at the date of decision.

69. It is clear that at the date of decision  the  children  did  not  have
    direct contact with both parents.  Their father did not live with them.
     Although the mother was able to maintain contact by  modern  means  of
    communication,  that  would  have  been  of  little  benefit   to   the
    appellant's very young children, as they were at the date of  decision,
    because they would  not  have  the  maturity  to  maintain  or  develop
    meaningful relationships without actual proximity to their father.  The
    separation was not in the children's best interests.

70. The chronology of when the older two children came to the UK  and  when
    their father applied for entry clearance shows that they had  to  adapt
    to living without their father.  They would have been helped  by  their
    mother.  There  is  no  evidence  to  show  that  their  wellbeing  was
    adversely affected by that change.  The youngest child has never  lived
    with his father and  therefore  has  never  had  to  adapt  to  such  a
    significant change.

71. At the date of decision, the children were being cared for primarily by
    their mother although it would appear that her parents played a part in
    childcare when she was  at  work.   It  is  likely  that  the  children
    developed bonds with those caring  for  them.   There  was  no  threat,
    however,  to  those  care  arrangements  continuing.   There   was   no
    allegation that those care arrangements were inadequate.  I infer  that
    the care arrangements would continue and were stable.

72. The children would all have had to adapt to living with their father if
    he had been granted entry clearance.  There is nothing to indicate that
    they would not have been able to adapt to this change in  their  lives,
    which would no doubt have had a positive impact.

73. No evidence has been  provided  to  indicate  that  the  children  were
    exercising their citizenship  rights  to  health,  education  or  other
    services in the UK at the date of decision.

74. There is evidence in the form of the FCO travel advice that at the date
    of decision it was not safe for British citizens to  remain  in  Yemen.
    This indicates that it was in their best interests in  terms  of  their
    security to remain in the UK.  Otherwise no evidence relating to  their
    security or safeguarding has been provided.

75. The consequences of the immigration decision  were  that  the  children
    would have to live for the foreseeable future apart from their  father.
    No evidence has been provided to show how this affected them.   Because
    of their ages they could not be consulted.  The  evidence  provided  by
    their mother is very weak in that she did not go beyond saying that the
    children miss their father.  It is not possible for me to speculate  as
    to how  the  absence  of  their  father  might  affect  the  children's
    development.

76. In addition to considering these  listed  factors,  I  also  take  into
    consideration the  following.   The  best  interests  of  children  are
    usually determined by their parents.  Rarely  do  courts  or  tribunals
    have to get involved.  In this case, it is  evident  that  by  December
    2010 the appellant and his wife had decided that it  was  in  the  best
    interests of their then two children to move to the UK  and  for  their
    third child to be born here.  I can infer this from the chronology even
    though there is no direct evidence.

77. The appellant did not apply to join his family until  June  2012.   The
    evidence indicates he delayed so that his wife  could  find  employment
    and the maintenance requirements of the immigration rules could be met.
     The  appellant  thought  he  could  circumvent  the  English  language
    requirements of the immigration rules.

78. I infer from this that the appellant and his wife recognised that  they
    would be forced to live apart until they met the  requirements  of  the
    immigration rules.  It is also reasonable to infer that  they  accepted
    that it would take the ECO some months to reach a decision.  I conclude
    that in 2010 and up until the refusal of  entry  clearance  the  couple
    decided that although they wished to be together as a family, it was in
    the best interests of their children to accept the separation forced on
    them by the immigration rules so that the children could  live  in  the
    UK.

79. Bringing all these factors together, I conclude that  at  the  date  of
    decision it was in the children's best interests to remain in the UK in
    the care of their mother and maternal grandparents.  It would also have
    been in their best interests if their father could live with them.

Security in Yemen

80. In addition to what  I  have  said  about  the  security  situation  in
    relation to the children's best interests, as it is  accepted  that  in
    2011 the FCO advised all British citizens to leave Yemen it is  evident
    that at the date of decision neither the children nor Mrs Abdulla could
    have been expected to return to that country.

Proportionality assessment

81. From my findings it is clear that this is a  case  that  turns  not  on
    whether the appellant's family life could have resumed in Yemen but  on
    whether it is reasonable in all the  circumstances  to  have  kept  the
    family apart because  he  failed  to  meet  every  requirement  of  the
    immigration rules.

82. At the date of decision, the couple did  not  consider  the  period  of
    separation to be unreasonable.  They accepted it as  a  consequence  of
    their plans to relocate to the UK as a family.  It is important that  I
    do not use hindsight to review the  reasonableness  of  the  period  of
    separation.  The ECO knew that his decision would  keep  the  appellant
    apart from his family but it was open to the appellant to  make  a  new
    application.

83. The appellant argues in part that the ECO would have known that  a  new
    application was bound to fail because the  financial  requirements  had
    significantly  changed  when  appendix  FM  was  introduced.   That  is
    speculative and is not a factor I can take into consideration.

84. What I must take into consideration  is  the  fact  that  the  ECO  was
    justified  in  refusing  entry  clearance  on  the  grounds  that   the
    immigration rules had not been met in  full  and  because  those  rules
    outweighed the appellant's personal circumstances at that time.  But it
    is evident that the ECO did not pay any attention to the best interests
    of the children or the fact that the family could not  be  expected  to
    live together in the Yemen since these matters  are  not  addressed  in
    either the refusal notice or the Entry Clearance Manager's review  even
    though the details of the children had  been  provided  and  the  FCO's
    travel advice was government policy.

85. It is for me to take these factors into consideration  to  ensure  that
    the case is properly considered.  Having assessed as  best  I  can  the
    situation at the date of decision, as I have indicated, I am  satisfied
    the best interests of the children lay in them remaining in the UK with
    their mother and that it was in their interests to be joined  by  their
    father.  However, as I have also indicated, there is  nothing  to  show
    that the children's wellbeing had been adversely affected in any way by
    the separation from their father.  I can only conclude, given the legal
    authorities and  principles  I  have  set  out  above,  that  the  best
    interests of the children did not at the date of decision outweigh  the
    need for maintaining effective immigration  control  even  though  this
    would mean that  the  children  would  continue  living  without  their
    father.

86. Where there is an obstacle to the  best  interests  of  children  being
    achieved, it is necessary to find the next best  alternative  and  that
    has to be accepted if evidence has not been provided to show  that  the
    decision preventing  the  best  interests  being  established  are  not
    proportionate in all the circumstances.  The absence of cogent evidence
    in this case means that the appellant  has  failed  to  show  that  his
    argument based on the best interests of his children requiring  him  to
    live with his family in the UK is not sound and does not  outweigh  the
    public interest in maintaining effective immigration control.

87. As I have indicated, there is nothing to explain why the best interests
    of the children changed at the date of decision.  Up until  that  time,
    the parents accepted that it was in the best interests of the  children
    to be with their mother in the UK, knowing that the appellant could not
    qualify under the immigration rules.  At the date of decision he  still
    could not qualify under those rules.

88. I add that the evidence from Mrs Abdulla is unreliable  because  it  is
    self  serving.   Her  own  circumstances  do  not  establish  that  the
    immigration decision is not proportionate because as I  have  indicated
    both before and at the date of decision she and her husband  knew  that
    he would only be able to join her and their children in the  UK  if  he
    met the requirements of the immigration rules.  As  the  Supreme  Court
    has said in Patel v SSHD [2013] UKSC 72, [2014] Imm AR 456,  article  8
    cannot be used to circumvent the immigration rules.

89. In reaching this conclusion I have also had  regard  to  the  Court  of
    Appeal's guidance in SSHD v SS (Congo).  At paragraph 39, the Court  of
    Appeal identified factors that have to be considered in appeals against
    refusal of entry clearance relying on family life rights.   As  can  be
    seen from my findings and reasoning, I have had serious concern  as  to
    the best interests of the  children  and  the  fact  that  they  cannot
    establish family life with their father in  Yemen.   However,  for  the
    reasons I have given, I find that the evidence does not show  that  the
    immigration decision which at the date  of  decision  resulted  in  the
    family unit being able to live together in the UK  is  a  proportionate
    interference  because  of  the  lack  of  evidence  to  show  that  the
    children's wellbeing had been undermined by the  decision  and  because
    the ECO was justified in enforcing the immigration rules.



Decision

Although I find there is legal error in the determination of Judge  C  Lloyd
and that I must set her decision aside, when I remake the  decision  I  find
that the appeal against the refusal of entry clearance must be dismissed.


                               Signed                     Date


                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal




ANNEX

Cases considered when summarising the  law  dealing  with  the  relationship
between immigration control and the best interests of a child

Ruiz Zambrano (European citizenship) [2010] EUECJ C-34/09
Dereci & Ors (European citizenship) [2011] EUECJ C-256/11

ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4
Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74

Singh v ECO New Delhi [2004] EWCA Civ 1075
Lee v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 348
AJ (India) and Others v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 1191
Muse & Ors v Entry Clearance Officer [2012] EWCA Civ 10
SS Nigeria v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 550
EV (Philippines) and Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874
SSHD v SS (Congo) & Ors [2015] EWCA Civ 387

LD (Article 8 - best interests of child) Zimbabwe [2010] UKUT 278 (IAC)
Omotunde (best interests - Zambrano applied - Razgar) Nigeria [2011] UKUT
247 (IAC)
E-A (Article 8 - best interest of child) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 315 (IAC)
MK (best interests of child) India [2011] UKUT 475 (IAC)
T (s.55 BCIA 2009 - entry clearance) Jamaica [2011] UKUT 00483(IAC)
Sanade and others (British children - Zambrano - Dereci) [2012] UKUT 48
(IAC)
SC (Article 8 - in accordance with the law) Zimbabwe [2012] UKUT 56 (IAC)
Mundeba (s.55 and para 297(i)(f)) [2013] UKUT 88 (IAC)
Campbell (exclusion; Zambrano) Jamaica [2013] UKUT 147 (IAC)
Azimi-Moayed and others (decisions affecting children; onward appeals)
[2013] UKUT 197(IAC)
MA and SM (Zambrano; EU children outside the EU) Iran [2013] UKUT 00380
(IAC)
JO and Others (Section 55 duty) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 00517 (IAC)
MK (section 55 - Tribunal options) Sierra Leone [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC)


