

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/20572/2013
                                                               OA/20573/2013
                                                               OA/20575/2013
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |         Decision and Reasons        |
|                                         |Promulgated                          |
|On 13 July 2015                          |             On 14 July 2015         |
|                                         |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between


                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (CHENNAI)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ARUNATHATHY SANTHARAJA
                         (and two child dependents)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:      Ms S. Saifolahi, counsel instructed by Jein
Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Miss A. Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    For the sake of continuity I will refer to the parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal but technically the Secretary  of  State
    is the appellant in this appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

2.    The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka whose  date  of  birth  is  10
    April 1975. She has two dependent children. She  appealed  against  the
    respondent's decision to refuse  entry  clearance  as  the  spouse  and
    dependent children of a person who is present and settled in the UK.

3.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Shepherd allowed the appeal  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 16 January 2015. The respondent applied  for  permission
    to appeal against the decision, which was  granted  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 04 March 2015. The grounds of appeal can be  summarised  as
    follows:

      (i)    The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  erred  in  finding  that  the
           photograph the appellant admitted she altered was  not  a  false
           document. The fact that the photograph had been altered to  show
           her with her  husband  quite  clearly  showed  an  intention  to
           deceive the Entry Clearance Officer ("ECO"): AA (Nigeria) v SSHD
           [2010] EWCA Civ 773.
      (ii)  The First-tier Tribunal Judge made inadequate findings  relating
           to the adequacy of accommodation that were not supported by  the
           evidence. There  was  no  evidence  from  the  landlord  of  the
           property to confirm that the appellant could live  there.  There
           was no evidence  to  support  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
           conclusion that there was no reason to suppose that the landlord
           would object.
      (iii) The First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in finding that  there  were
           'exceptional circumstances' to exempt  the  appellant  from  the
           English language requirement. It was not clear why the fact that
           the appellant has lost a limb  would  render  her  incapable  of
           learning English or being able to study for an exam.  Nor  would
           the fact that she suffers from depression stop her from learning
           English. There was no documentary or medical evidence to support
           the First-tier Tribunal Judge's findings.

4.    The matter comes before the Upper Tribunal to  determine  whether  the
    First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error of law.

5.    I heard submissions from both parties, which have  been  noted  in  my
    record of proceedings and  where  relevant  are  incorporated  into  my
    findings.

Decision and reasons

6.    After having considered the grounds of appeal and oral arguments I  am
    satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal decision  did  not  involve  the
    making of an error of law.

7.    In support of the application the appellant  submitted  a  photograph,
    amongst others, that purported to show her and her husband together. As
    part of the same set of  photographs  she  also  included  an  original
    photograph of herself beside a flower arrangement. It  is  quite  clear
    from the distinctive nature of the photograph that  the  photograph  of
    the appellant with her husband had been altered. The appellant and  the
    sponsor both admitted this in  their  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. The appellant explained that their  wedding  photographs  had
    been destroyed and she wanted a photograph showing her and her  husband
    together at a time before she lost her leg.  In  paragraph  42  of  the
    decision the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  considered  the  appellant's
    explanation and found that there had been no intention to deceive.

8.    In paragraph 56 of the decision the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  noted
    that the respondent's representative said she was "sympathetic  to  the
    appellant in this regard and that it was understandable  that  she  put
    together a "collage" photograph in the circumstances". She  noted  that
    the respondent's representative said that  it  was  "highly  debatable"
    whether or not there was any intention to deceive and left  the  matter
    for the Tribunal to decide. In light of this  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's findings in paragraph 62(i) are entirely sustainable. The First-
    tier Tribunal Judge found the appellant's explanation  to  be  credible
    and in light of the fact that the  appellant  had  also  submitted  the
    original photograph it is difficult to see how one could conclude  that
    she  was  seeking  to  deceive  the  ECO.  While  the  photograph   was
    manufactured to some extent it could  not  be  said  to  be  a  'false'
    document within the meaning identified by the Court  of  Appeal  in  AA
    (Nigeria) because the requisite element of intent to  deceive  was  not
    present.  For these reasons I conclude  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's findings were open to her on the evidence and do not disclose a
    material error of law.

9.    The second  ground  of  appeal  relates  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's findings regarding the  accommodation.  Miss  Everett  accepted
    that the immigration rules contain no  strict  evidential  requirements
    relating to accommodation. There is no evidential requirement  for  the
    appellant to produce an  accommodation  report  or  to  show  that  the
    sponsor's landlord has given permission for her to live there. The test
    contained  in  the  rules  is  whether  "adequate   accommodation"   is
    available. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found  the  sponsor  to  be  a
    credible witness [59]. There was supporting evidence in the form  of  a
    tenancy agreement. The sponsor's evidence  was  that  it  was  a  three
    bedroom house. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  was  satisfied  that  the
    sponsor was the sole occupant [62(iv)]. In light of this  it  was  open
    for the First-tier Tribunal Judge to  conclude  that  an  accommodation
    report or a letter from the landlord was not necessary. A three bedroom
    house is adequate accommodation for a married couple with  two  teenage
    children for the purpose of the room standards of the Housing Act 1985.
    It was therefore open for the First-tier Tribunal Judge  to  find  that
    the accommodation was adequate  for  the  purpose  of  the  immigration
    rules. For these reasons I  conclude  that  her  findings  disclose  no
    material error of law.

10.   The third ground of appeal relates to the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's
    findings regarding the English  language  requirement.  The  exceptions
    contained in paragraph E-ECP.4.2 of Appendix FM include  those  with  a
    physical or mental disability but in this case the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge considered that the appellant's circumstances, taken as a  whole,
    were sufficient to come within the third exception because  they  could
    be  described  as  'exceptional'.  The  respondent  accepts  that   the
    appellant has certain disabilities but argues  that  they  did  not  in
    themselves preclude her from learning  English  or  taking  an  English
    language test and as such the First-tier Tribunal Judge's findings were
    unlawful. I am not aware of and was not referred  to  any  guidance  or
    authority on how the requirement should be interpreted.

11.   In paragraph 41 of the decision the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  noted
    that there was medical evidence to show that the appellant was  injured
    by a shell blast in April 2009 and  as  a  result  her  right  leg  was
    amputated above the knee. Her mother and sister died in the same attack
    [40]. A further letter from the Divisional Hospital confirmed that  she
    had an artificial leg but was unable to work or undertake most  day  to
    day activities. In paragraph 44 the First-tier Tribunal Judge noted the
    sponsor's evidence. He said that his wife was very  depressed  and  she
    found it difficult to talk about things on the telephone. He felt  that
    it was beyond her to study at the moment because of her current  mental
    state. Whenever he mentioned the need to study for the English language
    qualification she would cry. In paragraph 55  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge noted the submissions made by the respondent's representative who
    acknowledged that the appellant had suffered  terrible  injuries  as  a
    result of the war and left it  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  to
    decide whether that was sufficient to come within the exemption.

12.   The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  made  clear  findings  addressing  the
    reasons for refusal in paragraphs 63-65 of the decision. She found that
    the evidence showed that the appellant had lost the ability to  earn  a
    living and must therefore be largely dependent on others  for  support.
    She was likely to be "at a  distinct  disadvantage"  when  it  came  to
    studying for and preparing to take an exam in a foreign  language.  She
    also concluded  that  the  appellant's  depression  was  a  "compelling
    element".

13.   While there will be some  clear  cases  where  a  physical  or  mental
    disability may preclude a  person  from  studying  for  and  taking  an
    English language test the exceptions also recognise that there might be
    other cases where  'exceptional  circumstances'  may  still  exempt  an
    applicant from the requirement. In most  cases  an  applicant  will  be
    expected to provide an English language test certificate in support  of
    the application. But the immigration rules must still  be  sufficiently
    flexible to allow for family life to continue  when  there  is  a  good
    reason why the English language requirement has not  been  met  and  an
    applicant meets the other requirements of  the  rules.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge  took  into  account  the  traumatic  events  that  have
    affected the appellant both physically and emotionally, as well as  the
    practical disadvantages of her disabilities, which  have  rendered  her
    unable to work and dependent on others for day to day support. She made
    clear that she had taken into account  those  factors  cumulatively.  I
    conclude  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  finding  that   the
    circumstances were 'exceptional' for the purpose of exemption was  open
    to her on the evidence. The respondent may disagree  with  the  finding
    but it could not be said to be irrational or perverse and discloses  no
    material error of law.

14.   For the reasons given above I conclude that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision did not involve the making of an error of law. The  First-tier
    Tribunal decision shall stand.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law.

The First-tier Tribunal decision shall stand.

Signed
                                   Date  14 July 2015

[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan








