

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                 Appeal
Numbers:    OA/20895/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:  Manchester                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 5th August 2014                           |On: 6th October 2014         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                 Yaya Jallow
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       Entry Clearance Officer, Accra
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:           Dr Mynott, Latitude Law
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety,  Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of The Gambia date of birth  11th  November
    1976. He appeals with permission[1]  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Devlin) to dismiss his appeal  against  a  decision  to
    refuse him entry clearance as  the  spouse  of  a  person  present  and
    settled in the United Kingdom.


 2. The Sponsor is a Ms Jarrai Jarrow. The Appellant submitted that he  and
    Ms Jarrow had married according to Islamic law in 2005,  that  marriage
    being registered in accordance with the Gambian  civil  code  in  2007.
    This was the Appellant's third application for entry  clearance  as  Ms
    Jallow's husband. It was made on the 15th June 2012 and was  considered
    under paragraph 281 of the Rules.

 3. It was refused on two grounds. The Respondent was  not  satisfied  that
    this was a genuine and subsisting marriage, nor  that  there  would  be
    adequate maintenance for the parties to the exclusion of public funds.

 4. As to the latter issue the determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    contains no  reasoning  save  to  say  that  if  the  matter  had  been
    considered it would have been resolved in  the  Appellant's  favour[2].
    The First-tier Tribunal did not however accept that this is  a  genuine
    and subsisting  marriage.  The  determination  sets  out  the  evidence
    presented by the Appellant at paragraph 60.  He  relied  upon  his  own
    statement, a statement by a family friend,   various  phone  bills  and
    international call cards, the Sponsor's passport,  a  letter  from  her
    father, a letter from the Appellant  to  the  Sponsor,  money  transfer
    receipts, two photographs and of  course,  the  oral  evidence  of  the
    Sponsor.  The determination then sets out why the Tribunal declines  to
    place significant weight to any or all of  these  pieces  of  evidence.
    The statements from the Appellant, his father-in-law and family  friend
    were all relatively out of date and had not been  tested  under  cross-
    examination. The photographs were poorly reproduced and  could  not  be
    seen clearly. The Sponsor's passport only showed one trip to Gambia, in
    2006, and did not support her claim to have made  several  visits,  the
    most recent of which was in 2011. The money transfer receipts  referred
    to two transactions, one undated and the other from 2011: they were  of
    little evidential value in establishing this to be a genuine  marriage.
    The  Tribunal  found  the  Sponsor's   evidence   to   be   vague   and
    contradictory.   As  to  the  evidence   of   telephone   contact   the
    determination gives some consideration to the Upper Tribunal  authority
    of Goudey[3]. It then analyses the evidence and finds little to support
    the claim that there is  frequent  contact  between  the  parties.   In
    respect of countervailing  factors  the  determination  notes  that  Ms
    Jallow had a child with another man in the UK in 2009. The Judge  found
    her evidence about her relationship with  that  child's  father  to  be
    unsatisfactory.  Findings that there was  not  sufficient  evidence  to
    discharge the burden of proof the appeal was dismissed.


 5. The grounds of appeal  are  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal   erred  in
    failing to apply Goudey correctly, and in failing to deal with  Article
    8 and in particular  the  Appellant's  relationship  with  his  British
    citizen step-children who reside in the UK.


    Error of Law

 6. This determination contains a detailed  and  lengthy  analysis  of  the
    decision in Goudey wherein the  First-tier  Tribunal  appears  to  take
    issue with the central ratio of that case.   As  Mr  McVeety  observed,
    these 20 paragraphs are entirely irrelevant. The point made  in  Goudey
    is simply this. If there is no reason to doubt the sworn statements  of
    two people  that  they  intend  to  live  together  as  man  and  wife,
    international call  cards  can  serve  as  corroboration  of  telephone
    contact, even if these items cannot definitively prove  that  person  A
    called person B on a particular number.   In this case there  was  good
    reason to doubt  the  declarations  of  the  parties.  The  Judge  gave
    numerous reasons for finding the evidence unsatisfactory, and there was
    of course the fact that the Sponsor had given birth  to  another  man's
    child four years after she married the  Appellant.    Even  if,  as  Dr
    Mynott contends, the Judge was wrong to disregard evidence  before  him
    capable of establishing that there was telephone  contact  between  the
    parties in this case, this would not have been sufficient to  discharge
    the burden of proof. The  reasons  that  the  Tribunal  has  given  for
    doubting the  remaining  evidence  are  unchallenged  and  disclose  no
    arguable error of law.


 7. In granting permission Judge Chalkley considered it arguable  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal applied too high a standard of proof. For  instance
    at paragraph 82 the Tribunal finds the  Sponsor's  evidence  about  her
    husband's relationship with his  step-children  to  be  "unconvincing":
    Judge Chalkley points out that the Judge did not need to  be  convinced
    about anything. Further at 76 he did not find the  Sponsor  to  "be  an
    entirely satisfactory witness": she  did  not  need  to  be  "entirely'
    satisfactory to discharge the burden of proof. These  turns  of  phrase
    are unfortunate. However having considered the determination as a whole
    I am not satisfied that the Tribunal did apply  too  high  a  standard.
    Where the Tribunal has given  sound  reasons  for  declining  to  place
    weight on virtually every  piece  of  evidence  before  it,  it  is  an
    inevitability that the appeal will be dismissed, whichever standard  of
    proof is being applied.

 8. The grant of permission also mentions the  failure  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to deal with  section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009 in the context of Article  8  ECHR.     I  do  not
    consider that omission to be an error of law such  that  this  decision
    should be set aside. The Tribunal had  clearly  rejected  the  parties'
    claims to be in a subsisting relationship. There was  very  little,  it
    any, evidence before it to support the contention  that  the  Appellant
    has a meaningful relationship with his stepchildren over and above  any
    relationship that he might have, or have had, with their mother.

      Decision
 9. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain an  error
    of law and it is upheld.
                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                         23rd September 2014
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission was initially refused by First-tier Tribunal Wellesley-Cole
on the 28th February 2014, but granted upon renewal by Upper Tribunal Judge
Chalkley on the 2nd April 2014
[2] Paragraph 91
[3] Goudey (subsisting marriage) Ghana [2006] UKAIT 00046

