
        [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/20574/2013
     OA/20578/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 15 April 2015                              |On 7 May 2015                 |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                                    M A M
                                    F A M
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER  - NAIROBI

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Hodgetts, Solicitor, instructed by South West
Law
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellants

 1. The appellants are nationals of Somalia born on 1 January 1998 and 1996
    and are brother and sister seeking  entry  clearance  with  a  view  to
    settlement under paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules.  The  decision
    currently under appeal was a refusal by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    made on 25 October 2013.

 2. The appellants had made previous applications which were refused  on  2
    August 2012, on the basis that the respondent did not accept  that  the
    appellants' mother had disappeared in December  2011  as  claimed.  The
    respondent did not accept that the sponsor had sole responsibility  for
    the children and the Entry Clearance Officer in 2012 decided  that  the
    sponsor's income  was  insufficient  to  adequately  maintain  the  two
    children.  In relation  to  the  first  applications  and  refusals,  a
    decision was issued by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Burnett  on  25
    April 2013.  He made a credibility  finding  against  the  sponsor  and
    dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules and  on  human  rights
    grounds.

 3. On 12 August 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal McLachlan heard  the
    appeal against the refusal of  the  second  applications  made  by  the
    appellants using the decision of Judge Burnett as  the  starting  point
    further to Devaseelan and she also  dismissed  the  appeals  under  the
    Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.

 4. An application for permission to appeal was made on  the  grounds  that
    the judge had failed to  deal  "properly"  with  the  testimony  of  an
    independent third party witness, Ms S M A.  She testified that she  who
    had been told by the sponsor that his wife had gone missing,  and  had,
    on ten separate occasions, during her visit to Uganda managed  to  talk
    with the two  appellant  children,  and  gave  the  evidence  that  the
    children were very unhappy and that "When the girl talked about her mum
    she started crying.  She was missing her and  her  siblings".   It  was
    argued that implicitly the judge accepted the independent  evidence  of
    her visit but  did  not  deal  with  the  substance  of  the  witness's
    testimony. The criticism that the judge made that this witness had  not
    given evidence at the previous  hearing  on  25  April  was  irrational
    because she  could not give a direct evidence as she had not  made  her
    visit prior to that time.

 5. A second challenge to the determination was that the judge  had  failed
    to take into account the witness statements of  the  minor  appellants.
    Following ZH (Tanzania)  [2011]  UKSC  4  the  best  interests  of  the
    children required the evidence  to  be  put  forward  and  their  views
    sought.

 6. Thirdly, there was a failure to make  clear  findings  on  whether  the
    judge accepted the sponsor had four missing children in Somalia and  to
    engage with the documentary evidence on that issue. The presence of the
    four missing children gave motivation for the sponsor's wife.

 7. At the hearing before me Mr Hodgetts outlined the documentary  evidence
    that the judge had failed to take into account and  this  included  the
    Ugandan government document confirming that only two children were with
    M, the wife and mother, when she  was  issued  with  an  asylum  seeker
    certification on 17 November 2010. Her other children were not  listed.
    Similarly in October 2013 a renewable asylum document again showed only
    two children were present in Kampala.  Secondly,  the  Luberi  Triangle
    parish letter confirmed the appellants were in the care of F.  Thirdly,
    the Uganda Somali community letter of 23 March  2013  corroborated  the
    account. Fourthly, the photographic evidence showed the  sponsor's  six
    children pictured together when younger in Somalia  and,  fifthly,  the
    medical evidence that the sponsor had talked to his GP over  the  years
    concerning his depression as a result of the disappearance of his wife.

 8. The fourth ground referred to the money transfer receipts.  Mr Hodgetts
    once again at the hearing made the point that the judge's  approach  on
    this was incorrect because the sponsor would have been expected to send
    remittances for his children even during a time when he knew  that  the
    mother would not be there.

 9. The absence of any money transfers receipts in 2011  to  the  sponsor's
    now missing wife had no relevance and was neutral in terms of probative
    value.

10. It was not clear whether the Tribunal accepted that the money transfers
    were in fact made to Ft from May 2013 to date. There was a  failure  to
    make clear whether the transfers to the respective carers was made.

11. There was an irrationality in the  approach  made  regarding  the  2010
    application.  It  was  stated  it  was  irrational  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to reason that the four missing children of the sponsor "would
    not have been listed in the application of November 2010 if he did  not
    know the whereabouts of those children at that time".   It  would  have
    been a material misrepresentation for those the applicants not to  have
    listed the four children  as  dependants  despite  being  missing.  The
    children were  still  the  sponsor's  dependants.  The  fact  that  the
    whereabouts of those four  children  was  not  disclosed  on  the  2010
    application form was  consistent  with  the  fact  that  there  was  no
    knowledge of their exact location.

12. Ground 6 of the application for permission to  appeal  related  to  the
    evidence of S in the USA, the person who had previously  had  care  but
    had left for the USA. Judge Burnett rejected the fact that the wife had
    gone missing in part because there was no evidence  that  S  had  taken
    over the care of the children or had gone  to  America.   Evidence  was
    produced that S was living in the USA in  2014  which  showed  that  IJ
    Burnett proceeded on a flawed factual basis.

13. Overall the judge failed to take into  account  relevant  evidence  and
    explanations from the sponsor and  submissions  made  in  the  skeleton
    argument dealing with these matters.

14. In submissions Mr Hodgetts  outlined  his  reasoning  set  out  in  the
    permission to appeal.

15. Mr Richards roundly rejected that there was a material error of law and
    stated on reading the decision as a  whole  that  Judge  McLachlan  was
    entitled to follow the decision of Judge Burnett.

Conclusions

16. The key point in the determination of Judge Burnett is the  whereabouts
    of the mother M.  The sponsor described in his statement [27] that  she
    had not seen her other four children since the end of 2009 and had left
    Uganda to go in search of them.

17. At [30] of Judge Burnett's determination he found that the sponsor  did
    not provide any information as to his wife's and his children  when  he
    entered the UK in 2006 and when interviewed stated that K was his first
    wife. In his statement for the appeal before Judge  Burnett  he  stated
    that K was his second wife. As a result Judge Burnett found that  "this
    interview demonstrates that the sponsor is prepared  to  tell  lies  to
    fulfil his desires and wishes".  This finding on credibility  which  is
    separate from other findings made by the judge largely underpinned  the
    remaining findings.  A further key issue which underpinned the findings
    of Judge Burnett was that the children were listed in  the  application
    of the wife M to enter the  United  Kingdom  in  2010  (they  had  been
    missing since 2009).  The judge added [28]  "It  is  notable  that  the
    sections 4.18-4.21 are not filled in. This part of the  form  requested
    information as to where the  children  are  living  and  who  would  be
    travelling with the applicants."

18. Challenge was made to this but the fact is that the question asked  was
    whether these are dependants and they were listed  as  dependants,  not
    listed as missing and no information was given when it was specifically
    directed on the form that it should have been.

19. At [19] Judge McLachlan made a specific  finding  resting  on  that  of
    Judge Burnett that the sponsor  had  not  contacted  any  international
    agencies to assist in searching for his wife  and  the  other  children
    such as the Red Cross and Judge Burnett was not prepared to accept that
    M had left the children alone with S and Mo in Uganda.  She found  that
    M was still with the children and concluded that  their  welfare  needs
    were being met by their mother. The judge had previously found that the
    mother M had listed as dependants all her six children by their names

20. However, the timeline was raised as a relevant issue in this appeal and
    Judge Burnett's decision was made in part on the fact that  S  had  not
    shown that she had gone to the USA.  Documentation  was  then  produced
    but Judge MacLachlan made an error regarding the date the documentation
    placed S in the USA.  At [30]  the judge stated

         "Given the significance of the change in the circumstances  of  the
         children in May 2013 as regards the supposed caring arrangements it
         is unsatisfactory that travel  documents  showing  exactly  when  S
         travelled to the USA are not produced."

21. In fact the date of the earliest document was not 27th  June  2014  but
    12th July 2013.  Thus there was an error relation to the  documentation
    and bearing in mind the reference to the significance of the change  in
    circumstances as identified above, I find this is an error of law.

22. There was also further criticism of the judgment  in  relation  to  the
    evidence of the witness, Miss A and the lack  of  engagement  with  the
    evidence of the children.  I do find that this was evidence with  which
    that the judge should have engaged.  The judge made the point that  the
    photographs did not demonstrate that the sponsor's wife was  not  there
    but the judge neither engaged directly with the evidence of Miss  A  in
    relation to what the children had told her despite accepting  that  the
    children were visited on ten occasions nor made any  reference  to  the
    testimony of the children themselves.  As asserted the witness  Miss  A
    had not made her visit by the time of  the  previous  hearing  and  she
    could not have given direct evidence relating to the children  at  that
    time.

23. Albeit that the statements of the children  were  taken  by  telephone,
    their evidence was not addressed by the judge at all and the weight  of
    the evidence not evaluated.  The judge made no attempt to evaluate  the
    evidence in relation to the children and  thus  it  would  appear  that
    there was a failure to assess witness evidence properly

24. Where a witness account is corroborated  by  another  witness'  account
    this can add to its credibility SA Iran [2012] EWHC  2575.   AK  Turkey
    [2004] UKIAT 00230 confirms that 'save in those exceptional cases where
    the material facts are not in issue  between  the  parties,  it  is  an
    essential  part  of  an  adjudicator's  responsibility  to  make  clear
    findings of fact on the material issues and to give proper intelligible
    and adequate reasons for arriving at those findings'.

25. The judge did make a specific finding at   [40]  that  the  appellants'
    mother had not left them alone in Uganda but nonetheless did not engage
    with  the  submissions  made  in  the  skeleton  argument  as  to   the
    explanations given by the appellant in relation to the discrepancies in
    the evidence.

26. I find that the errors of law perhaps by themselves are insufficient to
    make a material  difference,  nonetheless,  cumulatively,  may  make  a
    material effect to the outcome.  As the errors of law found may  affect
    the findings on credibility, they run to the heart of the decision  and
    I set aside the decision of Judge McLachlan.

27. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified.  I set aside the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007  and  further
    to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement



Direction regarding anonymity - rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could  lead  to  contempt  of  court  proceedings.   The
appeal involves minors.



Signed                                  Date 30th April 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


