
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/20186/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th May 2015                               |On 4th June 2015              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER

                                   Between

                        MS Hiwet Tesfaghirgis YEMANE
                          (ANONYMITY NOT RETAINED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Marcus
For the Respondent:    Miss Johnstone

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 18th July 1985 is  a  citizen  of  Eritrea.   The
    Appellant who was present was represented by Mr Marcus of Counsel.  The
    Respondent was represented by Miss Johnstone, a Presenting Officer.

Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had made application on 19th June 2013 to come to the  UK
    to join her Sponsor husband, Mr Tsegay.  The Sponsor in the UK had been
    granted refugee status on 27th January 2012 for  a  five  year  period.
    The Respondent had refused the Appellant's application under paragraphs
    352A and 320(7A) of the Immigration Rules.  The basis of  that  refusal
    was that a  document  verification  report  showed  that  the  marriage
    certificate provided was not genuine.  The Appellant had appealed  that
    decision and her appeal was heard by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Pacey
    sitting at Birmingham on 31st July 2014.  The  judge  had  allowed  the
    Appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules.

 3. The Respondent had made application to  appeal  that  decision  on  the
    basis of an error of law made by the judge.  Permission to  appeal  was
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Martin on 27th August 2014 on the basis
    it was arguable the judge should have taken account of  a  letter  from
    the Eritrean Church particularly given that it  predated  the  decision
    and was before the Entry Clearance Officer.  Directions were issued for
    the Upper Tribunal firstly to decide whether an error of law  had  been
    made in this case.

 4. The matter came before  me  in  accordance  with  those  directions  in
    Manchester on 7th January 2015.  Having heard submissions on the matter
    of an error of law I found a material error of law had been made by the
    judge for reasons provided in the decision promulgated on 19th  January
    2015.   In accordance with directions  issued  on  the  same  date  the
    matter came back to the Upper Tribunal for that appeal to be remade.

The Proceedings - Introduction

 5. I firstly explained to the Sponsor who was present the  nature  of  the
    proceedings and the way they would be conducted.  I  next  checked  the
    documents available to me in this case.

 6. The Respondent's bundle consists of:

      i) Refusal of entry clearance letter.

     ii) Those documents listed at pages 1 to 170 on the index sheet to  the
         bundle.

    iii) Document verification report.

     iv) Emails.

 7. The Appellant's documents consists of:

      v) Those documents listed at pages 1 to 22 on the index sheet  to  the
         main bundle.

     vi) Further translation of letter 28th August 2013.

Evidence

 8. The Sponsor was called to give  evidence.   He  confirmed  his  witness
    statements of 19th June 2014 and 24th April 2015 were true and correct.



 9. In cross-examination he confirmed that  his  marriage  certificate  was
    sent to the Home Office which he had got from his wife.  He  said  that
    she had brought it along with her.  He said that  she  had  brought  it
    from Sudan to Uganda but someone had brought it for her from Eritrea to
    Sudan.  He said that was towards the end of January 2013.  He  did  not
    know who had brought it to the Sudan but it was  brought  because  they
    needed it.

10. It was put to him that the Appellant's application stated that she  was
    still in Eritrea until March 2013.  He said that was  not  correct  she
    had left Eritrea in January 2013 and he  knew  that  because  they  had
    regular contact.

11. He said until 2012 he had sent her money through some people.  She  had
    stayed in Sudan for a short time.  He said it  was  a  friend  who  had
    brought the certificate to Sudan and she had requested that  and  there
    was a businessman who travelled back and forth.  Her mother had got the
    certificate from his home and she had given it to the businessman.

12. In matters I raised by way of clarification he confirmed that his  wife
    had left Eritrea in 2013 the purpose being to join him in the UK.   She
    had not left earlier as he had not had status in  the  UK  before  that
    time.  He agreed that when she left Eritrea he knew  it  was  important
    that they could demonstrate they  were  married.   She  had  not  taken
    anything with her such as the marriage certificate  because  she  could
    have been searched.  He agreed that she could  have  put  the  marriage
    certificate in the post to him in the UK.

13. In re-examination he said  that  the  businessman  crossed  the  border
    legally so he was less likely to be searched.

14. In cross-examination the Respondent relied upon the  original  decision
    and the document verification report.  There were submissions  relating
    to the most recent translation.

15. Finally I heard submissions on behalf of the Appellant who reminded  me
    of  the  higher  standard  burden  of  proof  on  the  Respondent  when
    allegations of deception  were  put  forward.   It  was  submitted  the
    marriage certificate and the current translation demonstrated  that  it
    was genuine and in any event there was clear evidence of a longstanding
    relationship in this case.

16. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision to consider the
    documents and evidence submitted.  I now present that decision with  my
    reasons.

Decision and Reasons

17. The Respondent had refused  the  application  on  the  basis  that  the
    Appellant had produced a false document to support her  assertion  that
    they had been married and had thereby acted dishonestly.   Refusal  had
    been under paragraph 320(7A) of the Immigration Rules.  The  Respondent
    had discharged the burden of proof in that regard by the production  of
    the letter from the Eritrean Church which stated that the Appellant and
    Sponsor had not been married as claimed by  claims  made  both  by  the
    Appellant and her Sponsor.  There was sufficient evidence  produced  by
    the Respondent to have discharged the burden of proof which  passes  to
    the Respondent when such allegations are made.

18. I have in remaking this decision, which  is  focussed  on  that  single
    issue, looked  carefully  at  all  the  documents  including  the  most
    recently produced documents and have had regard to the oral evidence of
    the Sponsor.

19. The documents reveal a consistency in terms of where  it  is  said  the
    Appellant and  Sponsor  married.   In  her  pre-flight  family  reunion
    application the Appellant had stated that they had married at Keren  on
    15th May 2005 and thereafter lived with the Sponsor's parents in  Keren
    until the Sponsor left Eritrea.

20. The marriage certificate produced by the Sponsor contains a  number  of
    details and includes the name of the church, sub-zone Keren, and  bears
    the  name  Keren  in  the  name  block  on  the  bottom  right  of  the
    certificate.

21. The entry clearance administration at Nairobi  decided  to  check  this
    document when the Appellant applied  for  entry  clearance.   It  is  a
    logical assumption that they would check with the church at Keren given
    that no other church had been suggested at any stage in any document or
    by anyone.  Indeed  the  email  from  Nairobi  dated  31st  July  2013,
    produced by the Respondent, states "I have managed to contact the  sub-
    zone office in Keren".  That is consistent with what would be expected.
     The email further relates  concerns  regarding  the  voracity  of  the
    marriage certificate raised by those in the sub-zone  office  in  Keren
    and relayed to Nairobi.  The email concludes  "I  have  asked  them  to
    check their record and let me know the result".

22. That check then prompted the letter from the Eritrean  Orthodox  Church
    to the British Embassy in Asmara dated 28th August 2013.   It  is  that
    letter that forms the basis of debate.  That  letter  states  that  the
    Appellant and Sponsor were never married in  the  Saint  Medhanie  Alen
    Church.  A translation of that letter produced  by  the  Appellant  and
    dated 6th April 2015 provides a different but  significant  translation
    by stating "did not tie  the  knot  at  the  Medhanie  Alen  Church  in
    Elaberied."  The Appellant's case  is  the  Asmara  authorities  and/or
    Eritrean Church checked the wrong church hence inevitably  there  would
    be no record.

23. There are a number of features regarding that claim put forward by  the
    Appellant as follows:

      i) As indicated above the  place  of  marriage  (Keren)  has  remained
         consistent and there is no  obvious  reason  therefore  why  anyone
         would seek to check at a different church.

     ii) It has to be assumed that a church with the identical  name  exists
         in the town of Elaberied.  Whilst  that  may  be  possible  or  not
         unlikely there is no evidence produced to that effect.

    iii) The email that prompted the check refers to contact being made with
         sub-zone Keren and concerns raised from the church in that sub-zone
         as noted in the email.

     iv) The letter dated 28th August 2013 noting the lack  of  marriage  is
         consistent with those concerns.

      v) The translation of the letter from the Eritrean Church is certified
         by a named individual and the presumption being such an  individual
         is an Eritrean, and certified as being a true translation.

     vi) Furthermore the translation of the document was done  by  the  same
         person who generated the email enquiry and  accordingly  it  is  an
         inference that can be made that if the town Elaberied  appeared  in
         the letter it may have alerted him, given he had spoken to and  was
         concerned with a different church namely the church in Keren.

    vii) The translation produced on the Appellant's behalf was produced  by
         a translation company in London and the  name  of  the  translator,
         nationality  etc.  is  not  given  namely  a  signature  which   is
         indecipherable and the stamp of the company.

24. I do not find when looking at that evidence in the round that  reliance
    can  necessarily  be  placed  on  that  translation  provided  by   the
    Appellant's representatives.

25. There are some further points in this case.  Firstly  the  letter  from
    the Eritrean Church was available from 5th  August  2014  when  it  was
    produced  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing.    There   has   been
    significant time therefore for the Sponsor to  have  spotted  the  name
    Elaberied on the original letter.  I do not place too  much  weight  on
    this point given the Sponsor appears to have been  unrepresented  until
    recently.

26. There is a further question mark over the provenance of the certificate
    however.  The Sponsor in oral evidence claimed that someone had brought
    the certificate from Eritrea to Sudan in January 2013.  He did not know
    who had brought it.

27. However it is clear from the Appellant's application form that she  did
    not leave Eritrea until 3rd March 2015.   It  was  submitted  I  should
    place little weight upon this matter.   However  the  Sponsor  in  oral
    evidence was quite adamant that  the  Appellant  had  left  Eritrea  in
    January claiming  that  he  was  in  regular  contact  with  her.   The
    Appellant  herself  within  her  application  form  was  very  specific
    concerning dates when she had lived both within Eritrea and  elsewhere.
    The dates given were not approximations and she provided specific dates
    when she had moved from living with the Sponsor's  family  to  her  own
    family and thereafter specific dates that she had moved from Eritrea to
    Sudan and then from Sudan to Uganda.  There is therefore on the face of
    it an irreconcilable inconsistency in dates given in this case.

28. It is further said the Appellant got a businessman to take the document
    from Eritrea to Sudan as it was too risky for her to take it  over  the
    border.  The danger or porousness of the  border  between  Eritrea  and
    Sudan is not a matter upon which I have  evidence  but  I  find  little
    obvious heightened risk to a person's safety  by  carrying  a  marriage
    certificate  rather  than  not.   Indeed  entrusting  it   to   another
    individual would  not  be  without  risk.   Further  according  to  the
    Appellant's application form she was only in Sudan between 4th and 18th
    March 2015, a narrow window to entrust such a document  to  another  to
    carry.

29. It is further the case  according  to  the  Sponsor  that  he  and  the
    Appellant were in regular contact with each other and she left  Eritrea
    when she did with the specific purpose of coming to the UK to  join  up
    with the Sponsor who by that stage  had  got  status  in  the  UK.   He
    accepted he was aware the marriage certificate was important for  proof
    of her application to come to the UK and  conceded  there  was  nothing
    preventing the Appellant putting the certificate in the post to him  in
    the UK.  Indeed there is a letter dated 19th May 2013  from  solicitors
    suggesting that they have checked documents supplied by the Sponsor and
    enclosing the application form and appendix.  It is not entirely  clear
    whether those documents checked would have included a photocopy of  the
    marriage certificate or not.

30. I have further noted that the Appellant remained in  Eritrea  following
    the Sponsor leaving in 2007 until she left in March 2013.   That  is  a
    significant period of time where according to her application form  she
    lived for a period with his parents and thereafter remained living with
    her parents until she crossed into  Sudan  on  4th  March  2013.   This
    Tribunal is not unfamiliar with  cases  from  Eritrea  and  indeed  the
    country guidance cases relating to Eritrea  which  have  been  recently
    updated.  The thrust of  evidence  that  emanates  from  those  country
    guidance cases is that the vast majority of Eritreans, male and female,
    within the Appellant's age bracket are subject to military service.  At
    the date of her marriage the Appellant would have been 19 or  20  years
    of age and already potentially subject to military service from the age
    of 18.  There is no evidence provided to  suggest  that  the  Appellant
    would  for  whatever  reason  be  exempt  from  military  service   and
    potentially liable to call up at any time.  I further  note  that  when
    the Appellant did leave Eritrea she rapidly  found  herself  in  Uganda
    where she claimed asylum and her asylum temporary status is a  document
    within the bundle.  Given all that we read from country guidance cases,
    and assuming that they reflect accurately circumstances within  Eritrea
    it seems unusual to say  the  least  that  the  Appellant  remained  in
    Eritrea for a period of six years following the  Sponsor  leaving  that
    country without experiencing any  problems  or  difficulties  from  the
    authorities, being called up for military service or being affected  by
    the fact that the Sponsor himself had fled the country.  Furthermore it
    does not appear to have been a concern of the Appellant  that  she  may
    suffer difficulties or call up and only left Eritrea at the point where
    she knew the Sponsor had status in the UK.  The relatively  swift  time
    in which she was able to move from Eritrea and obtain temporary refugee
    status in Uganda demonstrates that was a course of  action  potentially
    open to her many years earlier and potentially to have left at the same
    time as the Sponsor.  Those circumstances do not sit happily  with  the
    evidence and expert views which have been carefully  analysed  for  the
    production of Eritrean country guidance cases.

31. I do not have  evidence  as  to  the  Sponsor's  circumstances  between
    leaving Eritrea and coming to the UK so it is difficult to say what  if
    anything would have  prevented  the  Appellant  from  accompanying  the
    Sponsor either all the way to the UK or at least to  Uganda  where  she
    has been able to claim refugee status and remain  some  time.   However
    that chronology sits unhappily with country  guidance  cases  and  sits
    uncomfortably with the concept of a recently married couple  presumably
    doing all that they could to remain together rather than separated.

32. Having examined all of the evidence in the round I  am  satisfied  that
    the marriage certificate produced was not a genuine document  and  that
    the letter from the church stating that no marriage had taken place  is
    an accurate reflection of circumstances.

33. I have in the  consideration  of  the  evidence  looked  at  the  money
    transfers and the mobile telephone records  produced  by  the  Sponsor.
    The money transfers all begin after the Appellant would have arrived in
    Uganda and none predate that period.  In terms of  phone  records  once
    again the records produced  all  are  dated  from  the  time  when  the
    Appellant is in Uganda  and  whilst  there  are  clearly  a  number  of
    telephone calls to the mobile number she provided  on  her  application
    form there are also a substantial number of telephone calls made by the
    Sponsor to entirely different numbers within Uganda  and  at  the  same
    locations as the phone calls  made  to  the  Appellant.   There  is  no
    evidence to support the Sponsor's claim that he was in regular  contact
    with the Appellant during that extensive period  of  time  between  him
    leaving Eritrea in  2007  and  the  Appellant  arriving  in  Uganda  in
    March/April 2013.  The photographs produced by the Sponsor are  undated
    but with his  own  annotation  of  March  2013  in  Uganda.   There  is
    accordingly no objective  documentary  evidence  in  those  formats  to
    demonstrate a connection between the Appellant  and  Sponsor  pre-March
    2013 for what is claimed to have been an eight year period during which
    they were married.

34. In summary therefore  I  do  not  find  evidence  or  accept  that  the
    Appellant and Sponsor were married in 2005  as  claimed  and  that  the
    marriage certificate produced therefore was a false  document  and  the
    Entry Clearance Officer was entitled to refuse this  application  under
    paragraph 320(7A) of the Immigration Rules.

Notice of Decision

35. I dismiss this appeal under the Immigration Rules.

36. Anonymity not retained.


Signed   Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever


