
IAC-HW-AM-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/20002/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 March 2015                     |On 23 March 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVID TAYLOR


                                   Between

                            VIPUSSHAN SANMUGARASA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Turner of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a 22 year old citizen of Sri Lanka born on  22  August
    1992.  He has appealed, with permission, against the decision of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Rhys-Davies who, in a decision  promulgated  on  12
    November  2014,  dismissed  his  appeal  against  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer's refusal to grant him entry clearance for settlement in the UK
    under the Family Reunion provisions  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    appellant's sponsor is his father Mr Shanmugarasa  Thambiayah  who  has
    refugee status in the UK.

2.   In  granting  permission  to  appeal  on  28  January  2015  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Osborne noted that the appellant could not succeed under
    the Immigration Rules on substantive grounds but indicated that it  was
    arguable that, in considering the appellant's claims under  Article  8,
    the judge had applied the wrong or inappropriate  test  by  considering
    whether or not the refusal was  "unjustifiably  harsh"  as  opposed  to
    whether it was disproportionate in all the circumstances of the case.

3.   On 6 February 2015 the Secretary of State responded under Rule 24.   It
    was submitted  that  the  appellant  had  conceded  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing that  he  could  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules but that the judge's findings in respect of Article 8
    were sustainable.

4.   I heard submissions from both representatives as to whether there  was,
    in the judge's decision, a material error of law such that the decision
    should be set aside in whole or in  part.   Mr  Turner  relied  on  the
    grounds seeking permission to appeal.  He  argued  that,  although  the
    appellant had conceded that he could not succeed under the  Immigration
    Rules, the judge had nevertheless  not  dealt  appropriately  with  the
    Article 8 claim or  the  issue  of  proportionality.   He  had  made  a
    positive finding of family life [26] but he did not go on to apply  the
    five stage Razgar test.  Nor had he applied  any  of  the  most  recent
    cases relating to Article 8 and proportionality.  At [24],  [28],  [29]
    and [33] the  judge  had  found  that  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's
    decision was not "unjustifiably  harsh"  but  that  is  not  the  test.
    Indeed there is no mention of proportionality at  all  in  the  judge's
    decision.

5.   Mr Turner went on to submit that there had been no  clear  analysis  of
    the competing balances on the  question  of  proportionality.   It  was
    accepted by the Respondent that the family had all  lived  together  in
    Sri Lanka.  The purpose of the Family Reunion policy is for families to
    stay together and the fact that the sponsor is a refugee means that  he
    could not visit the appellant there.  Nor had the judge  considered  at
    all the impact of the refusal on other family members  as  required  by
    the House of Lords' decision in Beoku-Betts.

6.   In reply the Presenting Officer submitted briefly that  the  judge  had
    given adequate reasons for refusing the application under Article 8 and
    it was not necessary for him to quote specifically  the  relevant  case
    law.

7.   In my judgment the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  contained  a
    clear and obvious error of law.  The four times use of  the  expression
    "unjustifiably harsh" is not an expression that is relevant directly in
    Article 8 considerations of proportionality and its  repeated  use,  at
    the very least, gives a strong perception that the  judge  applied  the
    wrong test.  Similarly there was no examination by  the  Judge  of  the
    competing interests of both parties to the appeal  on  the  balance  of
    proportionality which the Judge was duty bound to assess.

8.   I therefore set aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision.   The  only
    remaining issue is that of private and family  life  under  Article  8.
    There will need to be a full rehearing of the  evidence  and  for  that
    reason it was agreed by both representatives that this case  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  further  evidence  and  for  a
    decision on the consideration of  Article  8  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal decision contained an  error  of  law.   It  is  set
aside in its entirety.  The appeal is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
at Hatton Cross for a rehearing (by any judge other than Judge  Rhys-Davies)
on the sole outstanding issue of Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.

No anonymity direction was sought and none is made.



Designated Judge David Taylor
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
23 March 2015
