
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/20358/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |     Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 4 March 2015                          |     On 13 March 2015                 |
|                                         |                                      |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                DENIS LUBANGA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER NAIROBI
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Josephine Lubanga (the appellant's wife)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Even though this case touches on the welfare of children I see no  need
    to restrain publication of details of the case and I make no order.

 2. This is an appeal by a citizen of Uganda  against  a  decision  of  the
    Entry Clearance Officer in Nairobi to refuse him entry clearance to the
    United Kingdom to settle with his partner and her child in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The application was refused under the Immigration  Rules  for
    two reasons.  It was refused with reference to paragraph 320(11) of  HC
    395 and it was refused under EC-P.1.1(c) of Appendix FM at S-EC2.2(b).

 3. The Entry Clearance Officer decided that the appellant  had  previously
    acted in a way to frustrate the intention of the Immigration Rules  and
    that there were aggravating factors.

 4. I do not see how there can be any doubt  about  these  findings,  which
    where upheld by the First-tier Tribunal, because the appellant admitted
    that he had indeed used false documents in order to obtain work and  he
    has used false identities, which misconduct is identified as an example
    of aggravating circumstances in the rules.  In  an  effort  to  justify
    himself the appellant said that he only used the assumed identities  to
    obtain work to survive because he could not work legally in the  United
    Kingdom.  The rather obvious point has to be made the proper  thing  to
    do was to leave the United Kingdom rather than pretend to  be  somebody
    else.

 5. There is some discretion under rule 320(11). It provides  that  refusal
    of entry clearance should normally be refused when the rule is engaged.
    Save  for  what  is  said  below   about   the   appellant's   personal
    circumstances, I see no basis for going behind  the  finding  that  the
    normal consequence should follow here.

 6. The other part of the decision is consequential on the appellant having
    been to prison for five months. This makes him "unsuitable" within  the
    Rules.  It follows therefore that  ordinarily  the  application  should
    have been refused under the Rules as indeed it was.

 7. Mrs Lubanga says that she was upset and offended by the way  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer or someone on the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's  staff
    treated her.  There was no interest in documents she wanted to rely  on
    and at some point there was a suggestion  that  she  should  raise  her
    child in "your culture" or "your country".  Although  Mrs  Lubanga  has
    family members who are citizens of Uganda  she  is  a  citizen  of  the
    United Kingdom. There must be some room to debate the meaning of  "your
    culture" because it is an imprecise term but Mrs Lubanga's  country  is
    the United Kingdom. If, as she claims, she was told to raise the  child
    in accordance with her culture or  her  country,  meaning  outside  the
    United Kingdom, then she had reason to feel  gravely  insulted.   Those
    who assume that a person with black skin necessarily identifies with  a
    culture or country that is not British are  profoundly  wrong  and  any
    contrary view should be expunged from those who  serve  the  public.  I
    cannot take this further as it was not material to the case before  me.
    I have not heard the Entry Clearance Officer's comments.  I  hope  that
    there was some misunderstanding but Mrs Lubanga was clearly  upset  and
    if her understanding about what was said is correct then she had  every
    right to be upset.

 8. The appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal who upheld the  findings
    of fact but permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Brunnen
    because as he put it "the grounds submit that the judge failed to  give
    adequate  consideration  to  the  best  interests  of  the  appellant's
    children and this is arguable".

 9. Mrs Lubanga explained that there are two relevant children; one of them
    is the natural child of the appellant who is now I think  6  years  old
    and the other is her own daughter girl who is now 7 years old or  close
    enough to that age for the distance not to matter.

10. However she also told me, and  I  have  no  reason  to  think  this  is
    anything other than wholly correct, that  the  appellant  has  not  had
    contact of any kind with his natural child since the mother stopped  it
    when she  discovered  the  relationship  the  appellant  had  with  Mrs
    Lubanga.  That is now over three years and it is unrealistic  to  think
    that it is in that child's interests for her father to be in the United
    Kingdom.  It is clear that there is no basis to think that any kind  of
    contact can be resumed.  Mrs Lubanga told me that even attempts to give
    presents have been rebuffed.

11. As far as her own child is concerned, she says that child refers to the
    appellant as "daddy". However they only cohabited as  a  family  for  a
    period of about six months.  It is clear to me that her child  has  not
    established a quasi-parental relationship which just might have made  a
    difference to the ordinary application of the rules. Whilst the  First-
    tier Tribunal's determination would  have  been  improved  by  specific
    consideration of the circumstances of the children associated with  the
    appellant, the fact  is  that  the  appellant's  circumstances  do  not
    satisfy the requirements of the Immigration Rules and I cannot see  how
    the most diligent examination on the part of the First-tier Judge would
    have led to his allowing the appeal under  the  Rules  or  outside  the
    rules on human rights grounds.

12. This is a case of a man who by reason of his own misconduct has made it
    difficult for  him  to  return  to  the  United  Kingdom.   It  is  not
    impossible that he can do that lawfully one  day.  Once  the  requisite
    time has lapsed since his being sentenced to imprisonment he might,  by
    reason of the strength of his relationships in the United  Kingdom,  be
    able to show that the normal consequences of his previous  misbehaviour
    do not apply in his case. However I make it plain that I am not  making
    any  findings  on  this  point.  I  am  merely  pointing  out   to   an
    unrepresented litigant that this is something that  he  might  like  to
    explore in the future.

13. I want to put  on  record  that  Mrs  Lubanga  conducted  herself  with
    considerable dignity before me, listening carefully  and  understanding
    the points I was making to her and addressing me clearly and  concisely
    about the appellant's case.  I make the decision because it is the  one
    I think that is right in law.  She must not  reproach  herself  in  any
    way.  She has done all that could have  been  expected  of  her  and  I
    record my appreciation of that.

14. My decision is that  there  is  no  error  of  law  so  the  appeal  is
    dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.
No anonymity direction is made.
I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 12 March 2015                  |


