
[pic]
IAC-TH-WYL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/20614/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 8 July 2015                            |On 13 July 2015                   |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                      Entry clearance officer - chennai
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             ANUSIYA RAVISHANKAR
                        (NO anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Savage of the Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Respondent

 1. The Respondent to whom I shall refer as the Applicant is a  citizen  of
    Sri Lanka, born on 5 November 1979.  On 23 October 2013  the  Appellant
    (the ECO) refused her application for leave to enter  as  the  wife  of
    Nadesu Ravishankar.  The Respondent  doubted  the  subsistence  of  the
    marriage and found the  Applicant  had  failed  to  provide  sufficient
    documentary evidence in compliance with the requirements of Appendix FM-
    SE of the Immigration Rules.

 2. On or about 12 November 2013 she lodged notice of appeal under  Section
    82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended  (the
    2002 Act).  The  grounds  assert  the  marriage  was  arranged  as  was
    customary in her culture.  The Applicant had submitted evidence of  her
    husband's earnings and  his  savings.   Additionally  the  claim  under
    Article 8 of the European Convention was maintained.

The First-tier Tribunal Proceedings

 3. By a decision promulgated on 12 March  2015  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Newberry allowed the Applicant's appeal.  He was satisfied the
    Applicant's husband was earning sufficient to meet the requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules and that the Applicant's marriage was genuine and
    subsisting.

 4. The ECO sought permission to appeal on the basis  that  the  Judge  had
    addressed  neither  the  ECO's  concern  about  the  adequacy  of   the
    accommodation available for the Applicant  nor  the  ECO's  claims  the
    Appellant had failed to meet the requirements of Appendix FM-SE of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 5. On 7 May 2015 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Osborne granted the  ECO
    permission to appeal.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 6. Nobody attended for the Applicant and her  solicitors  were  telephoned
    and subsequently sent a letter to the Tribunal stating the Applicant is
    willing to make a fresh application for entry  clearance  and  in  such
    circumstances they were not representing her  at  the  hearing  in  the
    Upper Tribunal.  I did not consider this amounted to  a  withdrawal  of
    the original appeal or concession to the ECO.

 7. I was satisfied that notice of the time, date and  place  set  for  the
    hearing had been properly given to the Applicant and her solicitors  in
    accordance with the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (as
    amended) and that in  all  the  circumstances  it  was  appropriate  to
    proceed with  the  hearing  in  the  absence  of  the  Sponsor  or  any
    representative for the Applicant.

 8. Ms Savage relied on the grounds.  The Applicant  had  been  refused  at
    least  in  part  because  she  had  failed  to  submit  the   requisite
    documentation required by Appendix FM-SE of the Immigration Rules.  The
    Judge had erred in not addressing this issue.  He had also erred in not
    adequately considering the issue of the accommodation available to  the
    Applicant and her husband.  The  ECO  in  the  decision  had  expressly
    identified certain concerns about the  adequacy  of  the  accommodation
    (possible overcrowding) and whether the mortgage  payments  secured  on
    the property had  been  maintained.   The  Judge's  decision  contained
    errors of law such that it should be set aside.

Findings and Consideration

 9. The Judge erred in law in failing to address the evidence  or  lack  of
    evidence in relation to the Applicant's  compliance  or  non-compliance
    with the requirements of Appendix FM-SE and the concerns which the  ECO
    had expressed about the adequacy of  the  available  accommodation  and
    whether the mortgage  account  had  been  properly  maintained.   These
    amount to material errors of law.

10. The Applicant was aware of the ECO's concerns about the nature  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal's  decision.   She  has  failed  to   supply   the
    documentary evidence required by Appendix  FM-SE  in  relation  to  her
    husband's earnings and  a  report  on  the  adequacy  of  her  proposed
    accommodation and evidence that the mortgage payments on it  have  been
    properly  maintained.  The  Rules  require  certain  documents  to   be
    submitted even if other documentation not required by  the  Immigration
    Rules has been submitted which would be sufficient to establish on  the
    balance of probabilities her husband's income.   Additionally  she  has
    not provided the evidence about the adequacy of  the  accommodation  or
    the conduct of the mortgage account.  Evidence  of  all  these  matters
    would have been admissible before  the  Upper  Tribunal  under  Section
    85A(2) of the 2002 Act.

11. The original grounds of appeal included a generic reference to  Article
    8 of the European Convention but no evidence or submissions  have  been
    made for the Applicant on this point. In the circumstances  and  having
    regard to the statement by  the  Applicant's  solicitors  that  she  is
    willing to re-apply to the ECO for entry clearance,  I  set  aside  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision and re-make the  decision  allowing  the
    appeal of the ECO and dismissing the  Applicant's  appeal  against  the
    decision of the ECO to refuse her entry clearance.

Anonymity

12. There was no request for an anonymity direction or order and I  do  not
    consider any is required.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The First-tier Tribunal's decision contained errors of law such that it
    should be set aside.  I have re-made the decision and allow the  appeal
    of the ECO and dismiss the Applicant's appeal on immigration grounds.



Signed/Official Crest  Date 10. vii. 2015

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



TO THE ECO: FEE AWARD

The appeal of the Applicant has been dismissed so no fee award may be  made.




Signed/Official Crest  Date 10. vii. 2015

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

