
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/21773/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 19 February 2015                           |On 25 February 2015          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                                Mr ASGHAR ALI
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Ahmed, Counsel (instructed by DV Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Introduction


    1.     The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge De Haney on 9 January 2015 against the determination
         of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Stott  who   had   dismissed   the
         Appellant's appeal in a decision  and  reasons  promulgated  on  22
         October 2014.


    2.     The Appellant is a national of Pakistan,  born  on  14  November
         1979, who had applied for leave to enter the United Kingdom as  the
         spouse of a British Citizen under Appendix FM  of  the  Immigration
         Rules, which was refused by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  on  19
         November 2013.  The judge found that the Appellant had not produced
         a  document  specified  under  Appendix  FM-SE,   namely   official
         documentation from the Department  of  Work  and  Pensions  ("DWP")
         confirming  the  sponsor's  entitlement   to   Severe   Disablement
         Allowance ("SDA").  The  credits  in  the  sponsor's  bank  account
         showing such receipts were only one  element  of  the  requirement.
         The letter on which the Appellant relied was from  Jobcentre  Plus,
         and there the SDA was described as "income you told us about":  see
         [15] and [16] of the decision.  The judge held that the Immigration
         Rules were not satisfied and that there was no breach of the status
         quo so that Article 8 ECHR was not engaged.


    3.     Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by First-
         tier Tribunal De Haney because he considered that it  was  arguable
         that the judge had (a) been wrong as to his  understanding  of  the
         specified evidence, in that the letter from Jobcentre Plus was from
         the DWP and (b) failed  to  carry  out  a  proper  Article  8  ECHR
         assessment.


    4.     The Respondent indicated by a rule 24 notice  that  the  onwards
         appeal was opposed.  Standard directions were made.


    Submissions - error of law


    5.     Mr Ahmed for the Appellant relied  on  the  grounds  of  onwards
         appeal on which permission to appeal  had  been  granted,  and  his
         skeleton  argument.   The  Appellant  had  shown  that  the  income
         requirement was met.  The judge had found as fact that it was.   It
         was a question of whether the correct evidence of such  income  had
         been produced.  Jobcentre Plus was operated by  the  DWP  and  thus
         part of the DWP.  The judge should have accepted the Jobcentre Plus
         letter as adequate, especially as  there  were  corresponding  bank
         statements proving income from the DWP.


    6.     Even if the judge had been right  on  the  documentation  issue,
         which was not  accepted,  the  judge  had  acted  unfairly  by  not
         requiring  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  to  seek  clarification.
         Discretion should  have  been  exercised  by  the  Entry  Clearance
         Officer.   The Article 8 ECHR claim was not  adequately  considered
         and the discretion outside the Immigration Rules was ignored.


    7.     Mr Whitwell for the  Respondent  submitted  that  there  was  no
         perversity and that the submissions  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant
         simply  amounted  to  disagreement  with  the   judge's   decision.
         Appendix FM-SE  to  which  the  judge  had  referred  set  out  two
         mandatory evidential requirements: see  12(a),  evidence  from  the
         payer and 12(b), proof of receipt from the same source.   The  fact
         that Jobcentre Plus was part of the DWP was beside the point.   The
         letter, as the judge had indicated, was not  a  primary  source  of
         information about the Severe Disablement  Allowance  but  simply  a
         recitation of what the sponsor had said.  The judge  was  right  to
         find that Appendix FM-SE had not been met.  The fact that the  bank
         statements produced showed receipt of SDA was  immaterial  and  the
         judge was entitled to reach the conclusion he had.


    8.     In reply, Mr Ahmed submitted that it was  not  in  dispute  that
         Jobcentre Plus was part of the DWP.  The judge had found  that  the
         sponsor was entitled to the SDA.  The judge's conclusion should not
         be sustained.


    No material error of law finding


    9.     The tribunal reserved its determination which now follows.


    10.    The judge had not misunderstood the facts.  He was plainly aware
         of the link between Jobcentre Plus and the DWP.  But as  the  judge
         found, the Jobcentre Plus letter recited  information  supplied  by
         the Appellant's  sponsor.   Rule  12  of  Appendix  FM-SE  has  two
         separate  mandatory  requirements,  as   Mr   Whitwell   submitted,
         requiring direct evidence of the source and direct evidence of  the
         receipt from such source.  The judge was correct to find that  only
         a letter  from  the  DWP  itself,  stating  the  sponsor's  current
         benefits entitlement was capable of satisfying the rule.  The  fact
         that there was separate evidence of receipt of funds from  the  DWP
         was  insufficient,  because  that  met  only  one   part   of   the
         requirement.


    11.    Given that the judge found that the Appellant had not  satisfied
         the Immigration Rules, but would be able to do so, by  implication,
         readily, it was obvious that proportionality under Article  8  ECHR
         would require a fresh and compliant application by  the  Appellant.
         There was no requirement for any discretion to be exercised by  the
         Entry Clearance Officer in such circumstances.  Nor was  there  any
         requirement for the Entry Clearance Officer to  seek  clarification
         from the Appellant.  The judge correctly  found  that  the  refusal
         decision did not interfere with the Appellant's existing  level  of
         family life with his sponsor.


    12.    Thus the tribunal finds that there was no material error of  law
         in the decision and reasons and there is no basis  for  interfering
         with the judge's decision.


DECISION

The making of the previous decision did not involve the making of  an  error
on a point of law and stands unchanged



Signed      Dated 19 February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal was dismissed so there can be no fee award



Signed      Dated 19 February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
