

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/21597/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|No hearing                                    |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 1 July 2013                                |On 5 July 2013               |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      Mr C M G Ockelton, Vice President


                                   Between

                     THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, DUBLIN

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                                 SAEED HAJEBI

                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent is a national of Iran.  He entered a notice of appeal to
    the First-tier Tribunal against  a  decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer Dublin, refusing him Entry  Clearance  for  a  business  visit.
    Judge Gurung-Thapa allowed his appeal.   The  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    sought and obtained permission to appeal to this Tribunal on the ground
    that the judge had no jurisdiction in this case.

 2. The respondent has been asked for  his  observation  on  the  issue  of
    jurisdiction.  He has submitted documents going to the substance of his
    case, in essence repeating what  he  has  said  earlier,  but  has  not
    offered any challenge to the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's  observations
    about jurisdiction.  In these circumstances no useful purpose would  be
    served by holding a hearing.

 3. I note that, throughout, the respondent has claimed  that  he  made  an
    application for a "two-year business visa" and that it was "refused" by
    the sending of his passport back to him.  The only decision,  to  which
    he can point, however, is that to which I have referred above; and  the
    supporting documentation suggests that the intention was to enable  him
    to make a number of short visits to the United Kingdom  in  the  period
    from February 2012 to April 2015.  It seems to me that the  application
    was correctly processed as for a visit visa, which,  if  issued  rather
    than refused, would have allowed multiple entries.

 4. The right of appeal against refusal of a visit visa is greatly  limited
    by statute.  There is a general right of appeal against  refusal  of  a
    visa for a family visit, but this application  was  not  for  a  family
    visit.  There is a right of appeal on human  rights  on  discrimination
    grounds, but none were raised in this case.

 5. It follows that the respondent had no right of appeal  in  the  present
    case. The judge was wrong in law to entertain  it.   I  set  aside  her
    decision and substitute a decision dismissing the appeal to the  First-
    tier Tribunal for want of jurisdiction.






                                                              C M G OCKELTON

VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                           Date: 1 July 2013
