
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/21624/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision and Reasons           |
|                                    |promulgated                    |
|On 9 December 2014                  |On 12 December 2014            |
|                                    |                               |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVID TAYLOR


                                   Between

                             mamurshokh tulkunov
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Harris, Counsel, instructed by Quality
                    Solicitors (Orion)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Although, in this appeal,  the  Secretary  of  State  is  strictly  the
    appellant, for the sake of conformity  I  have  described  her  as  the
    respondent (as she  was  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal).   Mr  Tulkunov
    similarly continues to be described as the appellant.

2.   The appellant, a 19 year old citizen of Uzbekistan, applied  for  entry
    clearance to the United Kingdom under the Family Reunion provisions  of
    paragraph 352D of the Immigration Rules.  The basis of his  application
    was that his mother (and sponsor) Mrs Malika Mahmudova has been granted
    refugee status in the UK.  The appellant's application  was  made  just
    three days before his 18th birthday.  It was refused on 30 October 2013
    by the Entry Clearance Officer who found that  the  appellant  did  not
    meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  352D(iv)  which  requires   the
    applicant to show that he

         "was part of the family unit of the person granted  asylum  at  the
         time that the  person  granted  asylum  left  the  country  of  his
         habitual residence in order to seek asylum."

3.   The appellant's appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge A M  Black
    who allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules in  a  determination
    promulgated on 22 September 2014.  The judge (at  paragraph  14)  noted
    that the sponsor left Uzbekistan and entered the UK on 23 March 2007 as
    a student with leave which, by extension, continued  until  16  October
    2011.  Her subsequent applicant for an  extension  was  refused.   Only
    then did the sponsor apply for indefinite leave to remain  outside  the
    Immigration Rules on human rights grounds.   Her  appeal  against  that
    refusal was allowed under Article 3 ECHR and, although the sponsor  has
    never applied for refugee status in the UK, the respondent nevertheless
    granted her refugee status on 2 May 2013.  The appellant's  application
    to join his mother in the UK was made some three months later.

4.   Judge Black noted that  when  the  sponsor  made  her  application  for
    indefinite leave to remain, and during her appeal hearing  itself,  she
    made it clear that she did not seek refugee status because  she  wanted
    to be able to visit her children in Uzbekistan  and  did  not  consider
    herself to be at risk of harm during such visits.  It  was  noted  that
    between June 2008 and March 2011 the sponsor had visited her  children,
    of whom the appellant is one, on three occasions.   The  judge  allowed
    the appellant's  appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules  based  on  her
    interpretation of paragraph 352D(iv).

5.   The Secretary of State was granted permission to appeal  on  the  basis
    of the grounds which, in essence,  argue  that  352D(iv)  applies  only
    where an applicant was part of the family unit of  the  person  granted
    asylum at the time  that  person  left  the  country  of  her  habitual
    residence in order to seek asylum.  But the sponsor left Uzbekistan  in
    2007 not to claim asylum, but after she had obtained leave to enter  as
    a student.  She never claimed  asylum  although  she  was  subsequently
    granted asylum status by the respondent in May 2013.

6.   At the hearing before me Mr Avery invited me to  find  that  the  judge
    erred in her holding that  the  appellant  fulfilled  the  criteria  in
    paragraph  352D(iv).   The  judge,  he  submitted,  was  vague  in  her
    arguments and although the judge accepted that the sponsor had  a  fear
    when she left her country, she did not  in  fact  leave  Uzbekistan  in
    order to seek asylum.  She came as a student.  The Rules do  not  cover
    the situation of this appellant.  The sponsor is, in effect, a  refugee
    sur place and the Rules do not cover such  a  situation  in  connection
    with family reunion.

7.   In reply Mr Harris acknowledged that the issue before me  is  a  narrow
    point.  It appears from the basic reading of the Rules that a sur place
    refugee cannot take advantage of the family provisions  in  the  Rules.
    He submitted, however, that that was not in accordance with the  spirit
    of the Refugee Convention  nor  of  Article  23  of  the  Qualification
    Directive 2004/83/EC which provides that Member States must ensure that
    family unity can be maintained.  He argued that the Rules  appeared  to
    discriminate against applicants who relied on sur place  refugees.   In
    those circumstances, the appellant ought to be able to succeed  on  the
    basis of his family life under Article 8.

8.   My judgment, however, is that the appellant  cannot  succeed.   I  find
    that the judge erred in her interpretation of paragraph  352D(iv).   It
    is clear from the ordinary reading of that Rule  that  the  sponsor  in
    this case never "left the country of her habitual residence in order to
    seek asylum".  Had that been the case she would have applied for asylum
    on arrival and not have remained here for some years as a student.  She
    deliberately chose not to claim asylum.  She has returned several times
    to Uzbekistan in order to see her children and clearly has no  fear  of
    being there for relatively short periods of time.

9.   The First-tier Tribunal decision must therefore be  set  aside  in  its
    entirety.

10.  I find therefore that the appellant cannot succeed under 352D(iv).   Mr
    Harris submitted that the family reunion  Rules  discriminated  against
    sur place refugees and that, at the very least,  the  appellant  should
    succeed under Article 8.   I  do  not  find  that  argument  convincing
    because there are other avenues for entry open to the  appellant  under
    the Immigration Rules. If an  applicant,  such  as  the  appellant,  is
    unable to obtain entry clearance under the  Family  Reunion  provisions
    there is nothing to prevent him  making  an  application  as  a  family
    member under Appendix FM.  As to Article 8, his family life is and  has
    always been in Afghanistan where he  lives  with  his  father  and  his
    siblings.  He would like to come to live with his mother in the UK  and
    if he is able to meet the requirements of  Appendix  FM  there  may  be
    nothing to prevent that  happening  in  the  future.  But  the  present
    refusal  is  neither  discriminatory  nor  an  interference  with   his
    established family life.

11.  Nor, with respect, is there any merit  in  Mr  Harris's  submission  in
    relation to Article 23 of the Qualification Directive which  refers  to
    family unity.  It need only be said that if the appellant were to  join
    his mother in the UK, his family unity with  his  father  and  siblings
    would be weakened.  Family  unity  cannot  mean  that  members  of  one
    family, some of whom are living in one country and others  in  another,
    have a right to choose where they wish to live.

Decision

12.  The First-tier Tribunal determination contains an error of law  as  set
    out above and is hereby set  aside  in  its  entirety.   I  remake  the
    decision by dismissing the appeal of Mr Tulkunov.

13.  As the appellant is now over the age of 18 and as  no  application  for
    anonymity has been made, I revoke the anonymity direction made  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

14.  The appeal having been dismissed I make no fee award.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge David Taylor
11 December 2014

[pic]

