
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/21929/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14th July 2014                             |On 4th Aug 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                               mrs amina begum
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Hossain instructed by Hossain Law Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh who claimed to be born on 10th
    October 1969 and on  11th  July  2012  applied  for  a  Certificate  of
    Entitlement to the Right of Abode in the United Kingdom as the child of
    the late Masood Ali (the sponsor) and the application  was  refused  on
    7th October 2012.

 2. In a determination  promulgated  on  10th  March  2014  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge having heard the appeal at Hatton Cross on 28th February
    2014  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal.   He  identified  that   the
    applicable provisions of the Immigration Act 1971

         "2 Statement of Right of Abode in the UK

         (1)  A person is under this Act to have the right of abode  in  the
             United Kingdom if

             (a)  he is a British citizen or

             (b)  he is a Commonwealth citizen who

                  (i)  immediately before the commencement  of  the  British
                      Nationality  Act  1981  was  a  Commonwealth  citizen
                      having the right of abode in the  United  Kingdom  by
                      virtue of Section 2(1)(d) or Section 2(2) of this Act
                      as then in force and

                  (ii) has not ceased to be a Commonwealth  citizen  in  the
                      meanwhile."

 3. Section 2(1)(b) of the Immigration Act 1971 then in force stated

         "He is a British citizen of the United Kingdom and Colonies born to
         or legally adopted by a parent who had that citizenship at the time
         of the birth or adoption and the parent either

        i) then had that citizenship by his birth, adoption, naturalisation
           or (except  as  mentioned  below)  registration  in  the  United
           Kingdom or in any of the Islands; or

       ii)  had been born to or legally adopted by a parent who at the time
           of that birth or adoption so had it."

 4. The Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 Section 10  gives  the
    Secretary of State power to make provision regarding  the  issue  to  a
    person of a certificate that he has the right of abode in the UK.  This
    is exercised in the form of The Immigration Certificate of  Entitlement
    to Right of Abode in the United Kingdom Regulations 2006.

 5. Regulation 6A of the Immigration Certificate of Entitlement to Right of
    Abode in the United Kingdom Regulations 2006 reads

         "6.  A certificate of entitlement will only  be  issued  where  the
             appropriate authority is satisfied that the applicant

             (a)  has a right of abode in the United Kingdom under  Section
                  2(1) of the 1971 Act."

 6. The schedule to the Immigration Certificate of Entitlement to Right  of
    Abode in the UK Regulations 2006 sets out that where the applicant  was
    a citizen of the United Kingdom and colonies and had a parent  who  was
    born, adopted, registered  or  naturalised  in  the  UK  prior  to  the
    applicant's birth or adoption that  the  following  documents  must  be
    provided:

      i) applicant's full birth certificate or adoption certificate;

     ii) parents' marriage or  civil  partnership  certificate  if  claiming
         through father or if claiming through woman who is a parent of  the
         applicant by virtue of Section 42 or 43 of the 2008 Act; and

    iii)  parents'  full  birth  certificate,   adoption   registration   or
         naturalisation certificate.

Application for Permission to Appeal

 7. An application for permission to  appeal  was  made  in  the  following
    terms.

 8. It was asserted that the  respondent  refused  the  application  mainly
    because the appellant could not establish she was related to her father
    Masood Ali.  The respondent also raised concern  about  not  submitting
    the father's nationality certificate to prove that  he  was  a  British
    citizen and that the appellant could not succeed by virtue of the  1971
    Act.

 9. The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant's brother Protab  Miah
    who came to the UK with the same rights as his father and  also  a  DNA
    test report confirming Mr Miah was the full sibling of  the  appellant.
    The father's first British passport was issued on 21st August 1969  and
    other supporting documents were put before the judge.  On  the  day  of
    the hearing the appellant also submitted a  copy  of  the  Home  Office
    letter dated 1st August 1984 confirming that a letter could be used  to
    show that the appellant's father was registered as a British citizen.

10. The judge accepted at paragraph 14 the relationship issue  but  it  was
    not clear how the appellant would be eligible for  the  Certificate  of
    Entitlement of Right to Abode.  The judge did not  refer  to  the  High
    Court decisions.

11. The judge made no decision as to whether  the  1948  or  the  1971  act
    applied.  Secondly the judge was self-contradictory about  the  British
    passport of the appellant's father.  He stated it was  before  him  but
    not before the ECO and the archived citizenship certificate  he  stated
    was neither before him nor the ECO.  The grounds questioned whether  it
    would make any difference if the original certificate  was  before  the
    Judge. The judge failed to  place  proper  weight  to  the  documentary
    evidence provided and the judge made a material error by excluding  the
    archived copy of the British  citizen  certificate  from  the  National
    Archive.  The appellant had provided a copy of his father's previous UK
    passport.

12. The judge did  not  dismiss  the  entirety  of  the  testimony  of  the
    appellant's brother and he accepted the evidence that the appellant was
    the daughter of the late Masood Ali.

13. On the day of the hearing the appellant's representative sent a further
    written submission and a copy of the Home Office letter but  the  judge
    made no reference to the submission and the letter.

Permission to Appeal

14. Permission to Appeal was granted by First Tier Tribunal  Judge  Shimmin
    on the basis that it was arguable that  the  Judge  failed  to  make  a
    decision whether the appellant had the right of abode, failed  to  give
    proper weight to the evidence, he excluded evidence from  the  National
    Archive and his findings did not reflect the evidence before him.

The Hearing

15. At the hearing Mr Hossain relied essentially on the written grounds for
    permission to appeal.  He stated the passport was  sufficient  to  show
    the father's status and showed he was a British citizen.  The  passport
    was dated 21st August 1969 and the appellant was born on  10th  October
    1969.  At the hearing Mr  Hossain  produced  an  original  stamped  and
    authenticated copy of the father's registration  certificate  from  the
    National Archives for the father but he confirmed  that  this  was  not
    before the judge. The original had been lost. The judge  had  seen  the
    letter from the Home Office dated 1st August 1984 and he submitted this
    was sufficient.

16. Mr Whitwell submitted that the letter from the Home  Office  dated  1st
    August 1984 merely confirmed that it was possible to write and  request
    that information be passed to the Passport  Office.   The  witness  was
    found to be  incoherent  and  further  only  a  copy  of  the  relevant
    certificate was submitted and this the judge had regard to.

Conclusions

17. The judge is clear that he had regard to the fact  that  copies  handed
    into the Tribunal at the commencement of  the  hearing  of  a  National
    Archives certificate of 26th  November  2012  certifying  as  true  and
    authentic a copy of the sponsor's confirmation  of  registration  as  a
    citizen of the  UK  and  colonies  dated  25th  July  1969.   This  was
    referenced at paragraph 5 of the determination and it is clear that the
    judge had taken this into account.

18. With reference to the witness Protab Miah the judge found  the  witness
    to be an "incoherent and muddled witness particularly in his  testimony
    at paragraph 13".  The judge was clear about the Land Registry document
    which was incompletely translated.

19. The judge found that he was satisfied on the balance  of  probabilities
    that the appellant was born in Bangladesh to the sponsor and  his  wife
    the late Shobutera Banu on 10th October 1969 and the judge  also  noted
    that a bundle of originals were submitted in respect of documents  that
    the appellant relied on.

20. However and this is the  key  part,  the  judge  noted  [15]  that  the
    original documentation produced at the hearing  included  in  the  1969
    issued passport for  the  sponsor  and  yet  this  had  not  been  made
    available to the respondent at the time of the decision.  Crucially and
    most of all the judge stated

         "Furthermore neither at the time of the decision or indeed the time
         of the hearing before me was  an  original  of  the  aforementioned
         certificate of the National Archives  produced.   At  the  time  of
         decision it was not even made known to the respondent that  such  a
         certificate was available.  Having regard to  these  considerations
         the  appellant's  claim  that   the   respondent's   decision   was
         unreasonable and unjustifiable could not be made out."

21. I find it is quite clear from the reading of the Immigration Acts  1971
    that the Immigration Regulations specifically restrict all applications
    for a certificate of entitlement to abode.  In particular the  parents'
    full birth certificate was not provided and nor was an original copy of
    the registration or naturalisation or registration certificate  of  the
    father or mother.

22. The Immigration Certificate of Entitlement to Right  of  Abode  in  the
    United Kingdom Regulations  2006  apply  to  this  appeal  and  to  the
    appellant's application.

23. The judge had regard to the evidence, was entitled to attach no  weight
    when presented with documents without originals and was not entitled to
    ignore the requirements of the Regulations.  As the ECO  indicated  the
    registration certificate is important  because  it  shows  how  British
    citizenship is acquired and this in turn  affects  the  acquisition  of
    citizenship for the appellant.

24. Mr Hossain confirmed that after the hearing the solicitors  obtained  a
    stamped copy of the claimed certificate but this original  was  clearly
    not before the judge.

25. I do not accept that the  appellant  is  entitled  not  to  produce  an
    original certificate and further to the Immigration Tribunal  Procedure
    Rules and in particular Rule 51(5) where a party seeks to rely  upon  a
    copy of a document as evidence the Tribunal may  require  the  original
    document to be produced.  The appellant was on notice that there was  a
    question in relation to whether the father had citizenship  of  the  UK
    and it is made clear in the decision notice from  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer that

         "The British nationality certificate is important as  it  tells  us
         which Section of the British Nationality Act your  relative  gained
         their citizenship through and also when they  registered.   Without
         this information I am not satisfied you qualify for  a  Certificate
         of Entitlement to the Right of Abode in the UK.  I note  that  this
         document is listed as a required document under the legislation for
         certificate  of  entitlement  applications   and   therefore   your
         application falls to be refused."

26. I did not find the unreported decisions from the  first  Tier  Tribunal
    helpful.  Previous unreported decisions from the  First  Tier  Tribunal
    are not precedents and this case must be decided on its own facts.   AO
    (unreported determinations  are  not  precedents)  Japan  [2008]  UKAIT
    00056.  The High Court cases provided predate the Regulations cited and
    only extracts of those cases were provided not  the  full  transcripts.
    They do however confirm that the Immigration Act 1971, which the  judge
    applied, amended and replaced the then present immigration laws.

27. I am not satisfied that the judge made a material error of  law  and  I
    therefore find the determination should stand.






Signed                                  Date 26th July 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
