
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/21624/2012
                                                               OA/21644/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 25th June 2014                               |On 15th July 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                            j a (first appellant)
                           S K (second appellant)
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                       Entry Clearance Officer - accra

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr A M Kanu of the League for Human Rights
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellants appeal against a determination of Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal S J Clarke (the judge) promulgated on 3rd March 2014.

 2. The Appellants are female citizens of Sierra Leone  born  16th  January
    1973 and 28th August 2007 respectively.  The  first  Appellant  is  the
    mother of the second Appellant.

 3. In June 2012 the Appellants applied for entry clearance to  the  United
    Kingdom, the first Appellant  applying  as  the  spouse  of  a  British
    citizen, MK, to whom I shall refer  as  the  Sponsor,  and  the  second
    Appellant applying as a dependent child.

 4. The applications were refused on 24th September 2012.  In  relation  to
    the first Appellant the Respondent referred to  paragraph  281(iii)  of
    the Immigration Rules, not being satisfied that the first Appellant and
    Sponsor intended to live permanently with each other  as  spouses,  and
    not being satisfied that the marriage is subsisting.  The fact that the
    parties had married was  not  disputed,  but  the  Respondent  was  not
    satisfied that evidence had been provided, to prove  that  the  parties
    had kept in regular contact since their marriage which  took  place  in
    Sierra Leone on 5th April 2012.

 5. In relation to the second Appellant the refusal was  made  pursuant  to
    paragraph 297(i)(e) of the Immigration Rules, the Respondent not  being
    satisfied that the first Appellant had had sole responsibility for  her
    upbringing.  It was noted that the Sponsor is not the biological father
    of the second Appellant, and the Respondent was not satisfied that  the
    second Appellant's father had given consent for her to  travel  to  the
    United Kingdom.

 6. The Appellants appealed and their appeals were heard together  on  18th
    February 2014.  The judge heard evidence from  the  Sponsor  and  found
    that the burden of  proof  had  not  been  discharged  in  relation  to
    paragraph 281(iii), and was therefore not satisfied  that  the  parties
    had a subsisting marriage and intended to live  permanently  with  each
    other as spouses.  In relation to the second Appellant the judge  found
    that there was inadequate evidence to prove that  the  first  Appellant
    had had sole responsibility for her.  The appeals were dismissed  under
    the Immigration Rules, and the judge did not consider Article 8 of  the
    1950 European Convention on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention).

 7. The Appellants applied for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.
    In brief summary it was contended that the judge  had  not  taken  into
    account relevant evidence and  had  failed  to  make  any  findings  in
    relation to Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Lever in the following terms;

         "1.  The Appellant seeks permission to appeal, in time,  against  a
             decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Clarke) who,  in  a
             determination promulgated on  3rd March  2014  dismissed  the
             Appellants' appeal to settle in the UK under para 281 and para
             297 Immigration Rules.
         2.   The grounds assert that the judge  ignored  or  did  not  take
             proper account of probative evidence in respect of the ongoing
             relationship in this case.  It is further said the  judge  did
             not address Article 8 raised within the grounds of appeal.
         3.   The judge has detailed the evidence that was before  him.   It
             does show that there was evidence from a variety of sources to
             show the nature of this relationship.  The judge has  referred
             to some difficulties with that evidence and has also  referred
             to the absence  of  witness  evidence  that  might  have  been
             expected.  The judge had said at  para  28  that  despite  the
             evidence presented but because of  deficiencies  he  dismissed
             the appeal.  It is also the case that he  did  not  deal  with
             Article 8 ECHR.
         4.   This is a case where it is arguable that the  judge  may  have
             placed too much weight on evidence that was absent rather than
             evidence that was present in reaching the conclusion  that  he
             did, and perhaps expecting a greater preponderance of evidence
             to demonstrate an ongoing relationship.  Whilst there may have
             been little merit in an Article 8 case that failed under these
             rules nevertheless it  was  a  matter  that  could  have  been
             addressed.
         5.   Whilst it should not be  felt  that  this  is  a  strong  case
             nevertheless I do find that there is an arguable error of  law
             made such that permission should at least be granted.
         6.   There is an arguable error of law in this case."

 9. Following the grant of permission the Tribunal issued  directions  that
    there should be a  hearing  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  ascertain
    whether the First-tier Tribunal (FtT) had erred in law  such  that  the
    decision should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

10. I firstly heard submissions from Mr Kanu who relied  upon  the  grounds
    contained within the application for  permission  to  appeal,  together
    with his skeleton argument dated 20th June 2014.

11. Mr Kanu submitted that there had been sufficient  evidence  before  the
    FtT to prove that there was a subsisting marriage between  the  Sponsor
    and first Appellant, and the judge had erred by not taking into account
    that evidence.  The judge had also erred by failing to consider Article
    8 which had been raised as a ground of appeal.

12. Mr Nath submitted that the determination did not  disclose  a  material
    error of law, and the judge had considered the evidence of  contact  by
    way of e-mails and telephone and also made findings on money  that  had
    been transferred by the Sponsor to the first Appellant.  The judge  was
    entitled to conclude that there was some evidence of  contact  but  not
    enough.

13. It was accepted that Article 8 had been raised as a  ground  of  appeal
    but not mentioned in the determination Mr Nath accepted that  this  was
    an error but not material, because the judge had found that family life
    had not been established.

14. Mr Kanu responded by submitting  that  family  life  had  clearly  been
    established and the judge had erred by disregarding evidence,  and  not
    taking into account material evidence.

15.  I  indicated  that  I  intended  to  reserve  my  decision,  and  both
    representatives agreed that if an error of  law  was  found,  then  the
    decision could be re-made without a further  hearing,  based  upon  the
    evidence that had been submitted to the FtT and the  additional  bundle
    submitted on behalf of  the  Appellants  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  the
    majority of which, had in fact been before the FtT.

My Conclusions and Reasons

Error of Law

16. The Sponsor gave oral evidence before the FtT, and had made  a  witness
    statement dated 11th February 2014.   His  evidence  was  that  he  had
    married the first Appellant, and that they had a  subsisting  marriage,
    and intended to live together permanently.

17. I find that the judge erred in making no  specific  findings  upon  the
    Sponsor's  evidence.   The  judge  does  not  specifically  reject  the
    evidence,  but  presumably  did  not  accept  it,  as  the  appeal  was
    dismissed.  The judge does not give adequate reasons why  the  evidence
    was not accepted, and such reasons need to be given, particularly where
    in this case, the  oral  evidence  was  supported  to  some  extent  by
    documentary evidence.  It is unclear why the Sponsor's evidence was not
    accepted.

18. In paragraph 17 of the determination the judge refers to a letter  from
    Kakua Foreign Exchange Bureau dated 10th October 2012  which  certifies
    that payment receipts were issued to the Appellant,  following  receipt
    of money from the Sponsor.  The judge records;

         "However, without identifying the  particular  receipts  and  dates
         upon them it is of  little  evidential  value  if  they  were  post
         decision, other than on the issue of intervening devotion."

19. It is not clear why the letter is of little  evidential  value.   There
    were six receipts from Kakua contained within the Respondent's  bundle,
    which were submitted with the application.  The file indicates that  21
    Kakua receipts were handed in at  the  hearing.   These  were  original
    receipts dated between 24th May 2011 and 30th April 2012.   These  were
    not post decision, and therefore the judge had a considerable number of
    receipts, together with a letter from the company which had issued  the
    receipts, but there is no adequate explanation as to why this  evidence
    was of little evidential value.

20. In paragraph 18 of the determination the judge refers  to  evidence  of
    contact between the Sponsor and first Appellant contained in pages  112
    to 159 of the Appellants' bundle.  I set out below paragraph 18;

         "18.     The chat from page 112 to 131 is all post decision  and  I
             repeat the same conclusion.  However, pages  132  to  139  are
             messages in 2011 but they are all from the  Appellant  to  the
             Respondent.  Pages 139 to 159 are two-way  correspondence  but
             take place in 2013 and 2014."

21. I find the above paragraph is inadequately reasoned.  It is  not  clear
    why it appears that little  evidential  weight  was  placed  upon  that
    evidence.  If the judge placed little weight because the  evidence  was
    post decision, then prima facie, that would be wrong if the  judge  was
    finding that post decision evidence could not be  taken  into  account.
    Such evidence is admissible if it relates to circumstances appertaining
    at the date of refusal as was made clear in  DR  (ECO -  post-decision
    evidence) Morocco* [2005] UKIAT 00038.  I conclude that this  paragraph
    is unclear.

22. The judge set out the following in paragraph 24 of the determination;

         "24.     I accept that there are many photographs of the Appellants
             with the Sponsor found in the Appellants'  bundle.   There  is
             evidence of contact between the parties, and there  are  money
             remittances.  There is photographic evidence and there is  the
             oral evidence of the Sponsor."

23. The above findings are clearly correct.  In my view, and with  respect,
    the judge does not  adequately  explain  why  the  evidence  summarised
    above, has not been accepted as proving on a balance of  probabilities,
    that the first Appellant and Sponsor have  a  subsisting  marriage  and
    intend to live permanently with each other.

24. The judge, in relation to the second Appellant  reached  the  following
    conclusion in paragraph 27;

         "27.     There is inadequate evidence regarding the father  of  the
             second Appellant and this clearly falls short  of  showing  he
             attended the various offices to consent to her coming  to  the
             UK, and that he had no responsibility for her and did  nothing
             for her."

25. In my view the above paragraph  demonstrates  that  inadequate  reasons
    have been given for concluding that the first Appellant  did  not  have
    sole responsibility for the second Appellant's upbringing.  This  is  a
    case where there was no evidence  that  the  first  Appellant  and  the
    father of the second Appellant had ever married nor  were  they  living
    together.

26. The judge erred in not considering Article 8, as this should have  been
    considered, as it was raised as a ground of appeal, and the appeal  had
    been dismissed under the Immigration Rules.

27. For the above reasons the determination of the FtT is set aside.

Re-making the Decision

28. I have taken into account all the documents that were before  the  FtT.
    This  includes  the  Respondent's  bundle  which  is  not  indexed   or
    paginated, and the  Appellants'  bundle  comprising  194  pages.   Also
    before the FtT were the Kakua Foreign Exchange receipts,  which  appear
    to be the original receipts, and there are 21 in number.  I  have  also
    taken into account the Appellants'  bundle  that  was  before  the  FtT
    comprising 194 pages.  The Appellants' bundle  produced  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal comprising 87 pages consists in the main of documents that had
    already been produced to the FtT.

29. I bear in mind that in relation to paragraphs 281 and 297 the burden of
    proof is on the Appellants and the  standard  of  proof  a  balance  of
    probability.   As  this  is  an  appeal  following  refusal  of   entry
    clearance, I must look at the circumstances appertaining at the date of
    refusal, that being 24th September 2012.

30.  In  considering  whether  the  first  Appellant  and  Sponsor  have  a
    subsisting marriage, I have taken into account the guidance  given  by
    the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal in GA Ghana*  [2006]  UKAIT  00046.
    In summary the guidance is that when considering whether a marriage  is
    subsisting, there must be consideration not only of whether  there  has
    been a valid marriage which formally continues, but there  must  be  an
    assessment of the current  relationship  between  the  parties,  and  a
    decision made as to whether in the broadest  sense,  this  relationship
    comprises a marriage properly described as "subsisting."

31. I find as a fact that the first Appellant and Sponsor  married  on  5th
    April 2012 in Sierra Leone.  In making this finding I take into account
    the  marriage  certificate  that  has  been  produced,  together   with
    photographs of the wedding ceremony, and the evidence of both  parties.
    In addition the Sponsor's passport confirms that he was in Sierra Leone
    between 26th April 2011 and 9th May 2011  which  is  when  the  parties
    state that they first met, and that he was in Sierra Leone between 30th
    March 2012 and 12th April 2012, when the marriage took place.

32. I am satisfied that the Sponsor visited Sierra  Leone  again  following
    the marriage, and that the visit took place between 29th November  2013
    and 17th December 2013.  The Sponsor's passport confirms that he was in
    Sierra Leone in that period.  I am satisfied that the purpose  of  that
    visit was to spend  time  with  the  Appellants.   There  are  numerous
    photographs of the Sponsor and Appellants together contained  at  pages
    73-111 of the Appellants' bundle that was before the FtT.   Photographs
    show not only the wedding ceremony,  but  the  Appellants  and  Sponsor
    together on various other occasions.  I attach weight to this evidence,
    and have taken into account the guidance given by the Upper Tribunal in
    Naz (subsisting marriage - standard of  proof)  Pakistan  [2012]  UKUT
    00040 (IAC) and set out below the second paragraph of the head note  to
    that decision;

         "(ii)    Post decision visits  by  a  Sponsor  to  his  spouse  are
             admissible in evidence in appeals to show that the marriage is
             subsisting: DR (ECO: post-decision evidence) (Morocco*) [2005]
             UKIAT 00038 applied."

33. The documentary evidence proves, in my view, that the Sponsor has  been
    sending money to the first Appellant.  As previously  mentioned,  there
    are receipts from Kakua  Foreign  Exchange  Bureau  covering  a  period
    between 24th May 2011 and 30th April 2012.  There is a letter  in  the
    Respondent's  bundle  from  that  company,  dated  10th  October   2012
    confirming that the receipts were issued to  the  first  Appellant,  in
    respect of remittances received from the Sponsor in the United Kingdom.
     There are also some  receipts  from  Bakadies  International  Limited,
    together with an undated letter from  the  managing  director  of  that
    company confirming that the Sponsor has been using the company to remit
    funds to the first Appellant in Sierra Leone.

34. In addition there are Western  Union  transfer  receipts  contained  at
    pages 45-61 of the Appellants' bundle showing  the  transfer  of  funds
    from the Sponsor to the  first  Appellant.   I  attach  weight  to  the
    documentary evidence, which supports the contention made  by  both  the
    Sponsor and first Appellant, that money has  been  sent  to  the  first
    Appellant in Sierra Leone.  In  my  view  this  evidence  supports  the
    contention  that  the  parties  are  married,  and  that  they  have  a
    subsisting relationship and intend to live permanently with each other.



35. There is evidence  of  contact  between  the  parties  following  their
    marriage.  This is  contained  in  pages  112-194  of  the  Appellants'
    bundle.  There are some telephone records  and  e-mails  and  telephone
    cards.  In relation to this evidence I  have  taken  into  account  the
    guidance given by the Upper Tribunal in Goudey (subsisting  marriage -
    evidence) Sudan [2012] UKUT 00041 (IAC) and set out below the head note
    to that decision;

         "(i)     GA ("Subsisting" marriage) Ghana* [2006] UKAIT 00046 means
             that  the  matrimonial  relationship  must  continue  at   the
             relevant time rather than just the formality  of  a  marriage,
             but it does not require the production of particular  evidence
             of mutual devotion before entry clearance can be granted.
         (ii) Evidence of telephone cards is capable of being  corroborative
             of the contention of the  parties  that  they  communicate  by
             telephone, even if such data  cannot  confirm  the  particular
             number the Sponsor was calling in the country in question.  It
             is not a requirement that the parties also write or text  each
             other.
         (iii)    Where  there  are  no  countervailing  factors  generating
             suspicion as to the intentions of the parties,  such  evidence
             may be sufficient to discharge the  burden  of  proof  on  the
             claimant."

36. In my view, the evidence of contact between the parties,  proves  on  a
    balance of probabilities that their relationship is subsisting.   Their
    evidence,  together  with  the  documentary  evidence  of  e-mail   and
    telephone contact, proves in my  view,  that  they  have  a  subsisting
    marriage.

37. The evidence of  the  parties,  taken  together  with  the  documentary
    evidence of contact, money remittances, and of a visit by  the  Sponsor
    to  the  Appellants  after  the  marriage,  proves  on  a  balance   of
    probabilities that  the  requirements  of  paragraph  281(iii)  of  the
    Immigration Rules are satisfied, therefore  the  appeal  of  the  first
    Appellant should be allowed.

38. In relation to the second Appellant, I am satisfied  that  she  is  the
    daughter of the first Appellant.  She is not the biological daughter of
    the Sponsor.  The FtT gave leave to include in the grounds  of  appeal,
    reliance upon paragraph 297(i)(f) which is set out below,  in  addition
    to  reliance  upon  paragraph   297(i)(e)   which   relates   to   sole
    responsibility;

         "(f) one parent or a relative is present and settled in the  United
             Kingdom or being admitted on the same occasion for  settlement
             and  there  are  serious  and  compelling  family   or   other
             considerations which make exclusion of the  child  undesirable
             and suitable arrangements  have  been  made  for  the  child's
             care;"

39. The  second  Appellant's  birth  certificate  gives  the  name  of  her
    biological father.  There is no evidence that he has played any part in
    her upbringing, although there  must  still  be  some  contact  between
    himself and the Appellants, as he has provided two letters  to  support
    the first Appellant's  application  for  entry  clearance.   These  are
    contained at pages 43 and 44  of  the  Appellants'  bundle,  which  was
    before the FtT.  One of the letters  was  certified  on  10th  December
    2013, before a consular officer in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs  and
    International Cooperation in Freetown, in which the  biological  father
    gives his approval for the second Appellant to travel with  her  mother
    to join the Sponsor in the United Kingdom,  who  is  described  as  the
    second Appellant's stepfather.  The other letter is dated 23rd  October
    2012, and sworn by the biological father before a justice of the  peace
    in Freetown, in which consent is given  for  the  second  Appellant  to
    travel with her mother and settle in the United Kingdom.

40. In considering sole responsibility,  which  is  the  test  set  out  in
    paragraph 297(i)(e) I have taken into account the guidance given in TD
    Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049.  In  paragraph  52(ix)  of  TD  the  Tribunal
    stated;

         "The  test   is,   not   whether   anyone   else   has   day-to-day
         responsibility, but whether the parent has continuing  control  and
         direction  of  a  child's  upbringing,  including  making  all  the
         important decisions in the child's life.  If not, responsibility is
         shared and so not sole."

41. The Tribunal indicated in TD that  sole  responsibility  is  a  factual
    matter  to   be   decided   having   considered   all   the   evidence.
    Responsibility is a practical consideration, and one must look  to  who
    in fact is exercising responsibility for the child.  The responsibility
    may have been for a short duration, in that  the  present  arrangements
    may have begun quite recently.  It is not therefore  the  case  that  a
    parent must prove that they have had sole responsibility  for  a  child
    since birth.

42. The  evidence  indicates  that  the  first  Appellant  and  the  second
    Appellant's biological father were never married.  They were not living
    together when the application for entry clearance was made, as I accept
    the evidence that the relationship  between  the  first  Appellant  and
    Sponsor began in July 2010, and they physically met for the first  time
    in April 2011 when the Sponsor visited Sierra Leone.

43. I conclude, that on a balance of probability, the first  Appellant  has
    had sole responsibility  for  the  second  Appellant's  upbringing  and
    therefore the requirements of paragraph 297(i)(e) are satisfied and the
    appeal should be allowed on that basis.

44. If that were not the  case,  I  would  find  in  the  alternative  that
    paragraph 297(i)(f) applies although I accept  that  there  is  a  high
    threshold.  In my view if the second  Appellant's  mother  was  granted
    entry clearance, and the second Appellant  had  been  living  with  her
    mother in Sierra Leone, taking into  account  the  age  of  the  second
    Appellant, there are serious and compelling considerations  which  mean
    that the second Appellant should not be separated from her mother,  and
    this would make her exclusion from the United Kingdom undesirable.

45. As I allow the appeal under the Immigration Rules, although  Article  8
    was raised as a ground of appeal, it was raised as  an  alternative  if
    the appeal was not allowed under the rules, and there is  therefore  no
    need to go on and consider Article 8.

Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and
was set aside.

I substitute a fresh decision.

The appeals are allowed under the Immigration Rules.

Anonymity

The First-tier  Tribunal  made  an  anonymity  direction  pursuant  to  rule
45(4)(i) of The Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005.
This was because the second Appellant is a minor.   I  continue  that  order
pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008.







Signed                              Dated 7th July 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeals are allowed I have considered whether to make  a  fee  award.
I do not consider it appropriate.  Some of the evidence which has  persuaded
me to allow the appeals was  not  made  available  to  the  decision  maker.
There is no fee award.






Signed                              Dated 7th July 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

