
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/21480/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 September 2015                 |On 3 March 2016                      |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                               ISAYAS BERHANE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Not present/no sponsor/not represented
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Mr Isayas Berhane, was born on 17 December 1996 and is a
    male citizen of Eritrea.  It is accepted  that  the  appellant  is  the
    brother of Awet Berhane who is a refugee living in the United  Kingdom.
    The appellant applied in 2013 to join the sponsor in the United Kingdom
    but the Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) Nairobi refused  the  application
    under paragraph 319X of HC  395  (as  amended).   Notwithstanding  that
    refusal, the respondent now accepts (following the  production  of  DNA
    test results) that the appellant and sponsor are brothers  as  claimed.
    The ECO found that there was no evidence that there  were  serious  and
    compelling family or other considerations which made exclusion  of  the
    appellant from the United Kingdom undesirable and  also  that  suitable
    arrangements were made for the appellant's care.   The  ECO  considered
    the appellant was living an independent life (paragraph 319X(v)).

 2. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Saffer) which,
    in a decision promulgated on 23 October  2014,  dismissed  the  appeal.
    The appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 3. At the hearing on 29 September 2015 at Bradford, the appellant was  not
    represented nor did the sponsor (who lives  in  Leeds)  attend.   I  am
    satisfied that the sponsor and the  appellant's  representative  (BMAP)
    had been duly served with the notice of hearing by first-class post  on
    4 September 2015.  In the circumstances, I proceeded to hear the appeal
    in the absence of the appellant/any representative/the sponsor.

 4. In essence, the grounds of appeal are nothing more than a  disagreement
    with the findings of the judge.  At  [12]  the  judge  found  that  the
    appellant had been living in a house  since  October  2013  with  other
    Eritreans.   The  judge  accepted  that  "the   appellant   has   lived
    effectively alone with minimal support".  Contrary to what is stated in
    the grounds,  the  judge  did  consider  the  appellant's  own  written
    evidence to the effect that there was no security in his area and  that
    the situation was "very bad".  However, the judge concluded that:

         "There was no evidence that the appellant had been affected by  the
         security situation.  ... there was no evidence  that  he  has  been
         assaulted, he has been able to receive money,  he  has  cooked  for
         himself and he has been able to shop to buy the food.  He  was  and
         is living in an acceptable social and economic environment.   There
         was no evidence of neglect or abuse or unmet needs which  would  be
         cared for or unstable arrangements for his physical care".

    Nothing that was stated in the grounds of appeal to the Upper  Tribunal
    persuades me to question whether those findings were not  available  to
    the  judge  on  the  evidence.   The  judge's   conclusion   that   the
    arrangements could "plainly continue for the time he remained there for
    the remainder of his minority of eight weeks" was available to  him  on
    the evidence.  In the circumstances, the appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 29 January 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 29 January 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
