
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number OA/21139/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons promulgated     |
|On 25 February 2015                  |On 29 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis


                                   Between

                                    J.F.
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr. C. Yeo of  Counsel  instructed  by  Legal  Rights
Partnership LLP.
For the Respondent:    Ms. L. Kenny, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. This matter comes back before me to remake the decision in  the  appeal
    following my finding of an error of law in the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Carroll.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen  of  Jamaica.  His  date  of  birth  appears
    inconsistently in the papers: the Respondent records it as 24 September
    1975; the most recent statements of the  Appellant  give  his  date  of
    birth as 31 May 1977. It is to be noted that the Appellant has  used  a
    false identity document in the past and it is likely this is the origin
    of the discrepancy; in the event for present purposes nothing turns  on
    such a discrepancy per se (although necessarily the past  deception  as
    to identity informs the issues herein.) He appeals against  a  decision
    dated 25 October 2013 to refuse to revoke a deportation order.

 3. The following Chronology is to be derived from the various documents on
    file.

    5 OCT 2000:  Appellant entered the UK with leave as a visitor  until  5
                      November 2000.

    21 OCT 2000: Appellant married CC, a British citizen who  had  met  the
                      Appellant when visiting Jamaica earlier in the year.

    2 NOV 2000:  Appellant returned to Jamaica.

    11 MAY 2001: Appellant returned to UK; granted  leave  to  enter  as  a
                      visitor until 11 November 2001.

    c. JUN 2001: Relationship with CC broke down.

    c. NOV 2001: Appellant met SJ  (whom  he  would  later  marry,  and  is
                      referred to elsewhere herein, post-marriage, as SF).

    11 NOV 2001: Appellant's leave expired, but Appellant remained in UK as
                      an 'overstayer'.

    c. JUN 2002: Appellant commenced cohabitation with SJ.

    27 JUL 2003: Appellant arrested in connection with suspected theft  and
                      immigration offences.

    FEB 2004:    SJ (as she then was) visited Jamaica for 2 weeks  and  met
                      the Appellant's family (whilst Appellant remained  in
                      UK).

    27 JUL 2005: Appellant applied for asylum.

    2 AUG 2005:  Appellant's asylum claim refused.

    20 SEP 2005: Asylum appeal dismissed. (It is apparent  that  Article  8
                      was  also   considered:   see   later   decision   in
                      deportation appeal at paragraph 23 -  "The  appellant
                      confirmed  that  Article  8  was  considered  in  the
                      original asylum appeal...".)

    26 OCT 2005: Appellant removed from UK.

    24 MAR 2006: Decree absolute terminating Appellant's marriage.

    27 MAR 2006: Appellant married SJ in Jamaica.

    12 MAY 2006: SF (nee SJ) delivered of Appellant's daughter D-RF in UK.

    c. SEP 2006: Appellant applied for entry clearance as a spouse.

    7 FEB 2007:  Entry clearance refused.  (Reasons  are  set  out  in  the
                      Notice of Immigration Decision, pages 135-137 of  the
                      Appellant's bundle.)

                      SF and D-R made two visits to Appellant for  14  days
                      in May/June and 14 days in October/November of 2007.

    DEC 2007:    Appellant applied for entry clearance as a visitor.

    21 DEC 2007: Entry clearance refused.  (Reasons  are  set  out  in  the
                      Notice of Immigration Decision, pages 138-140 of  the
                      Appellant's bundle.)

    6 MAY 2008:  Appellant  arrived  from  Jamaica  presenting  a  Jamaican
                      passport in another identity; his  previous  identity
                      was revealed following a fingerprint check.

                      Appellant claimed asylum.

    21 MAY 2008: Appellant convicted at Lewes Crown  Court  in  respect  of
                      possession of a false  identification  document,  and
                      sentenced   to   9   months   imprisonment   with   a
                      recommendation  for   deportation.   The   sentencing
                      remarks of the presiding judge,  HHJ  Kemp,  included
                      the following:

                      "...you  have  pleaded  guilty  to  this  offence  of
                      possession of a passport in the name of another  with
                      intent on 6th  May  to  establish  registrable  facts
                      about yourself, in other words, with intent to use it
                      to persuade the Immigration Authorities to allow  you
                      to enter the United Kingdom.

                      You have pleaded guilty at the very first opportunity
                      and for that I give you full credit, but the  offence
                      is a serious one. Officers  at  ports  and  airports,
                      particularly Immigration Officers,  are  entitled  to
                      know who the holder of a passport  is,  and  if  that
                      passport, on the face of it, tells a  lie  about  the
                      person presenting it, then  rightly,  as  the  public
                      would expect, those officials  will  investigate  the
                      matter and the courts will  come  down  hard  on  the
                      heels of anybody convicted of that offence.

                      You have been to this country before;  you  knew  you
                      should not be here; you were using the false passport
                      in order to seek to gain entry illegally.  There  are
                      more legal and legitimate avenues for you to  pursue,
                      and  that  is  what  I  strongly  advise  you  to  do
                      hereafter.

                      For this offence, you  have  pleaded  guilty  at  the
                      earliest opportunity, I  give  you  full  credit  for
                      that. I am told  you  are  a  man  hitherto  of  good
                      character, and that indeed you have a wife and  child
                      to  look  after.  That  is   what   you   should   be
                      concentrating on doing rather than spending  time  in
                      prison, but you will serve a sentence of imprisonment
                      nine months...

                      ... and I recommend that  you  be  deported  back  to
                      Jamaica before you are in fact released from custody,
                      as soon as the Secretary of State has considered  the
                      recommendation ..."

    25 AUG 2008: Appellant withdrew his asylum claim.

    9 SEP 2008:  Appellant notified of a decision  to  make  a  Deportation
                      Order.

    12  SEP  2008:  Appeal  lodged  against   deportation   decision   (ref
                      IA/15475/2008).

                      (Appellant subsequently granted bail.)

    27 OCT 2008: Appeal dismissed.

                      It is apparent on the face of  the  determination  of
                      Immigration Judge Metzer and Non-Legal Member Mrs Roe
                      (which is  a  matter  of  record  on  file  and  also
                      extensively quoted  in  the  decision  of  First-tier
                      Tribunal Judge Carroll  herein)  that  the  Appellant
                      relied in considerable part upon  Article  8  of  the
                      ECHR with reference to his relationship with his wife
                      and daughter. The Tribunal found "the  appellant  has
                      established a private and family life in  the  United
                      Kingdom under  Article  8(1)  on  the  basis  of  his
                      marriage to his wife, the fact of his young  daughter
                      in the United Kingdom and his close relationship with
                      members of his wife's family and friends"  (paragraph
                      39).

    6  NOV  2008:   Application  for  reconsideration  refused  by   Senior
                      Immigration Judge Eshun.

    16 DEC 2008: Application for reconsideration dismissed  by  Mr  Justice
                      Silber: "The Tribunal  was  entitled  to  regard  the
                      applicant's offending as serious as it struck at  the
                      basis of border control; indeed the sentencing  judge
                      considered  it  sufficiently  serious  to  justify  a
                      prison sentence."

    8 APR 2009:  Deportation Order signed.

    22 JUL 2009:       Son, KF, born to Appellant and SF.

    28 APR 2010: Appellant deported.

    6 OCT 2010:  Application letter for revocation of Deportation Order.

    13 MAY 2011: K travelled to Jamaica to stay with Appellant.

    8 AUG 2011:  SF and D-R travelled to Jamaica.

    27 AUG 2011: SF and both children returned to UK.

    29 APR 2013: SF and K travelled to Jamaica.

    6 MAY 2013:  SF returned to UK leaving K with the Appellant.

    31 JUL 2013: SF travelled to Jamaica.

    7 AUG 2013:  SF and K returned to UK.

    25 OCT 2013: Decision refusing to revoke Deportation Order. (A 'reasons
                      for  refusal'  letter  ('RFRL')  and  a   Notice   of
                      Immigration Decision both dated 25 October 2013  were
                      served on 30 October 2013.)

 4. There is no real issue between the parties in respect  of  the  primary
    facts, and as such it is was not necessary to reconvene a  fact-finding
    hearing following the 'error of law' decision.

Consideration

 5. It was common ground that the relevant framework  for  considering  the
    Appellant's application for revocation of his deportation order, and in
    turn the framework for the appeal, was to be found in Part  13  of  the
    Immigration Rules at paragraphs 390 et seq.

 6. The particular version of the Rules that was applicable (i.e. extant at
    the date of the Respondent's decision) was agreed by the parties to  be
    that set out in the Skeleton Argument of Ms Kenny. For  completeness  I
    reproduce those paragraphs of the Skeleton Argument here:

         "390. An application for revocation of a deportation order will  be
         considered in the light of  all  the  circumstances  including  the
         following:

             (i) the grounds on which the order was made;

             (ii) any representations made in support of revocation;

             (iii)  the  interests  of   the   community,   including   the
             maintenance of an effective immigration control;

             (iv)  the  interests   of   the   applicant,   including   any
             compassionate circumstances.

         390A. Where paragraph 398  applies  the  Secretary  of  State  will
         consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not,
         it will only  be  in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the  public
         interest in maintaining the deportation order will be outweighed by
         other factors.

         391. In the case of  a  person  who  has  been  deported  following
         conviction  for  a  criminal  offence,  the   continuation   of   a
         deportation order against that person will be the proper course:

             (a) in the case of a conviction for an offence for  which  the
             person was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less  than
             4 years, unless 10 years have elapsed since the making of  the
             deportation order, or

             (b) in the case of a conviction for an offence for  which  the
             person was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4
             years, at any time,

         Unless, in either case, the continuation would be contrary  to  the
         Human Rights Convention or the Convention and Protocol Relating  to
         the  Status  of  Refugees,   or   there   are   other   exceptional
         circumstances  that  mean  the  continuation   is   outweighed   by
         compelling factors.

         391A. In other cases, revocation of the order will not normally  be
         authorised unless the situation has been materially altered, either
         by a change of circumstances since the order was made, or by  fresh
         information coming to light which  was  not  before  the  appellate
         authorities or the Secretary of State. The passage  of  time  since
         the person was deported may also in itself amount to such a  change
         of circumstances as to warrant revocation of the order.

         ...

         398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
         to the UK's  obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
         Convention, and

             (a) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
             the public good because they have been convicted of an offence
             for which they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment
             of at least 4 years;

             (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
             the public good because they have been convicted of an offence
             for which they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment
             of less than 4 years but at least 12 months; or

             (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
             the public good because, in  the  view  of  the  Secretary  of
             State, their offending has caused serious harm or they  are  a
             persistent offender who shows a particular disregard  for  the
             law,

         the Secretary of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, it  will
         only be in exceptional circumstances that the  public  interest  in
         deportation will be outweighed by other factors.

         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c)  applies
         if -

             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is  in
             the UK, and

                  (i) the child is a British Citizen; or

                  (ii) the child has lived in the  UK  continuously  for  at
                  least the 7 years immediately preceding the  date  of  the
                  immigration decision; and in either case

                      (a) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to
                      leave the UK; and

                      (b) there is no other family member who  is  able  to
                      care for the child in the UK; or

             (b) the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with
             a partner who is in the UK and is a British  Citizen,  settled
             in the UK, or in the UK with  refugee  leave  or  humanitarian
             protection, and

                  (i) the person has  lived  in  the  UK  with  valid  leave
                  continuously  for  at  least  the  15  years   immediately
                  preceding   the   date   of   the   immigration   decision
                  (discounting any period of imprisonment); and

                  (ii) there are insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life
                  with that partner continuing outside the UK.

         399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c)  applies
         if -

             (a) the person has lived continuously in the UK for  at  least
             20 years immediately preceding the  date  of  the  immigration
             decision (discounting any period of imprisonment) and  he  has
             no ties  (including  social,  cultural  or  family)  with  the
             country to which he would have to go if required to leave  the
             UK; or

        (b) the person is aged under 25 years, he has spent at least half of
             his life living continuously in the UK  immediately  preceding
             the date of the immigration decision (discounting  any  period
             of  imprisonment)  and  he  has  no  ties  (including  social,
             cultural or family) with the country to which he would have to
             go if required to leave the UK."

 7. Ms Kenny's reproduction of the Rules omits, amongst  others,  paragraph
    392 which states: "Revocation of a deportation order does  not  entitle
    the person concerned to re-enter the United  Kingdom;  it  renders  him
    eligible  to  apply  for  admission  under   the   Immigration   Rules.
    Application for revocation of the  order  may  be  made  to  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer or direct  to  the  Home  Office."  Also  omitted  is
    paragraph 396: "Where a person is liable to deportation the presumption
    should be that the public interest requires deportation. It is  in  the
    public interest to deport where the Secretary  of  State  must  make  a
    deportation order in accordance with section 32 of the UK  Borders  Act
    2007". (I do not criticise such omissions; the Skeleton focuses on  the
    more directly relevant Rules; I make good in part the omissions  herein
    however for completeness and context.)

 8. Also omitted are the sub-headings. For  completeness:  above  paragraph
    390  is  the  sub-heading  'Revocation  of  deportation  order';  after
    paragraph 392 - 'Rights of appeal in relation  to  a  decision  not  to
    revoke a deportation order; above  paragraph  398  -  'Deportation  and
    Article 8'.

 9. The Rules appear to some extent problematic in that the same paragraphs
    that apply to deportation decisions are referenced in  the  context  of
    revocation applications; this appears to strain  the  context  and  the
    language. For example, in considering paragraph 398 in the  context  of
    an out-of-country revocation application an applicant is past the point
    of claiming that their "deportation  would  be  contrary  to  the  UK's
    obligations under Article 8". Similarly, where  pursuant  to  paragraph
    390A a decision-maker considers paragraphs 399A  it  is  artificial  to
    consider a period of residence in the  UK  "immediately  preceding  the
    date of the immigration decision", or the ties in the country "to which
    he would have to go if required to leave the UK".

10. It seems to me that there is  no  easy  resolution  of  such  tensions:
    indeed both representatives recognised and  acknowledged  the  apparent
    shortcomings in the drafting of  the  Rules  in  this  regard.  In  the
    circumstances, and bearing in mind that  the  Rules  do  not  have  the
    absolute force of statute or secondary legislation and as such are  not
    subject to the same rigours of statutory interpretation, it seems to me
    that  a  pragmatic  and  practical  approach  must  be  taken   to   an
    understanding  of  their  meaning  in  the  context  of  a   revocation
    application, and bearing in mind the underlying principles relevant  to
    issues of deportation and immigration control, but also recalling  that
    the Rules are to be approached with a broad humanity.

11. In this latter context and generally I note that  it  was  also  common
    ground that the amendments to Part 5A of the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 introduced by virtue of the  Immigration  Act  2014
    was of application in so far as issues of private and family life under
    Article 8 were concerned. Sections 117A - 117D  are  matter  of  public
    record and accordingly I do not reproduce them here. (See further below
    in respect of the relevance and applicability of Article  8.)  For  the
    avoidance of any doubt I recognise and acknowledge that the concept  of
    an 'approach of broad humanity' to an interpretation and  understanding
    of an immigration rule is not congruous with a consideration of Article
    8, and may readily accommodate a wider - or more  generous  -  approach
    than a strict  jurisprudence  led  Article  8  balance.  In  effect  in
    reaching an understanding of the meaning of a rule that might be poorly
    drafted, and applying it, what is required is a  common-sense  approach
    bearing in mind that the Rules impact upon people's lives.

12. In addition to the Rules  there  is  published  Guidance:  Mr  Yeo  has
    provided a  copy  of  the  Respondent's  'Criminal  casework'  guidance
    document 'Revocation of deportation order: requests made  from  outside
    the UK' (v3.0, valid from 23 January 2014). (A copy  is  on  file;  the
    document is a  matter  of  public  record  and  accordingly  I  do  not
    reproduce it here.) Necessary I remind myself that such  guidance  does
    not constitute the Rules themselves, and the Tribunal is  concerned  in
    the first instance with a consideration  of  whether  the  Respondent's
    decision  is  in  accordance  with  the  rules.  Such   guidance   may,
    nevertheless, assist in an understanding of the meaning of  the  rules;
    moreover a  failure  to  consider  the  guidance,  unwarranted  and  or
    unreasoned departure from the guidance, may found a conclusion  that  a
    decision is not in accordance  with  the  law.  Neither  representative
    sought to emphasise any particular passages in the guidance.

13. Neither representative has made any express  reference  to  the  duties
    under section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act  2009
    in their respective Skeleton Arguments. Nonetheless the welfare of  the
    Appellant's children has featured as a primary element of the  evidence
    and submissions herein - in particular in respect of events  since  the
    Appellant's deportation. I have accorded the position  and  welfare  of
    the children a primary consideration in my deliberations.

14. Before turning to the particular facts  of  this  appeal,  I  make  two
    further preliminary observations as to its parameters.

15. The first echoes paragraph 392 of the Rules,  (quoted  at  paragraph  7
    above). This appeal is  not  about  whether  the  Appellant  should  be
    admitted to  the  UK,  but  whether  he  should  be  able  to  make  an
    application for entry clearance - which necessarily will then  have  to
    be considered  in  accordance  with  the  applicable  Rules  for  entry
    clearance as a spouse and or parent. It was this feature  of  the  case
    that caused me, following the finding of an error of law, to invite the
    parties to provide assistance  as  to  the  role  of  Article  8  in  a
    revocation  case  "bearing  in  mind  that  a  decision  to  revoke   a
    deportation order is not a decision to  grant  entry  to  the  UK,  but
    merely 're-opens the  gateway'  to  making  an  application  for  entry
    clearance  under  the  Rules"  (paragraph  14  of  my  'Error  of  Law'
    decision). In the event little was said by way of  submission  on  this
    point; after some discussion it appeared to be common  ground  that  in
    effect Article 8 was still of relevance (because a decision  to  refuse
    to revoke could potentially impact  on  the  Article  8  rights  of  an
    applicant and persons present in the UK in that it  would  maintain  an
    obstacle to seeking to enjoy any mutual family/private life in the UK),
    but must be considered through the prism of a  decision  that  did  not
    itself resolve the issue of entry to the UK. In  effect  a  case  might
    come down to the proportionality  of  an  applicant  being  denied  the
    opportunity to make a substantive application for entry in which he/she
    would be asserting Article 8  rights.  This  is  a  slightly  different
    balancing exercise from that more usually considered in the context  of
    immigration cases, be they in the entry clearance or  removal,  but  is
    perhaps approximately analogous to the circumstances  of  an  applicant
    with no basis to remain in  the  UK  who  nonetheless  is  pursuing  an
    application for contact with his or  her  children  in  the  UK  family
    courts wherein it may be a breach of Article 8 - depending  on  of  the
    particular facts - to deny such a person the  opportunity  of  pursuing
    matters relevant to their family life.

16. It seems to me that what follows from that is that any Article 8 issues
    raised by an applicant for revocation - i.e. an  applicant  wanting  to
    put himself in a position to  apply  for  entry  clearance  -  are  not
    inevitably to be determinatively answered by a suggestion  of  UK-based
    family members relocating. Be that as it may, and in any event what  is
    clear on the  facts  here  is  that  this  is  not  a  case  about  the
    reasonableness of relocation of the Appellant's wife  and  children.  I
    approach the appeal on the premise that the issue is in respect of  the
    possibility of the Appellant seeking to apply for entry  clearance  and
    that that cannot adequately be answered by the suggestion that his wife
    and children could instead relocate.

17. The second preliminary observation is, just as this is  not  an  'entry
    clearance' appeal, neither is at an appeal against the decision to make
    a deportation order, or the decision  of  the  Tribunal  upholding  the
    decision to deport.

18. Whilst this is a trite proposition, it  is  nonetheless  worth  stating
    given  that  much  of  the  representations  made  in  support  of  the
    Appellant's application for revocation seek  to  revisit,  deconstruct,
    and  criticise  the  reasoning  of  the  Tribunal  in  the  Appellant's
    unsuccessful deportation appeal.

19. In this context I note in particular that the application letter  of  6
    October 2010, having set out the relevant criteria under paragraphs 390
    and 391 of the Immigration Rules then states "First  and  foremost  the
    factor that ought to be considered is the grounds on which the original
    order was made and in this regard we would submit that the  Immigration
    Judge's decision was fundamentally flawed", before going on to  analyse
    the decision of the Tribunal promulgated on 27 October 2008. Further in
    this regard it is to be noted that  when  the  application  letter  was
    written only 6 months had elapsed since  the  Appellant's  deportation.
    The only material alteration in terms of the facts  identified  in  the
    letter - and addressed in a single short paragraph - was the  birth  of
    KF.  (With  the  passage  of  time  between  the  application  and  the
    Respondent's decision other occurrences have now been highlighted:  see
    further below.)

20. I remind myself that the attempt  to  challenge  the  decision  of  the
    Tribunal in the deportation appeal was  unsuccessful  -  permission  to
    appeal was refused and a subsequent application for permission to apply
    for judicial review dismissed.

21. Further, for the avoidance of any doubt, in so much as the approach  of
    the letter of 6 October 2010 is  apparently  implicitly  based  on  the
    proposition that paragraph  390(i)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  -  "An
    application for revocation of a deportation order will be considered in
    the light of all the circumstances including... the  grounds  on  which
    the order was made" - allows a challenge to  those  grounds,  I  reject
    such a notion as legally flawed. The imperative of paragraph 390(i)  is
    to remind the decision-maker to  take  into  account  when  considering
    revocation the actual basis of the deportation order itself: it is  not
    an invitation to an applicant to challenge the basis of the deportation
    order at  the  time  of  an  application  for  revocation  -  which  is
    inevitably at a  time  after  becoming  'appeal  rights  exhausted'  in
    respect of the initial deportation decision. Of course  this  does  not
    mean that in considering the grounds upon which the  deportation  order
    was made the decision-maker in a revocation application  (and  in  turn
    the  Tribunal)  cannot  look  at  those  grounds  from  the   different
    perspective and distance of the revocation application; that is a  very
    different process from impugning the grounds for deportation ab initio,
    which is what the letter of 6 October 2010 in the main  attempts.  This
    appeal is not a chance to re-litigate the decision to deport  -  albeit
    such a decision inevitably forms the  backdrop  to,  and  informs,  the
    issues herein.

22. Taking these two observations together: the central  issue  is  whether
    the valid deportation order should now be  revoked,  which  would  then
    permit an application for entry clearance to be  considered  under  the
    Rules.

23. Mr Yeo's principal submission in this regard is this: where a  sentence
    of less than 12 months led to deportation, revocation will normally  be
    the correct course. (See Skeleton Argument at paragraph 15.) Indeed  he
    goes so far as to submit that absent the aggravating factors listed  at
    paragraph 398(c) - serious harm or persistent offender - revocation  is
    "essentially mandatory" (paragraph 21).

24. This  submission  is  based  on  the  fact  that  under  the  automatic
    deportation regime introduced pursuant to the UK Borders Act  2007  and
    the Immigration Act 2014 (which was  not  in  force  at  the  time  the
    Appellant  was  deported),  a  person  otherwise   facing   'automatic'
    deportation will  not  be  deported  if  the  circumstances  of  either
    paragraph 399 or 399A pertain, save in  exceptional  circumstances.  Mr
    Yeo argues that the public  interest  in  removing  a  person  who  has
    received a sentence below that which triggers  'automatic'  deportation
    must be considered even less. In short, he argues that the  Appellant's
    offending behaviour would not result in a deportation order today,  and
    accordingly maintaining a deportation order is not appropriate.

25. In my  judgement  this  represents  too  simplistic  an  approach  that
    overlooks that the Appellant was not deported  simply  because  of  his
    criminal  behaviour.  In  particular  in  essentially  focusing  on   a
    sentencing tariff, or scale,  as  currently  applicable  in  'automatic
    deportation' cases, it overlooks that the criminal behaviour  of  which
    the  Appellant  was  convicted  was  specifically  in  the  context  of
    frustrating immigration control. It also ignores that  the  deportation
    order related  to  an  individual  with  a  history  of  disregard  for
    immigration control. In all such circumstances -  irrespective  of  the
    current provisions in respect of automatic deportation -  it  is  plain
    and evident why the onerous sanction of deportation  was  imposed  upon
    the Appellant after a non-automatic discretionary consideration of  all
    of his circumstances.

26. It also seems to me that Mr Yeo's submission  essentially  ignores  the
    fact that the regime of automatic  deportation  for  foreign  criminals
    does not represent the entire deportation scheme.  A  person  sentenced
    for  fewer  than  12  months  who  is  nonetheless  the  subject  of  a
    recommendation for deportation by the sentencing judge may yet be  made
    the subject of a decision to deport pursuant to  the  exercise  of  the
    Secretary of State's discretionary powers. In such circumstances  I  do
    not accept the essential premise of Mr Yeo's  argument  that  a  person
    sentenced in the same way as the Appellant, could  not  currently  face
    deportation. True,  such  a  person  would  not  engage  the  automatic
    deportation regime, but it does not follow that a  decision  to  deport
    might not yet be made in all of the  circumstances  of  the  particular
    case.

27. Further and in any event, in my  judgement  the  submission  disregards
    that the exceptions to automatic deportation would not have been met by
    the Appellant. (Of course I recognise that Mr Yeo's starting  point  is
    that the automatic deportation provisions are not engaged in any  event
    by reason of the sentence; however in seeking to argue  that  a  person
    with a lower sentence would not face deportation by analogy, inevitably
    regard must be had  to  those  balancing  elements  that  would  defeat
    automatic  deportation  as  similar  elements  may  be  relevant  to  a
    consideration of discretionary deportation in  respect  of  a  criminal
    with  a  lesser  sentence.)  The  Appellant  would  not  have  met  the
    requirement of paragraph 399(a)(b) - "there is no family member who  is
    able to care for the child in the UK" - by reason of  the  presence  of
    the mother; further the Appellant would not have met the requirement of
    15 years continuous valid leave.

28. In any event I am unable to accept that  support  for  this  submission
    emerges from a consideration of the relevant Immigration Rules.

29. Mr Yeo's submission essentially invites a  decision-maker  to  commence
    consideration of a revocation  application  at  paragraph  398  of  the
    Rules, and to determine that if paragraph 398  does  not  apply  -  and
    therefore it is unnecessary to consider the exceptions at paragraph 399
    and 399 A - then revocation must follow. This is to  ignore  the  other
    provisions of the Immigration Rules.

30. In my judgement the starting point is paragraph 390. This sets  out  in
    broad terms the matters that must be taken  into  account.  Numerically
    and logically the next matter  for  a  decision-maker  to  consider  is
    paragraph 390A - which directs attention to paragraph 398. If paragraph
    398 does not apply then "it will only be in  exceptional  circumstances
    that the public interest in maintaining the deportation order  will  be
    outweighed by other factors" (paragraph 390A). Paragraphs 391 and  391A
    provide further guidance which is relevant to  the  balancing  exercise
    adverted to in paragraph 390 and the last part of paragraph 390A.

31. In contrast Mr Yeo's submission is to the effect that if paragraph  398
    does not apply then revocation is inevitable. I cannot  reconcile  this
    submission with the scheme of the Rules, and reject it accordingly.

32. I turn then to a consideration of the Appellant's  case  in  accordance
    with the scheme of the Rules.

33. The starting point is the grounds on which the  deportation  order  was
    made. I have set out above in the chronology fulsome extracts from  the
    sentencing remarks of  the  Judge  that  recommended  deportation.  The
    details of the decision to make a deportation order are also set out in
    the determination of the Tribunal which  upheld  that  decision  -  and
    which is a matter of record on file.

34. At paragraph 41  the  Tribunal  commented  on  the  Judge's  sentencing
    remarks - "The sentencing judge made a recommendation  for  deportation
    which was not appealed against and noted in his sentencing remarks that
    the offence was a 'serious one'. He further noted  that  the  appellant
    had been to the United Kingdom previously and knew  he  should  not  be
    here and used a passport in order to gain  entry  illegally"  -  before
    adding the following observation: "In addition, although the  appellant
    had committed no previous criminal offences, it was clear that  he  had
    been an overstayer and had no lawful status in the United Kingdom for a
    number of years before being deported". The Tribunal then  went  on  at
    paragraph 42 to comment on the unsatisfactory nature of the Appellant's
    immigration history. In drawing matters to a conclusion,  at  paragraph
    51, reference to the wider immigration history of  the  Appellant  over
    and above his criminal offending is again made: "He had been present in
    the United Kingdom illegally for most of his first stay in  the  United
    Kingdom and married and had a child in circumstances where  he  had  no
    status in the United Kingdom. It was only once  he  had  been  arrested
    that he sought to regularise his position in the United Kingdom".

35. In my judgement it is very clear that the notion that the  decision  to
    make a Deportation Order was not merely a product  of  the  Appellant's
    offence in attempting to secure entry by use of a false passport in May
    2008 is underscored by these passages.  This  not  only  undermines  Mr
    Yeo's essential reliance upon length of sentence as the determinant  of
    revocation - because the conviction and the sentence  length  were  not
    the only  bases  of  the  deportation  decision,  but  also  serves  to
    emphasise  the  nature  of  the  Appellant's  conduct  as  striking  at
    immigration control. This latter  matter  was  also  emphasised  by  Mr
    Justice  Silber  in  dismissing   the   Appellant's   application   for
    reconsideration (quoted above  in  the  chronology).  Necessarily  such
    matters are relevant to a consideration of paragraph 390(iii)  as  well
    as 390(i).

36. I depart temporarily from paragraph 390. However in doing so I  observe
    the paragraph 390 is an overarching provision to which  the  subsequent
    paragraphs are subordinate. Much of the analysis set out below will  in
    turn be considered as part of "all the circumstances"  required  to  be
    considered under paragraph 390.

37. Paragraph 390A directs attention to paragraph 398. There is no  dispute
    that neither  paragraph  398(a)  nor  (b)  applies  to  the  Appellant.
    Further, I accept Mr Yeo's submission that paragraph  398(c)  does  not
    apply. There is no suggestion of  the  Appellant  being  "a  persistent
    offender". Nor has the Respondent  previously  articulated  a  case  in
    respect of "serious harm". I do note, however, in this context that  at
    one point Ms Kenny  argued  that  the  references  to  the  Appellant's
    offence  being  a  'serious'  offence  in  the  determination  of   the
    deportation appeal were tantamount to a finding of 'serious harm'. I do
    not accept that the concept of a serious offence is congruent with  the
    concept of offending that  has  caused  serious  harm,  and  I  am  not
    prepared to infer without  more  that  this  is  what  the  deportation
    Tribunal had in mind. Ms Kenny is otherwise unable to identify anything
    in  the  documentary  evidence  to  indicate  that  the   reasons   for
    deportation related to offending  behaviour  that  had  caused  serious
    harm.

38. In circumstances where I find that paragraph 398 does not apply  it  is
    not necessary for me to give consideration to paragraph 399 and 399A in
    the context paragraph 398 and pursuant to the imperative  of  paragraph
    390A. (Nonetheless, I have in  any  event  given  consideration  in  my
    overall evaluation  of  the  case  to  those  matters  covered  by  the
    substance of paragraph 399, specifically the  Appellant's  relationship
    with his wife and children: see further below.)

39. Pursuant to paragraph 391(a), and  where  the  Appellant  was  deported
    following conviction with  a  sentence  of  less  than  4  years,  "the
    continuation of a deportation order... will  be  the  proper  course...
    unless 10 years have elapsed since the making of the deportation order"
    unless one of the exceptions identified in that paragraph - contrary to
    the ECHR, contrary to the Refugee Convention, exceptional circumstances
    constituting 'compelling factors' - pertains In other words, under  the
    scheme of the Rules the Appellant's exclusion  is  envisaged  at  least
    until April 2019. I note that the Respondent's decision herein was made
    some 4.5 years after the deportation order was signed,  and  3.5  years
    after the Appellant's actual deportation.

40. Paragraph 391A directs attention "in other cases" to a consideration of
    changes of circumstances, fresh information, and the passage  of  time,
    on the premise that absence such features revocation of the order  will
    not normally be authorised. In my judgement  this  provision  does  not
    apply herein because  this  is  not  an  'other  case'  because  391(a)
    applies.

41. Pursuant to the latter part of  paragraph  391  -  the  exception  limb
    ("Unless...")  - and the overarching imperatives of  paragraph  390,  I
    have accordingly attempted to explore herein factors in relation to the
    ECHR, exceptional circumstances (which in reality on the facts here are
    rooted in the family life of the Appellant in any  event),  the  events
    that  have  occurred  since  the  Appellant's  deportation  (again,  as
    advanced herein, essentially matters relating to the  circumstances  of
    the Appellant's family in the UK), and the passage of time.

42. The Appellant relies upon a number of events / changes of circumstances
    in addition to the passage of time, specifically: the birth of K, which
    postdates the  signing  of  the  Deportation  Order,  (albeit  that  it
    predates the Appellant's actual deportation); a house fire which led to
    the relocation SF and the children for  5  weeks  in  September/October
    2010; a claim that it was discovered that D-R had  been  abused  by  an
    older child at  her  after-school  club;  SF  being  diagnosed  with  a
    prolapsed disc in September 2011; and  the  death  of  SF's  father  in
    November 2013.

43. As regards K's birth,  and  the  circumstances  of  the  children  more
    generally, I address these matters both incidentally in considering the
    other events, and more particularly, below.

44. In respect of the house fire I have noted the news report from a  local
    paper which is on file. This suggests the cause to have been  a  faulty
    plug socket. Detail is also provided by SF in her witness statement  at
    paragraphs 11-13. I do not understand  it  to  be  suggested  that  the
    Appellant's presence could have avoided such an  event,  and  therefore
    could not have avoided the upset, the loss  of  treasured  possessions,
    and  the  subsequent  unsettling   of   being   placed   in   temporary
    accommodation,  or  the  resulting  nightmares  and  residual  nightime
    worries. The best that might be  said  is  that  the  presence  of  the
    Appellant might have helped in comforting and coping after the event.

45. The exposure of  D-R  to  inappropriate  sexualised  behaviour  is  the
    subject of a Children's  Services  assessment  made  in  December  2010
    (Appellant's bundle pages 115-119). D-R would have been 4 years old  at
    this time. The referral appears to have been prompted by  SF  observing
    her daughter inappropriately touching a  family  member's  child;  when
    asked about her conduct D-R had said that her friend had taken her into
    the toilet at after-school club, they had undressed and then her friend
    had told her to get on top of her.

46.  The  report,  after  setting  out  the  details  of  the  'information
    gathering' exercise, states: "Based on  the  information  gathered,  my
    opinion is that [D-R] displayed signs which suggested  she  might  have
    seen or directly involved with sexualised behaviour. It  appears  [D-R]
    may perceive this behaviour as child play since she has  not  developed
    the social moral maturity to  interpret  it  as  inappropriate".  After
    considering  a  wide  variety  of  factors,  and  concluding  that  the
    incidences between D-R and the  other  child  were  inappropriate,  the
    report recommended that Social Services had no  further  role  to  play
    because the parents had demonstrated  strength  in  safeguarding  their
    child: in particular SF had acted promptly by discontinuing the  after-
    school sessions and reporting the matter to social  services,  and  was
    open  to  receiving  support  for  D-R  to  engage   with   therapeutic
    intervention; it was considered "the protective factors out weight  the
    risk  of  young  person  being  exposed  to  inappropriate   sexualised
    behaviour".

47. It is to be noted that the  report  does  not  otherwise  identify  any
    significant concerns about the children's  domestic  circumstances  and
    upbringing: D-R was reported by her Primary school to be  "doing  well"
    in her cognitive and learning development; a relatively low  attendance
    record was considered to be likely attributable to a family holiday  in
    Jamaica; "The children appeared  to  be  well  cared  for  with  neatly
    braided hair and clean clothes"; both children had regular routines and
    opportunities for social learning and  development;  secure  attachment
    was observed between the children and their mother.

48. I note that  the  Appellant  does  express  the  view  in  his  witness
    statement that had he not been deported his  daughter  would  not  have
    needed to attend an after-school club, and would therefore in turn  not
    have been exposed to the sexualised  behaviour  of  another  child.  He
    expresses considerable regret over such circumstances.

49. Necessarily, and bearing in mind that this is not a  challenge  to  the
    decision to deport the Appellant in the first place, the events of  the
    past cannot be altered. Accordingly the significance of this episode to
    the Appellant's case in respect of revocation is again the more general
    point in respect of the support to be gleaned from a father  (which  in
    the ordinary course of  events  will  include  both  the  provision  of
    comfort when hurt, and an element of parental protection).

50. The Appellant has also filed  a  letter  from  a  Consultant  Community
    Paediatrician  dated  27  July  2011  addressed  to   the   family   GP
    (Appellant's bundle pages 120-121).  This  letter  is  written  in  the
    context of a concern about D-R's memory  retention,  and  her  mother's
    query as to whether she might be dyslexic;  there  were  also  concerns
    expressed by her school  as  to  falling  asleep  during  numeracy  and
    phonics. D-R (5 years and 2 months old, i.e. 62 months) was assessed to
    be at a 44 month developmental age, and it was thought - "I suspect..."
    - that this accounted for her "difficulties with memory,  progress  and
    engaging at school". The Consultant recommended appropriate support  be
    given at school "to address her mild learning impairment", and that  SF
    discuss with the school ways of supporting her daughter  at  home.  The
    letter concludes "Hopefully, with adequate  support  and  encouragement
    she will make good progress".

51. The school report for the year ending July 2011 (pages 122-124) must be
    seen through the prism  of  the  Consultant  Community  Paediatrician's
    assessment. Although concern is expressed with regard to  literacy  and
    numeracy, it is also indicated that D-R is interested in  many  topics,
    seems on the whole motivated and excited to learn, works well  as  part
    of a group, has good relationships with adults  and  a  number  of  her
    peers, expresses her needs and feelings in  appropriate  ways,  and  is
    developing awareness of her own needs, views and feelings and those  of
    others; she is described as "a very good-natured,  kind  and  sensitive
    child, with strong creative impulses".

52. A more recent report on D-R in respect of Drama and Movement Therapy at
    school dated December 2013 (pages 25-26) refers to problems engaging in
    class, difficulties expressing thoughts  /  feelings  /  emotions,  and
    problems connecting with peers socially. The report indicates a  highly
    positive response: "appeared to enjoy";  "often  initiated";  "able  to
    make direct choices"; "lead the group confidently and  articulately  in
    an activity that she had instigated"; "positive connections with  other
    group  members";  "energetic,  playful  and  enthusiastic  role";  "she
    developed a strong supportive presence"; "many positive experiences  in
    allowing [D-R] to explore her feelings of adult to child  relationships
    and communication".

53. I am, of course, cautious not to lose sight of the fact that a positive
    response to therapy nonetheless does not detract  from  the  fact  that
    there was a perceived need for therapy in the first place. However,  in
    my judgement all of these reports, individually and in combination, not
    only reveals nothing of any great adverse significance  (and  certainly
    nothing obviously and directly  attributable  to  the  absence  of  the
    Appellant), but also indicate that SF is demonstrably able to cope  and
    act to safeguard the  best  interests  of  her  children  and  to  seek
    appropriate support and input from other agencies as required.

54. In respect of SF's back problems, supporting documents (pages  128-129)
    show that she was admitted  to  hospital  on  18  September  2011,  and
    discharged on 24 September 2011 with a one year  history  of  bearable,
    non-traumatic back pain diagnosed as acute exacerbation of Left S1 root
    syndrome, treated by way of a micro-discectomy at Left L5/S1.  She  was
    discharged with routine post-operative advice, there were  no  sutures,
    her operation wound was clean  and  dry,  and  she  was  provided  with
    analgesics and laxatives.

55. SF has also provided a statutory sick note indicating that she was  not
    fit for work between 13 May 2014 and 30 May 2014 because of pneumonia.

56. There is also on file  a  discharge  notification  from  Kings  College
    Hospital indicating that K was admitted overnight on 20 March 2014 with
    viral gastroenteritis.

57. There is no dispute in respect of the death of SF's elderly father.

58. With all due respect to the Appellant and his family, and  not  wishing
    for a moment to belittle their experiences and any resulting upsets and
    anxieties, ultimately it seems to me that  all  of  these  matters  are
    essentially  the  vicissitudes  of  life  -  albeit  the  exposure   to
    inappropriate   sexualised   behaviour   is   particularly    troubling
    notwithstanding D-R's apparent lack  of  insight  into  this  as  being
    anything more than play.

59. I note what the Appellant has had to say in his  witness  statement  at
    paragraphs 22 and 23 about these  matters  and  his  absence  from  his
    family during such episodes. I am prepared to accept that  it  is  more
    likely than not that all would have been better able  to  cope  if  the
    Appellant had been - or was to be -  present  in  the  UK.  This  would
    likely alleviate some of the pressure on  SF  and  the  children  would
    enjoy his company better than on the occasional visits  (the  financial
    pressures of which would also be alleviated).

60. However, such matters  are  the  near  inevitable  consequence  of  any
    deportation and necessarily do not in  themselves  justify  either  not
    making an order in the first place, or - more pertinently in this  case
    - revoking such an order.

61. In this context I turn again to the background to  the  making  of  the
    deportation  order,  including  as  it  does  a  consideration  of  the
    Appellant's  immigration  history,  and  consider  such  matters   with
    reference to the Appellant's comments and observations in  his  witness
    statement - which regrettably in my judgement  do  not  reveal  genuine
    contrition. I also give further  consideration  to  the  'family  life'
    aspect of the case in the context of the immigration  history.  I  make
    the following observations:

   (i) Following his entry in 2001 the Appellant became  an  overstayer.  I
         find that it is more likely  than  not  that  he  would  have  done
         nothing to regularise his status if he had  not  been  arrested  in
         July 2003

   (ii) I note that in his witness statement, at paragraph 6, he  seems  to
         suggest CC had taken his passport and told him that  she  would  be
         applying to extend his lead on his behalf, and that he  only  found
         out "much later" that she had not made any such application.  I  do
         not accept that  this  in  any  way  provides  an  explanation  for
         overstaying from November 2001: on his own account the relationship
         had broken down by June 2011 and so he had  no  basis  to  consider
         that there was any foundation for an application to remain  in  the
         UK  to  be  made  on  his  behalf  by  CC  by  reference  to  their
         relationship or otherwise. I consider the  Appellant's  attempt  to
         distance himself from the wrongdoing to  be  disingenuous,  and  an
         adverse matter in the overall consideration of this appeal:  it  is
         indicative of a continuing  lack  of  responsibility  for  his  own
         actions and in particular his contravention of immigration control.



   (iii) In my judgement the Appellant's lack of  willingness  to  shoulder
         responsibility for his (and in turn his family's) predicament,  and
         his misplaced sense of injustice is also illustrated  at  paragraph
         14 of his witness statement: "The Crown Court Judge  was  not  made
         aware of all my personal and family circumstances when he sentenced
         me by recommending the deportation order. Therefore I believe  that
         the decision to recommend my  deportation  was  made  without  full
         information regarding my circumstances. I honestly believe that had
         the judge been made aware of all my circumstances then he may  well
         not have made a recommendation for deportation and I would not have
         got into all these difficulties".(See similarly at  paragraph  16.)
         There is no  basis  for  such  a  belief.  More  critically  it  is
         manifestly not  the  case  that  Judge  Kemp  was  unaware  of  the
         Appellant's  domestic  circumstances  to  which  he  made   express
         reference - "I am told you are a man hitherto  of  good  character,
         and that indeed you have a wife and child to look  after.  That  is
         what you should be concentrating on doing rather than spending time
         in prison".

   (iv) The  Appellant  seeks  to  blame  "all  these  difficulties"  on  a
         misunderstanding  by  the   criminal   Judge   in   preference   to
         acknowledging his own wrongdoing as the source of his difficulties.

   (v) Whilst I recognise that at paragraph 13 of his witness statement the
         Appellant comments that he made "a foolish decision", and  that  he
         "knew  this  was  wrong",  he  still  does  not  seem  prepared  to
         acknowledge that it was  in  consequence  of  his  actions  that  a
         deportation order was made; rather he attributes the making of  the
         deportation order to a misunderstanding on the part of  Judge  Kemp
         and thereafter  a  misapplication  of  law  and  principle  by  the
         Respondent and in turn the  Tribunal.  In  such  circumstances  the
         Appellant's observations at paragraph 16 that he is not seeking  to
         justify or condone his actions seem to me little  more  than  empty
         platitudes driven by a sense of needing to appear  contrite  rather
         than being driven by any insight into how seriously his  misconduct
         has  appropriately  been  treated  by  the  criminal  courts,   the
         Respondent, and the Tribunal.

   (vi) The asylum claim following his  arrest  appears  no  more  than  an
         attempt to frustrate the process of removal. This is exacerbated by
         a further 'empty' asylum claim following upon  his  arrest  in  May
         2008 - although had the good sense later to withdraw that.

   (vii) The attempted re-entry in 2008 using  a  false  document  followed
         soon after - and necessarily was in defiance of - two  refusals  of
         entry clearance.

   (viii) It is suggested that family difficulties following burglaries  in
         December 2007 and January 2008 were  the  trigger  for  seeking  to
         enter unlawfully. Supporting evidence by way of  two  letters  from
         the Metropolitan Police both dated 15 February 2008 addressed to SF
         as a victim of burglary have been  provided.  However,  bearing  in
         mind the earlier applications for entry clearance,  his  denial  of
         the justice of the deportation decision, and the  presence  of  his
         family in the UK, in my judgement it was  clearly  the  Appellant's
         wish to come to UK come  what  may,  and  I  do  not  accept  these
         burglaries were trigger events that led to him taking steps that he
         would not otherwise have taken. The passage  of  time  between  the
         burglaries and the entry does not obviously suggest  a  nexus  even
         allowing for time to make the necessary arrangements. He has  shown
         himself previously - and since by the making of an  abusive  asylum
         claim - to have  no  respect  for  immigration  control  and  I  am
         satisfied on a balance of probabilities that he would  have  sought
         to enter the UK unlawfully in any event.

   (ix) I find nothing has been advanced that  in  any  way  mitigates  the
         Appellant's misconduct. I find it an unsatisfactory aspect  of  his
         case that he does not accept full responsibility for  his,  and  in
         turn his family's, circumstances.

   (x) The Tribunal considering the Appellant's Article 8  grounds  in  his
         asylum appeal recognised that the  marital  relationship  had  been
         entered into at a time of 'precariousness'  in  immigration  terms:
         "The  appellant  and  his  wife  married  in  entirely   precarious
         circumstances in Jamaica when the appellant's wife was fully  aware
         that he had no lawful status in the United Kingdom" (paragraph 43).

   (xi) Indeed it seems to me also that both  children  were  conceived  at
         times of the utmost precariousness of his immigration  status:  D-R
         was born in May 2006 which suggests conception at  earliest  in  or
         about August 2005 - and most likely just after the refusal  of  his
         asylum claim. K was born in July 2009,  and  so  conceived  at  the
         earliest in or about October 2008 - just after the service  of  the
         Notice of Intention to Deport.

   (xii) Again the earlier Tribunal  commented  in  respect  of  the  first
         child: "Although we accept the appellant's wife is dutiful  towards
         her parents and did not know until 2003 of the appellant's lack  of
         status in the United Kingdom, she clearly married him and  had  the
         child with him in that knowledge" (paragraph 45). (D-R's conception
         was described before the Tribunal in October  2008  as  a  'planned
         pregnancy' (paragraph 19).)

62. The Appellant has been able to maintain family life both with his  wife
    and children through visits: indeed he accepts as much in  his  witness
    statement at paragraph 19 "I have developed and maintained a close bond
    with my children". There are  assorted  photographs  on  file  in  this
    regard, and SF gives a breakdown of the various visits  to  Jamaica  at
    paragraphs 8 and 9 of her witness statement.

63.  Of  course  I  entirely  accept  that  such  'family  life'   is   not
    qualitatively the same as if the Appellant and his children  had  been,
    or were to, reside in  the  same  country  (and  thereby  in  the  same
    household). However I note that the current predicament is not simply a
    consequence of the deportation order; it is also  in  significant  part
    both a consequence of the decision of the  Appellant  and  SF  to  have
    children when they did, and, more particularly, a  consequence  of  the
    election not to relocate as a family with  the  Appellant.  Whilst  the
    children are blameless in such matters it does not,  in  my  judgement,
    behove the  adults  to  rely  upon  the  stress  and  inconvenience  to
    themselves of having to bring up their children apart. As  regards  the
    impact on the children - that is  inevitable  in  a  deportation  case;
    indeed every child is impacted by the actions of their parents  whether
    for good or bad, the State's obligation to remedy such  impact  is  not
    absolute, which is  illustrated  in  the  immigration  context  by  the
    principal  that  whilst  a  child's  best  interests  are   a   primary
    consideration they are not paramount.

64. As regards the children's best interests I  accept  that  it  would  be
    better if their father was part of their household than if he was  not.
    However, it also seems abundantly clear from the evidence that  SF  has
    been well able successfully to protect their welfare in their  father's
    absence.

65. In terms of the public interest considerations - which inevitably  must
    inform any decision to revoke a deportation order involving a separated
    family (and in this regard it seems to me that Article 8 considerations
    are subsumed in the overarching consideration  under  paragraph  390  -
    "all the circumstances" - and do not require any separate consideration
    in the event that it is determined that an applicant does  not  satisfy
    the Rules) - necessarily I take into account the public interest in the
    maintenance of effective immigration control as should be apparent from
    the various observations in respect  of  the  reasons  for  making  the
    deportation order in the first place. I acknowledge that the  Appellant
    is able to speak English. I also  acknowledge  that  SF  is  in  steady
    employment, although I have not been provided with any costings  as  to
    the financial independence of the family in the event of  the  addition
    of the Appellant to the household. Nor  has  anything  of  detail  been
    provided in terms  of  his  economic  circumstances  whilst  living  in
    Jamaica beyond the fact that he has been living with family.

66. I have had regard to the risk of re-offending. I do not accept that the
    Appellant's offence was  triggered  by  exceptional  circumstances  and
    therefore  can  be  considered  a  'one-off'  on  that  basis.  He  had
    previously  demonstrated  a  longstanding  disregard  for   immigration
    control and thereby disrespect for the law  of  the  land.  Nonetheless
    there is nothing before me by way of a professional assessment  of  the
    risk of reoffending, and ultimately I treat this as a neutral factor.

67. For the avoidance of any doubt I have had regard to the early case  law
    referred to at paragraphs 11 and 12 of Mr Yeo's Skeleton Argument,  and
    also the cases at paragraphs 13 and 14. Mr Yeo  acknowledges  that  the
    early case law was in a different context where no  minimum  period  of
    exclusion was specified, and deportation was the only means of physical
    removal (there being no administrative removal  until  the  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 1999). As such these cases are of minimal value in terms
    of principle, and  as  regards  the  circumstances  of  the  appellants
    therein, necessarily each case must turn on its own facts. As regards N
    v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 299, it seems that reliance is  placed  on  this
    for little more than the uncontroversial proposition that paragraph 390
    means what it purports to say. HM (Malawi) [2010] EWHC 1407 (Admin)  is
    again recognised to be a case of a very different nature, and  as  such
    is of limited - though not irrelevant - value.

68. Having had regard to the grounds on which the order was made (paragraph
    390(i)), the interests of the community including  the  maintenance  of
    effective immigration control (paragraph 390(iii)),  the  interests  of
    the Appellant including the compassionate circumstances  in  particular
    of his wife and children being present in the UK  (paragraph  390(iv)),
    and on the basis that paragraph 398 does not apply to  the  Appellant's
    case, (but nonetheless having regard to the terms of paragraphs 399  by
    approximate analogy as matters that have featured  in  the  Appellant's
    representations both as matters of form and substance, and  bearing  in
    mind that  such  matters  are  broadly  instructive  in  respect  of  a
    consideration of the compassionate circumstances of the case),  I  have
    reached the conclusion that the  deportation  decision  should  not  be
    revoked. In particular, in my judgement the vicissitudes of  life  that
    have  transpired  since  the  making  of  the  deportation  order,  and
    otherwise the circumstance of the Appellant living apart from his  wife
    and children, do not on the facts of this  particular  case  constitute
    compelling factors outweighing  the  continuation  of  the  deportation
    order. The continuation of  the  deportation  order,  and  thereby  the
    deprivation of the ability to make an application for  entry  clearance
    does not constitute a disproportionate  interference  with  the  mutual
    Article 8 rights of the Appellant and his family.

69. The decision of the Respondent was in accordance with  the  Immigration
    Rules, was proportionate in human rights terms, is not to  be  impugned
    as not  being  in  accordance  with  the  law,  and  moreover  was  the
    appropriate decision on the merits.

Notice of Decision

70. The decision in the appeal is remade. The appeal is dismissed.


Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     27 October 2015





Anonymity Order

In  order  to  secure  the  anonymity  of  the  Appellant  throughout  these
proceedings I order pursuant to Rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014  and  Section  11
of the Contempt of Court Act 1981 the no  report  or  publication  of  these
proceedings or of any part or parts  of  them  shall  name  or  directly  or
indirectly identify the Appellant. Reference to the Appellant may be by  use
of his initials but not by name. Failure by any person, body or  institution
whether corporate or unincorporated (for the avoidance of doubt  to  include
a party to this appeal) to comply with this order may  lead  to  proceedings
for contempt of court. This order shall continue until the  Tribunal  or  an
appropriate Court shall lift or vary it.


Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     27 October 2015

