

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/21095/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined at Manchester                      |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3rd October, 2013                          |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

                                 Ahsan Javed

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISLAMABAD

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Angela J Stull an Assistant Solicitor with
Lloyds, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety a Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 20th July, 1983  and  he
    made application to the Entry Clearance  Officer  Islamabad  for  entry
    clearance with a view to settlement as the spouse of a  person  present
    and settled in the UK.

2.   In a Notice of Refusal of entry clearance dated 2nd October,  2012  the
    Entry Clearance Officer refused the application stating

         "You have failed to demonstrate that you have sufficient  knowledge
         of the English language.  You have failed to provide evidence  that
         you have attained level 1A or above in speaking and listening.  You
         have provided a certificate from TOEIC which shows  you  scored  40
         for speaking, this is below the  requirement  for  A1.   I  am  not
         therefore satisfied that you meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
         281(i)(b)(ii) of HC 395."


3.    The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal   and   in   a
    determination promulgated on 27th June, 2013, First-tier Tribunal Judge
    McDade dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal.   At  paragraph  5  of  his
    determination he said


         "The Entry Clearance Officer  refused  the  application  on  ground
         alone, namely that the appellant had failed  to  attain  an  A1  or
         above in speaking and listening showing a score of 40  out  of  200
         for  speaking  and  no  evidence  being  supplied  in  relation  to
         listening.   The  pass  mark  is  50.    Subsequently   after   the
         application but  before  the  decision  the  appellant  re-sat  the
         speaking test and attained a mark of 50.  However, as far as  I  am
         aware still no evidence has been adduced in relation to  listening.
         An appellant has to attain a mark of 60 at level A1 or above and in
         the absence of any evidence that this has been attained this appeal
         must fail."[My emphasis]


4.   Unfortunately the judge failed to notice that the application had  been
    refused by the respondent because the appellant had failed  to  provide
    evidence showing that he could score  a  sufficiently  high  level  for
    speaking.

5.   As the judge pointed out, after the date of the application but  before
    the Entry Clearance Officer's decision, the appellant re-sat  the  exam
    and scored 50 for speaking.

6.   The Secretary of State responded to  the  appellant's  application  for
    permission to appeal by suggesting that the appellant's  appeal  should
    be allowed.

7.   Mr McVeety confirmed that it was his  view  that  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer was satisfied as to the appellant's ability to listen  and  was
    only concerned with the appellant's ability to speak.  As a result  the
    judge materially erred in law and Mr  McVeety  indicated  that  he  was
    happy for me to remake the decision  as  I  had  been  invited  by  the
    Secretary of State Rule 24 response to do.  I  find  that  the  judge's
    determination does contain  an  error  of  law  and  I  set  aside  the
    determination. I remake the decision myself and I allow the appeal.




Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
