
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/21447/2013
                                                               Oa/21449/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House               |               Decision & Reasons        |
|                                   |Promulgated                              |
|On 4 March 2015                    |               On 17 March 2015          |
|                                   |                                         |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                          mahesha kaushikkumar shah
                         kaushikkumar himatlal shah
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - BOMBAY
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr A Slatier, Counsel instructed by Richmond
Chambers LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I see no need for and do not make any order restraining publication  of
    the details of this case.

 2. The appellants are citizens of India and are  married  to  each  other.
    The first appellant was born on 9 January 1958 and so is now  57  years
    old.  Her husband was born on 23 November 1953 and so is now  61  years
    old.

 3. They appeal with leave decisions of the First-tier Tribunal to  dismiss
    their appeals against decisions of the respondent to refuse them  entry
    clearance to join their son and other relatives in the  United  Kingdom
    because they could not care for themselves in India.  In each case  the
    refusal  was  under  paragraph  E-ECDR.2.5  of  Appendix  FM   to   the
    Immigration Rules.  This provides that:

         "The applicant or, if the  applicant  and  their  partner  are  the
         sponsor's parents or grandparents, the applicant's partner, must be
         unable, even with the practical and financial help of the  sponsor,
         to obtain the required level of care in the country where they  are
         living, because -

         (a)  it is not available and there is no person in that country who
         can reasonably provide it; or

         (b)  it is not affordable."

 4. However it is a requirement  of  E-ECDR  that  in  order  to  establish
    eligibility for entry clearance as an adult dependent  relative  or  of
    the requirements of E-ECDR.2.1 to 3.2 must be met.  It is a requirement
    of E-ECDR.2.4 that:

         "The applicant or, if the  applicant  and  their  partner  are  the
         sponsor's parents or grandparents, the applicant's partner, must as
         a result of age, illness or disability require  long-term  personal
         care to perform everyday tasks."

 5. The applications were refused on 22 November 2013  and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge, correctly, reminded himself that he was concerned  with
    facts in existence at the date of decision.

 6. I set out below the Entry  Clearance  Officer's  reasons  for  refusal.
    Although the sense is plain enough, I do not find the  reasons  equally
    valid.  The reasons are:

         "You and your spouse both state that you are  unable  to  care  for
         yourselves on a daily basis, and both state that the required  care
         cannot be delivered in India.  It is unclear why this is the  case.
         Your proposed sponsors in the UK have not submitted any evidence of
         medical qualifications and it is unclear therefore whether you  and
         your spouse  both  require  care  that  requires  specific  medical
         training.  I am mindful that two doctor's notes have been received,
         from different doctors in different  locations  with  their  belief
         that care is not available in India.  I  note  however  that  these
         letters are written  in  extremely  similar  ways,  with  identical
         sentence structure and description of the perceived lack of care in
         India.  I am not satisfied therefore that these  letters  have  not
         been provided with the  specific  intention  of  facilitating  your
         application.  The care discussed by both doctors relate to everyday
         tasks, washing, dressing, and cooking.  Again  it  is  unclear  why
         this care cannot be provided by carers in India.  I note that  both
         doctors have stated that this care is not available in  India,  but
         they have not given any reason why it is not.   Carers  are  widely
         available in India, as well as personal help, at a  relatively  low
         cost.  I note the documentation from your daughter who is based  in
         India who acknowledges that help can be acquired (in  the  form  of
         maids) but  states  that  they  don't  provide  personal  care.   I
         acknowledge this but again, I am mindful that personal  carers  are
         available in  India.   Your  daughter  also  states  that  you  are
         vulnerable to people that they cannot trust but it is  unclear  why
         you would choose not to  interview  and  vet  potential  employees,
         prior to employment.  In light of the lack of evidence to show  why
         the care you require is not available in India,  and  mindful  that
         you do have direct descendants in your home  country,  and  receive
         money from your UK sponsors which  can  be  utilised  for  personal
         care, I am not satisfied that you are unable to obtain the required
         level of care in India.  I therefore refuse your application  under
         paragraph EC-DR.1.1(d) of Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules. (E-
         ECDR.2.5)."

 7. The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  considered  evidence  including  oral
    evidence from the sponsor which he found to  be  "thoroughly  credible"
    and concluded that on 22 November 2013, being  the  date  of  decision,
    each appellant with the assistance of a cook, cleaner and driver, their
    daughter in India and, in the case of the second  appellant  help  from
    his wife, was  able  to  carry  out  everyday  tasks.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge therefore found that the appellants  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph E-ECDR.2.4 and dismissed the appeal for  that
    reason.

 8. He also considered the appeal on human rights grounds.

 9. The appellants were given permission to appeal by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Colyer.

10. One of the reasons for giving permission  to  appeal  is  that  it  was
    arguable that the First-tier Tribunal Judge's finding under  E-ECDR.2.4
    was wrong.  Arguably the judge  had  only  reached  his  conclusion  by
    considering the care available rather  than  what  care,  if  any,  the
    appellants needed and so had misdirected  himself  in  concluding  that
    they had not shown the required  long-term  personal  care  to  perform
    everyday tasks.

11. It was also arguably perverse, said to be "Wednesbury unreasonable" for
    the First-tier Judge to have found that the appellants were capable  of
    carrying out  daily  tasks  when  that  was  contrary  to  the  medical
    evidence.

12. It was also arguable the judge had reached  his  findings  taking  into
    account  post-decision  evidence  and  had  misdirected  himself   when
    considering the claim with reference  to  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights because he had not  reminded  himself  there
    was a positive duty to show respect for family life.

13. Regrettably, a detailed and apparently quite  helpful  bundle  prepared
    for the First-tier Tribunal had not found its way onto my file with the
    result that I was not as prepared as I wanted  to  be  at  the  hearing
    room.  I was given a copy during the course of the morning.   I  regret
    that the need to consider  that  bundle  meant  I  could  not  give  an
    extempore judgment.

14. The applications were supported by medical reports.  In the case of the
    first appellant there is a report dated 19 September 2013 from Dr Nayan
    H Shah.  Dr Shah said that the first appellant suffers from high  blood
    pressure, diabetes, thyroid and high cholesterol and has a  history  of
    her Triglycerides level increasing to a level which showed an increased
    risk of heart attack or stroke.  This led to mobility problems so  that
    in the opinion of the doctor "she is unable to walk or move around  and
    she need complete rest".  This led to the conclusion that she "requires
    long-term personal care and she is unable to  perform  everyday  tasks,
    e.g. washing, dressing and cooking".

15. This report also offered the comment that she was:

         "unable to obtain the required level of care in India because it is
         not available and there is  no  person  in  that  country  who  can
         reasonably provide it even with the help of financial  support.   I
         must stress that she cannot acquire any suitable care in India."

16. In the case of the second appellant  there  was  a  report  from  Dr  J
    Kothari who, in a report dated 6  December  2013,  confirmed  that  the
    second appellant is a cancer patient.  It is said elsewhere that he has
    had much of  his  oesophagus  removed.   Dr  Kothari  said  the  second
    appellant "requires long-term personal care.  He is unable  to  perform
    everyday tasks, e.g. washing, dressing, driving and cooking."

17. There was also evidence in the form of  letters  from  members  of  the
    family saying broadly similar things.

18. The appeal was supported by statements dated 10 October 2014.

19. There the first appellant explained  that  she  had  mobility  problems
    combined with high blood pressure, diabetes,  hypothyroidism  and  high
    cholesterol. She was expecting to  have  replacement  surgery  on  both
    knees.  She was unable to carry out household tasks including cleaning,
    washing or cooking.

20. She was in no position to look after her husband.

21. She accepted that carers could be hired in India  but  did  not  accept
    that the people who could be hired would  be  capable  of  doing  their
    jobs.

22. The second appellant's statement confirmed the extent of the surgery he
    had undergone in an effort to defeat cancer of the oesophagus.

23. It explains that as a result of his illness the second appellant cannot
    perform everyday tasks like washing, cleaning, cooking and he found  it
    difficult to look after himself.

24. His wife was not able to look after herself never mind look after him.

25. The sponsor made  a  statement  on  14  October  2014.   His  statement
    explained how  the  sponsor  wanted  to  support  his  family  and  the
    emotional stress of not being close to his parents.  The  sponsor  told
    the First-tier Tribunal that the second appellant's general health  has
    improved since the date of decision so he was now a little more able to
    look after himself. For example he could now dress  himself.  He  could
    not do that when the case was decided. His mother, the first  appellant
    could use the toilet on her own.

26. At paragraph 87 of his  determination  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge
    concluded:

         "Upon the totality of the oral and written  evidence  received  the
         Tribunal finds  as  a  fact  that  as  of  22  November  2013  each
         appellant, together with assistance from the cook, the cleaner, the
         driver and, at that  time  it  still  being  received,  from  their
         daughter in India and, in Mr Shah's case from his wife, was able to
         carry out everyday tasks."

27. This is an extremely significant finding. I agree with the grounds  and
    the reasons given for permission to appeal that this finding reflects a
    misdirection.  Paragraph E-ECDR.2.4 is not about an applicant's ability
    to cope with or without assistance but whether in  fact  the  applicant
    requires long-term personal care to perform everyday tasks.

28. Given the terms of refusal the appellants were entitled to assume  that
    their ability  to  satisfy  Paragraph  E-ECDR.2.4  was  not  in  issue.
    Paragraph E-ECDR.2.5 is only relevant where  a  person  requires  care.
    When care is needed Rule 2.5 requires the person seeking to  enter  the
    United Kingdom to show that the level of care cannot be obtained in the
    country where they are living.

29. The ability to use a toilet unaided is not determinative.  The evidence
    that was  accepted  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  is  that  the
    appellants are managing with help that they obtain in India.

30. Mr Avery submitted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge was  entitled  to
    conclude that the appellants had not satisfied the requirements  of  E-
    ECDR.2.4.   Mr  Avery  was  right  to  the  extent  that  it  is  trite
    immigration law that a First-tier Tribunal Judge cannot allow an appeal
    unless satisfied that an appellant meets all of the requirements of the
    Rules. Sometimes it is necessary to make findings on  things  that  had
    not been considered by Entry Clearance Officers  and  sometimes  it  is
    necessary to disagree with  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's  findings.
    However, it is very unwise to consider a requirement of the rules  that
    was not doubted by the Entry  Clearance  Officer  without  putting  the
    appellant on notice. Such a failure will often lead to a decision being
    challenged because it is thought to be unfair.

31. I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal Judge should have concluded
    on the evidence before him that at the date of decision each  appellant
    required  long-term  personal  care  to  perform  everyday  tasks.  The
    evidence does not suggest that they are severely disabled. Neither do I
    accept that neither of the appellant's can ever carry out any of  their
    everyday tasks. However findings  about  this  must  be  made  "in  the
    round". The sparse nature of the medical evidence has to be  considered
    against a background of the appellants not realising  that  their  need
    for help was in dispute. Their health had  improved  by  the  time  the
    appeal was heard in the First-tier Tribunal but they still had the help
    of a cook, a driver and a  cleaner  as  well  as  some  help  from  the
    daughter. I find it probable that they could not  manage  without  such
    help.

32. Where two applicants are married to each other it is not necessary  for
    them both  to  require  such  care  in  order  to  satisfy  the  Rules.
    Obviously in many cases where there is a marriage where only one  party
    to the marriage is in  need  of  long-term  personal  care,  the  other
    partner to the marriage can provide it and so a  married  coupled  will
    not normally satisfy the Rules where only one applicant is disabled.

33. However, I find the First-tier Tribunal Judge had in  fact  found  that
    the appellants, far  from  showing  they  were  unable  to  obtain  the
    required level of the care in the country in which they were living had
    in fact obtained it.  This is what he meant at paragraph 87  where  the
    Tribunal said:

         "Upon the totality of the oral and written  evidence  received  the
         Tribunal finds  as  a  fact  that  as  of  22  November  2013  each
         appellant, together with assistance from the cook, the cleaner, the
         driver and, at that  time  it  still  being  received,  from  their
         daughter in India and, in Mr Shah's case from his wife, was able to
         carry out every day tasks."

34.  The  evidence  that  such  care  is  unavailable  in  India  is   very
    unsatisfactory.  The respondent has not provided any  evidence  at  all
    and although the burden of proof  is  on  the  appellants  if,  as  the
    respondent claims is the case, such care is available  in  India  there
    would be no harm in producing evidence on the point.

35. The evidence relied on by the  appellants  is  not  satisfactory.   The
    medical practitioner's opinion concerning the unavailability  of  hired
    help is clear but wholly unexplained.  I accept that the appellants may
    very well prefer the care of a close family member  to  that  of  hired
    help and that it is not practical to obtain the desired care  from  the
    relatives in India.  I also accept that there is a cultural presumption
    that care will be provided by the elder son and that, whether it  is  a
    cultural  requirement  or  not,  it  is  something   the   sponsor   is
    endeavouring to do in accordance with the Rules if that is permissible.

36. India is a country with an enormous population and  an  entrepreneurial
    tradition.  It also has excellent centres of healthcare.  Whilst  I  am
    perfectly  prepared  to  accept  that  there  are  bad,  inadequate  or
    downright dishonest so-called carers available  in  India,  just  as  I
    suspect there are in every society in the world, I do not see how I can
    conclude rationally that that kind of care need cannot be  obtained  in
    India on the evidence that is before me.

37. I recognise that  the  medical  practitioners  who  have  expressed  an
    opinion are in a position to know. It just might be that they are right
    and see no need to explain their opinion because  it  is  so  obviously
    right. However, although their opinion is clear it is  perfunctory  and
    unexplained.  Although I would have appreciated some more help from the
    respondent the contention that such care is unavailable is, I find,  so
    counter-intuitive that it  must  be  proved  strictly.   I  would  have
    appreciated, for example, a detailed expert report from a health worker
    in India explaining what kind of care is available, what it  costs  and
    how it can  be  obtained  or  why  such  a  large  population  has  not
    stimulated demand for the kind of care that these appellants need.

38. There is additional evidence before me.  I make it clear that I do  not
    admit that evidence because I see no reason why it could not have  been
    made available for the First-tier Tribunal hearing if the case had been
    prepared properly on that occasion.  The object of a  re-hearing  after
    an error of law has been established is to decide the case properly and
    not to give the parties an opportunity to prepare their cases.  However
    I have considered the evidence and I do not think it  would  have  made
    any difference if I had admitted it.  Dr Kothari and Dr Shah really  do
    not add  to  anything  they  have  said  before.   I  accept  that  the
    appellants each require full-time personal care.  I do  not  understand
    why such care is not available in India.

39. I have seen the letter from M L A Gujarat dated 1 September 2014 from a
    Mr Rakesh Shah who introduces himself as a member  of  the  Legislative
    Assembly in Gandhinagar.  This asserts that there is "no facility  like
    nursing care home over here, which  can  provide  full-time  care."   I
    hesitate to be critical of Mr Gujarat. I have no reason  to  think  him
    dishonest or mischievous.   However,  the  suggestion  that  such  care
    cannot be found astonishes me.  Mr Gujarat did say that "they  have  to
    find various people to do washing, cooking  or  driving  from  personal
    resources like neighbour or friends as there is  no  employment  agency
    available to provide this kind of labour jobs".

40. Again I find that an astonishing claim but, more importantly,  it  does
    not assist the appellants  because  the  First-tier  Tribunal  accepted
    evidence that they appellant had obtained the care that they needed.

41. I have reminded  myself  the  burden  of  proof  on  the  appellant  is
    discharged if the case is proved on a  balance  of  probability  and  I
    reminded myself of the favourable impression the sponsor made  when  he
    gave his evidence.  Nevertheless I am not persuaded that the appellants
    are "unable, even with the practical and financial help of the sponsor,
    to obtain the required level of care in  the  country  where  they  are
    living".  It may not be as easy as it would be in the  United  Kingdom.
    It may  require  the  use  of  several  different  suppliers  of  care.
    Nevertheless adequate care is available.  The  appellants  are  coping.
    They are able to get that care in India and it has not  been  suggested
    that it is not affordable.

42. It follows that I must dismiss the appeal under the Rules.

43. The appeal is also pursued on human right  grounds.   Mr  Slatier  also
    argued the case on Article 8 grounds.  He very helpfully reminded me of
    the decision of the Court of Appeal in ZB (Pakistan)  [2009]  EWCA  Civ
    834.  This case is a firm reminder of the need to consider Article 8 in
    the case of adult children and their dependant  or  becoming  dependent
    parents.

44. I remind myself that Article 8 protects a person's "private and  family
    life", home and correspondence.  "Private and family life" is not to be
    understood as two separate concepts  despite  the  apparently  contrary
    insistence in the Immigration Rules.  A  person's  private  and  family
    life has sometimes been translated as a person's physical and emotional
    integrity.  Article 8 is about restraining the state  from  interfering
    with a person's life and rather requiring the state to let a person get
    about his or her lawful business without hindrance.  It is a  qualified
    right.  Immigration control can usually  be  justified  because  it  is
    necessary for promoting the economic wellbeing of  the  United  Kingdom
    and for the prevention of disorder or crime.  This is  not  to  suggest
    that the appellants would be disorderly.  Far  from  it,  the  evidence
    points in entirely the contrary direction.  However the United  Kingdom
    has decided, as it is entitled  to  do,  that  immigration  has  to  be
    controlled because a free for all would be disorderly.

45. It does not follow from this that anything that anybody might  want  to
    do comes within the scope of Article 8(1).  Removal will almost  always
    interfere with a person's private and family life.  A person  wants  to
    be somewhere where the government says he must not be.  In  many  cases
    such interference is wholly justified,  lawful,  proportionate  and  in
    every other way acceptable but it is an interference.  Refusal of entry
    clearance is not so clear cut.  There are some relationships which  the
    United Kingdom has  to  promote.   Typically  these  are  relationships
    between a husband and wife and parent and minor child.  These are  very
    special  relationships  that  require  particular  respect.   Here  the
    appellant's children have chosen to live away from  the  appellants  in
    the United Kingdom.  They clearly continue a  healthy,  respectful  and
    supportive relationship.  The  fact  that  they  chose  to  live  in  a
    different country from the appellants should not be seen as a  sign  of
    abandoning their relationship with the appellants any more  than  would
    be the fact that they chose to live in  a  different  house.   However,
    without some particular level of dependency or other unusual  feature,,
    it is not a relationship which generally has  to  be  promoted  by  the
    United Kingdom/

46. I have noted the reference in the grounds to  Advic  v  United  Kingdom
    [1995] EHRR 57 mentioned in  ZB  (Pakistan)  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  834  at
    paragraph 38. The European Court of Justice did  not  decide  in  Advic
    that a relationship between adults would attract the protection of  the
    Convention where there was financial dependency. Rather it decided that
    in the absence of such dependency a Tribunal was entitled  to  conclude
    that a relationship was not protected.  In MT  (Zimbabwe)  [2007]  EWCA
    Civ 455 the Court of Appeal approved the need show that a  relationship
    is "Beyond what would normally be accepted between adult family members
    in an adult child and parent" before Article 8 was engaged. In  an  out
    of country case, such as this, it seems me that something very much out
    of the ordinary will be needed before there is any duty on  the  United
    Kingdom to promote the relationship. A human right to enter the  United
    Kingdom, even a right that is qualified, cannot  be  bought  simply  by
    proving a degree of financial dependency.  Relationships between  adult
    children and their parents are  not  part  of  the  essential  building
    blocks of society and so are not  analogous  to  relationships  between
    life partners or parents and minor children.

47. Here I am satisfied that the sponsor wants to do the best that  he  can
    for his parents.  The concern that  is  expressed  is  natural  between
    adults  and  their  parents  where  there  is  respectful  and   loving
    relationship.  It  is  established  that  there   is   some   financial
    dependency.  The sponsor wants his parents to live near to him now that
    they need him.  The fact that that was  not  thought  appropriate  when
    they were healthier is not particularly illuminating.  There  is  clear
    evidence they are willing to make considerable financial sacrifices  in
    the United Kingdom.

48. However this is not something over and  above  the  ordinary  emotional
    ties.  Rather it is an likely consequence of these  ordinary  emotional
    ties.  I do not accept that on these facts there is any  obligation  on
    the United Kingdom to promote the admission of the  appellants  to  the
    United Kingdom. If I might be  permitted  a  convenient  term  of  art,
    Article 8(1) is not engaged.

49. However even if I am wrong about  this  then  refusing  the  appellants
    permission is proportionate.  The United Kingdom has devised  a  series
    of Rules that concern  certain  circumstances.   The  Rules  require  a
    person seeking admission to show that proper provision cannot  be  made
    in the country of origin and this the appellants  failed  to  do.   The
    decision is proportionate.

50. Mr Slatier has made me consider very carefully  the  decision  in  this
    case.  He has also provided invaluable assistance.  The bottom line  is
    that although the appellants and their children in the  United  Kingdom
    would like the appellants to be in the United Kingdom  at  a  difficult
    time in their lives they have not been able to show, as required by the
    Rules, that arrangements cannot be made locally.

51. In short, although I set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    I come to the same conclusion and I dismiss the appeal.

52. Although I have set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  I
    dismiss the appeal. I have not given an anonymity direction and I  make
    no fee award.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 12 March 2015                  |

