
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Oa/21556/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London             |        Decision and Reasons        |
|                                         |Promulgated                         |
|On 16 July 2015                          |        On 14 August 2015           |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ARCHER

                                   Between


                              mrs mariam balhas
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      entry clearance officer - beirut

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Taib Akrimu, Sponsor
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is not subject to an  anonymity  order  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014.  Neither  party
    has invited me to make an anonymity order pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (SI  2008/2698)  and  I
    have not done so.

 2. The appellant appeals against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Swaniker) dismissing the appellant's appeal against  a  decision
    taken on 20 November 2013 to refuse entry to the UK as a partner  under
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.

Introduction

 3. The appellant married the sponsor in the UK on 23  February  2013.  The
    sponsor is Mr Taib Akrimu, a citizen of the UK born on 2 January 1967.

 4. The respondent refused the application on the basis that  the  marriage
    was not genuine and subsisting, the parties  did  not  intend  to  live
    permanently with each other, the financial requirements  were  not  met
    and the appellant had not provided sufficient evidence  to  prove  that
    she had passed the English language test to the required level from  an
    approved provider.

The Appeal

 5. The appellant appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  sponsor
    attended an oral hearing at Taylor  House  on  24  November  2014.  The
    appellant was represented by Mr Murphy, Counsel, instructed  by  Farani
    Taylor Solicitors. The First-tier Tribunal found that the sponsor was a
    credible witness and that all of the requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules were met, except for the English language requirement.

 6. At paragraph 16 of the decision, the judge found that the appellant had
    produced an English language test certificate  showing  an  ESOL  Entry
    level 1 qualification and a letter  from  Training  Connect  confirming
    that she had been awarded  the  qualification  following  a  course  at
    Training Connect Limited ("the college"). The certificate was issued by
    Learning Resource Network ("LRN"). There was no evidence that  Training
    Connect Limited was approved by UKBA. The judge granted seven days  for
    the appellant to submit evidence that the English language  requirement
    was met. Solicitors for the appellant submitted further evidence on  28
    November 2014. However, nothing had been received by the judge as of  5
    January 2015.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  the
    basis that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law. It was  now  clear
    that the requirement was met and the  judge  made  a  decision  without
    considering the further evidence. The appellant had been denied a  fair
    hearing and the decision should be set aside.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Nicholson
    on 23 February 2015. The Tribunal file  showed  that  further  evidence
    relating to LRN was submitted to the Tribunal on 1 December  2014,  the
    seventh day after the hearing. It was  arguable  that  there  had  been
    procedural unfairness.

 9. Thus, the appeal came before me

Discussion

10. Mr Whitwell indicated that the  credibility  of  the  sponsor  and  the
    genuineness of the relationship are no longer in dispute conceded  that
    new evidence was submitted to the  Tribunal  (at  pages  46-52  of  the
    appellant's  appeal  bundle).  The  sponsor  stated  that  he  was  not
    represented because the issue was  straightforward  and  the  case  was
    costing him a lot of money. The evidence proves  that  LRN  is  on  the
    Register of Regulated Qualifications (page  47)  and  the  respondent's
    Immigration Directorate Instruction ("IDI", page 56) shows  LRN  as  an
    approved awarding body.  LRN  is  approved  by  the  Home  Office.  The
    appellant went to the college  on  the  advice  of  their  lawyer;  the
    college has a big sign and is  on  the  high  street.  Everyone  speaks
    English in Beirut.

11. Mr Whitwell submitted that the application was  made  on  23  September
    2013 and the provider does not feature in Appendix O of the Immigration
    Rules in force at that time. If the IDI is accurate then the respondent
    would be in difficulty resisting the submission based  upon  procedural
    irregularity; however there is no material error  of  law  because  the
    provider does not appear in Appendix O. The IDI does not assist in  any
    event because the submitted section refers to persons in the UK.

12. I find that the further evidence was submitted within  seven  days  and
    there was procedural unfairness, through no fault  of  the  judge.  The
    issue is materiality. I find that the correct IDI has  been  submitted;
    covering applications received between 7  April  2010  and  27  October
    2013. Although there is a heading at 2.2 referring to  persons  in  the
    UK, 2.3.3.1 (page 62) confirms that the same evidence is required  from
    overseas applicants. LRN is listed as  an  approved  awarding  body  at
    2.2.2.6. There is no separate list  of  awarding  bodies  for  overseas
    applicants.

13. The archived Appendix O for 23 October 2013-30 November 2013  submitted
    by Mr Whitwell contains an entirely different (and much  shorter)  list
    of approved providers. No evidence has been submitted  to  explain  the
    discrepancy and I find on balance of  probabilities  that  the  IDI  is
    accurate. The key may be that the archived Appendix O was in force from
    28 October 2013, after this application was submitted. I  am  satisfied
    that the further evidence proves that LRN was an approved awarding body
    as at the  date  of  application.  The  certificate  submitted  by  the
    appellant proves that the English language requirement was  met  as  at
    the date of application.

14. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal under the Immigration Rules involved the making of an  error  of
    law and its decision cannot stand.

Decision

15. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    remake the decision, allowing the appeal under the Immigration Rules.



Signed   [pic]                      Date 7 August 2015


Judge Archer

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
