

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/21601/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|No hearing                                    |Determination Promulgated    |
|Decided on 8 July 2013 at Field House         |On 8 July 2013               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                           BARBRA NAA AMERLEY AMAA

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ACCRA

                                                                  Respondent




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   On 28 May 2013 the following direction was issued in this appeal:


        1.   Permission to  appeal  has  been  granted  by  the  First-tier
        Tribunal on the grounds that it is arguable that there has  been  a
        procedural error to the detriment of the appellant amounting to  an
        error of law.


        2.   The background to this appeal appears to be as  follows.   The
        appellant is a citizen of  Ghana  who  applied  for  permission  to
        appeal against a decision of  the  respondent  refusing  her  entry
        clearance as a dependent child.  Her appeal  was  determined  under
        the provisions of Rule  15(2)(c)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
        Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 without a hearing on the basis that
        she failed to comply  with  a  provision  of  the  Rules  or  of  a
        direction of the Tribunal issued  on  21  November  2012  requiring
        grounds of appeal to be lodged by 2 January  2013  and  no  grounds
        were lodged.  Her appeal was dismissed.


        3.   In the grounds seeking permission to  appeal  it  is  asserted
        that a completed notice of appeal together  with  the  grounds  was
        sent to the Tribunal on 1 November 2012 and  was  enclosed  in  the
        same envelope as a notice  of  appeal  for  the  appellant's  step-
        sister, Amanda Boa Amponsem as  the  cases  were  related.   It  is
        argued that it would be impossible for the step-sister's  documents
        to have been received but not the  appellant's.   Her  stepsister's
        notice and grounds of appeal have been received and acted upon  and
        her appeal is proceeding under case  number  OA/21592/2012  and  is
        listed for hearing on 19 July 2013 at Hatton  Cross.   The  grounds
        further assert that neither the appellant nor  her  representatives
        received the letter of 21 November 2012 directing that  grounds  be
        filed.


        4.   The appellant's representatives have enclosed with the grounds
        of appeal copies of  the  documents  sent  to  the  Tribunal  which
        include the appellant's grounds of  appeal  and  confirm  that  the
        bundles containing these grounds were sent  in  the  same  envelope
        with the step-sister's appeal bundle


        5.   It is my provisional view that the  appeal  before  the  Upper
        Tribunal should be determined without a hearing,  that  the  First-
        tier Tribunal erred in law by proceeding  on  a  mistaken  view  of
        whether the  grounds  of  appeal  had  been   filed,  that  in  the
        circumstances  of  this  appeal  the  requirements  of  the  Senior
        President's Practice Statement para 7.2(a) are met as the effect of
        the error has been to deprive the appellant of a hearing  and  that
        the appeal should be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
        linked with the appeal by her step-sister.


                                  DIRECTION


        6.   I direct that any representations to the  contrary  by  either
        party are to be filed with the Tribunal and  served  on  the  other
        party no  later  than  21  days  after  the  date  on  which  these
        directions are sent out.


2.   Representations have been received from the appellant's  solicitors  in
    a letter dated 2 July 2013 confirming their argument  that  the  appeal
    should be allowed and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  heard
    with the appeal of the appellant's step-sister. No representations  had
    been received from the respondent.

3.   In these circumstances I  am  satisfied  that  this  appeal  should  be
    determined without a hearing. The First-tier Tribunal erred in  law  by
    proceeding on a mistaken view as to whether grounds of appeal had  been
    filed. The decision is set aside. I am satisfied that this is a  proper
    case for the appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  the
    decision to  be  re-made.  The  appellant  has  been  deprived  of  the
    opportunity of putting her case to that Tribunal and  the  requirements
    of Para 7.2(a) of the Senior President's Practice  Statement  are  met.
    The appeal is to be listed for hearing  with  OA/21512/2012  at  Hatton
    Cross on 19 July 2013.

Decision

4.   The First-tier Tribunal erred in law such that its decision  should  be
    set aside. I remit the  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  the
    decision to be reconsidered and re-made.




    Signed                     Date: 8 July 2013




    Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
