
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/21093/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On  11 October 2013                           |On 15 October 2013           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                        ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER-DHAKA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              SHEULY BEGUM SUMI
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr L. Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr M. Haque, Solicitor.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


    1. The appellant in these proceedings is the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
       ("ECO"). However, for convenience I refer to  the  parties  as  they
       were before the First-tier Tribunal.

    2. The appellant, a citizen of Bangladesh born on 6 November 1988, made
       an application for entry clearance as a spouse on 26 June 2012. That
       application was refused in a decision dated 27 September  2012.  Her
       appeal against that decision was allowed by  First-tier  judge  A.R.
       Williams who heard the appeal on 7 August 2012.

    3. The application for entry clearance was made under paragraph 281  of
       HC 395 (as amended). It was refused on the basis that the  appellant
       had failed to provide an English language test certificate  from  an
       approved test provider as required by paragraph 281(ii).

    4. Judge Williams appears on one view, to have found that the appellant
       had not met the English language requirement in terms  of  producing
       the relevant evidence as at the date of the decision but that by the
       time of the hearing she was able to produce a test certificate  from
       an approved provider. Yet, referring to the  decision  in  DR  (ECO:
       post-decision evidence) Morocco * [2005] UKIAT 00038  he  concluded,
       in summary, that her subsequent taking and passing of a English test
       from an approved provider cast light on the circumstances  obtaining
       at the date of decision.

    5. The test certificate that the appellant relied on in support of  the
       application is dated 21 March 2011. It  is  from  EMD  International
       English Language Assessment ("EMD").  I  note  that  it  states  "A1
       (Mapped to the CEFR)" which in that respect at least, conforms  with
       the Rules (as to the level required).

    6. The appellant's representatives have submitted  a  response  to  the
       grant of permission. It has to be said that  it  is  not  altogether
       easy to follow.  It states that at the hearing before the First-tier
       Tribunal  it  was  conceded  that  the  appellant  "had  passed   in
       accordance with the relevant requirements on language  requirements,
       which was valid when she undertook and remained valid for two  years
       e.g. valid as of application, which she  submitted  with  her  first
       application when  Respondent  did  not  raise  any  question  on  it
       although they refused her application on other grounds."

    7. The response goes on  to  refer  to  a  judicial  review  pre-action
       notice, seemingly in respect of the earlier  application  for  entry
       clearance, refers to the appellant having passed  an  approved  test
       post-decision and argues that the First-tier judge  was  correct  to
       decide that it would be disproportionate to expect the appellant  to
       make a further application.  There is also reference to  'fairness'.
       At [5] it is said that because the test submitted with the  previous
       application was accepted as valid "it cannot subsequently  be  ruled
       as invalid just because the  test  provider  lost  their  regulatory
       licence...(which could have been by way of suspension  or  delisting
       but no evidence was furnished by the Respondent)".

    8. Mr Haque submitted that there was no evidence that EMD  was  not  on
       the list of approved providers. He referred  to  a  letter  dated  3
       October 2013 in which the matter of proof of the issue  is  referred
       to. He further suggested that the matter was raised at  the  hearing
       before the First-tier Tribunal, and that the First-tier  judge  gave
       time to the Presenting Officer to see if she could provide  evidence
       on the matter, which she was unable to do. As I  indicated  however,
       for what it matters there is no evidence from the determination that
       such enquiries were  made  and  the  judge's  manuscript  record  of
       proceedings does not record the matter either.

    9. Mr Tarlow submitted that at the time of the decision  the  appellant
       provided a certificate from a test provider that  was  not  approved
       and the appellant could  not  therefore  have  succeeded  under  the
       Rules.

   10. In further submissions Mr Haque said that he did not know whether or
       not EMD was on the  list  of  approved  providers  at  the  date  of
       decision. He argued however, that because EMD was part  of  or  came
       under City and Guilds, which was on the list of approved  providers,
       that was sufficient. He  also  suggested  that  I  could  take  into
       account the length of time the  application  process  can  take,  in
       terms of Article 8.

My assessment

   11. The sole issue in the refusal of entry clearance and in  the  appeal
       is the English  language  requirement  under  the  Rules.  Paragraph
       281(ii) of HC 395 (as amended) requires that an applicant for  entry
       clearance as a spouse:

             "...provides an original English language test certificate  in
             speaking and listening from an English language test  provider
             approved by the Secretary of State for these  purposes,  which
             clearly shows  the  applicant's  name  and  the  qualification
             obtained (which must meet or exceed level  A1  of  the  Common
             European Framework of Reference)..."

   12. There are certain exceptions to that requirement, none of which  are
       suggested to apply here.

   13. At [15] Judge Williams noted that "it is accepted that the  [English
       language] requirement was only satisfied after the date of  decision
       by the Entry Clearance Officer."

   14. At [17] he stated that

             "On the evidence before  this  Tribunal  she  had  passed  the
             necessary English language requirement at a time when EMD  was
             on the Secretary of State's list but, at a  later  stage,  and
             before her application, EMD was removed from  the  list.  Thus
             she could not rely upon those certificates."

   15. It is clear therefore, that Judge Williams found that EMD was not on
       the list of approved test providers at the date of decision.

   16. Having found that EMD was not an approved test provider at the  date
       of decision, he went on to conclude however,  that  given  that  the
       appellant had subsequently provided  certificates  in  speaking  and
       listening from an approved provider, namely from City & Guilds dated
       8 and 12 March 2013 (pages 63 and 64  of  the  appellant's  bundle),
       those subsequent actions cast light on the position at the  time  of
       the decision. He referred to the appellant having  been  undertaking
       preparation for the City & Guilds ESOL examination and the  evidence
       contained in a letter from ClearSprings EMD Centre in  Sylhet  dated
       11 October 2012 to the effect that she was a good  student  in  whom
       there was confidence that she would pass.

   17. Having concluded that those matters cast light on the  circumstances
       at the date of decision he stated at [18] that it would be

              "disproportionate in all the circumstances of  this  case  for
             this appeal to be dismissed on the basis that the  requirements
             were only formally satisfied after the date of decision."

       He went on to state that

             "Everything could be said to  have  been  anticipated  at  the
             moment of decision and the Appellant had, previously satisfied
             the requirement although  she  fell  foul  of  the  provider's
             removal from the list. It is also of very great relevance,  so
             I find, that the English  language  requirement  is  the  only
             issue advanced by the Entry Clearance Officer."

   18. At [19] the judge concluded by stating that "In those  circumstances
       this Tribunal is willing to allow the appeal."

   19. With respect to this experienced judge, it is  not  clear  from  the
       passages that I have cited whether  the  appeal  was  being  allowed
       under the Immigration Rules or under Article  8.  The  reference  to
       evidence casting light on the  position  at  the  date  of  decision
       suggests that the appeal was allowed because  at  the  time  of  the
       decision the appellant met the requirements of  the  Rules.  On  the
       other hand, stating that it would be disproportionate to dismiss the
       appeal and that the English language requirement was the only  basis
       of the refusal, suggest that the judge had Article 8  in  mind.  The
       decision itself does not state whether the appeal is  allowed  under
       the Rules or under Article 8.

   20. Judge Williams' willingness to allow the appeal is understandable in
       the light of the evidence that was before him.  Nevertheless,  I  am
       satisfied that he erred in law in allowing the appeal.  He concluded
       that by the date of application (and decision) the appellant had not
       provided an English  language  test  certificate  from  an  approved
       provider. The requirement in  the  Rules  is  the  provision  of  an
       original English language test certificate in speaking and listening
       from an English language test provider approved by the Secretary  of
       State. The  provision  of  a  certificate,  even  from  an  approved
       provider, only after the date of decision self evidently means  that
       the appellant had not provided it by the date of  decision,  as  she
       was required to do. The decision in DR (Morocco) does not assist the
       appellant  at  all  in  this  respect.  She  either   provided   the
       certificate at the relevant time or she did not.

   21. Even if the judge had in fact meant to have allowed the appeal under
       Article 8 of the ECHR, that too would have been  an  error  of  law.
       Even in respect of Article 8 he  was  bound  to  consider  only  the
       circumstances obtaining at the date of decision  (see  AS  (Somalia)
       [2009] UKHL 32).

   22. Is the error of law such as to require the decision to be set aside?
       Arguably not if the judge was wrong and the appellant  did  in  fact
       meet the English language requirement at the date of decision.  This
       is where it becomes necessary to explore what I understood to be  Mr
       Haque's assertions, namely that EMD were on  list  at  the  relevant
       time; that the appellant's previous certificate from EMD  was  still
       valid; that EMD being associated with City & Guilds meant that  they
       were approved, or that the Respondent has not established  that  EMD
       were not on the approved list.

   23. It is important to note that it was not, and has never been,  argued
       that the rules do not legitimately impose a requirement for  a  test
       from an approved provider.

   24. The appellant relies on her having produced a certificate  from  EMD
       for a previous application, in which it is said the certificate  was
       not questioned. I was referred to the respondent's  complete  bundle
       (not the one on the Tribunal file) which has a  certificate  in  the
       appellant's name from EMD, with the award date  of  21  March  2011.
       That copy of the certificate does not say how long it is valid  for.
       Mr Haque initially submitted that it was not time limited but  as  I
       pointed out, the  letter  from  ClearSprings  (EMD  Centre)  in  the
       respondent's bundle and to which  Judge  Williams  referred,  states
       that it is valid for two years.

   25. However long it is valid for is irrelevant in my  view  if  EMD  was
       not, at the date of decision, an approved test provider. If EMD  was
       taken off the list of approved providers by  the  date  of  decision
       (and there were no transitional arrangements, none being  relied  on
       on behalf of the appellant before me), the appellant would not  have
       met the relevant requirement of the Rules.

   26. Mr Haque submits that the respondent has not proved that EMD was not
       on the list. However, it is for the appellant to establish that  she
       meets the requirements  of  the  Rules.  Whilst  on  behalf  of  the
       appellant the issue seems to have been raised in correspondence with
       UKBA subsequent to the appeal before Judge Williams, it  appears  to
       have been accepted at the hearing before him that EMD  were  not  on
       the list at the date of decision and Judge Williams  so  found.  The
       appellant's reply does not contend that the judge was wrong to  come
       to that view.

   27. In any event, I note what is said in the  letter  from  ClearSprings
       (EMD) Centre. It states that the  UKBA  "published  a  new  list  of
       approved English tests for spouse visa applications on 6 April 2011.
       EMD International English Language Assessment test was not  included
       in it but UKBA announced that they will accept the EMD test until 17
       July 2011." It goes on to state that on the date of the test and  on
       the  date  of  her  visa  application  "this  test  was   completely
       acceptable by UKBA and many of our students have received visa  with
       this certificate."

   28. Thus, it is clear from evidence from EMD  itself  that  EMD  was  no
       longer on the approved list of providers from  6  April  2011.  Even
       were I to accept Mr Haque's contention that the  respondent  has  to
       prove that EMD were not on the list, which I do  not,  the  fact  is
       established  by  the  letter  from  EMD  itself.  The  letter  also,
       incidentally does not suggest that at the date  of  writing  it,  11
       October 2012, it was back on the list.

   29. It is as well to point out that the letter from EMD is incorrect  to
       state that at the time of application they were on  the  list;  they
       were not. The appellant's application for entry clearance  was  made
       on 26 June 2012. They were no longer on the list from 6 April  2011.
       They were on the list at the date of the award, namely 21 March 2011
       but  for  reasons  I  have  explained,  that  does  not  assist  the
       appellant.

   30. Mr Haque also sought to argue that  because  City  &  Guilds  is  an
       approved test provider and EMD are supervised by or part of  City  &
       Guilds, therefore EMD is also an approved provider. However, City  &
       Guilds was not the provider of this  appellant's  test  certificate;
       EMD was. In addition, as I have pointed out,  the  letter  from  EMD
       itself states that it was taken off the list.

   31. I return then to the question of whether the error  of  law  by  the
       First-tier judge requires  the  decision  to  be  set  aside.  I  am
       satisfied that it does. At the date of the decision, or incidentally
       at the date of application, the appellant did not provide an English
       language certificate from an approved test provider.

   32. I canvassed with the parties the question of whether, if I found  an
       error of law such as to require the decision to be  set  aside,  the
       parties were content for me to re-make the decision on the basis  of
       the evidence and submissions already before me. Mr  Haque  submitted
       that if the decision was set aside I should,  before  re-making  the
       decision, give directions, as I understand it, to the respondent for
       evidence to be produced as to EMD's status as an  approved  provider
       at the date of decision. However, I pointed out to the parties  that
       I may decide to re-make the decision on the basis  of  the  evidence
       and submissions already before me. That is what I now propose to do.

   33. I am not satisfied that the appellant meets the requirements of  the
       Immigration Rules. She did not  provide  an  English  language  test
       certificate from an approved provider at the date of  decision.  EMD
       was not such a provider. The fact that subsequent  to  the  decision
       she provided certificates from  what  is  said  to  be  an  approved
       provider is not evidence of the circumstances obtaining at the  date
       of decision. Her appeal under the Immigration Rules  must  therefore
       be dismissed.

   34. So far as Article 8 is concerned, I apply the Razgar [2004] UKHL  27
       formulation. The appellant's marriage  to  the  sponsor  is  not  in
       dispute. She therefore has family life with him. The decision of the
       respondent shows a lack of respect for that  family  life,  lack  of
       respect being the appropriate way of describing the  'interference',
       this being an entry clearance case. That lack of respect  will  have
       consequences of such gravity as potentially to engage the  operation
       of Article 8, applying the second principle in Razgar. The  decision
       is however, in accordance with the law and pursues a legitimate aim,
       namely the economic well-being of the country expressed through  the
       maintenance of an effective immigration control.

   35. As to proportionality, Mr Haque invited me to take into account  how
       long the entry clearance process takes. As  regards  the  fact  that
       post-decision the appellant has passed a test from what is  said  to
       be an approved provider, that is not a matter that I can  take  into
       account since, as already explained, I am bound by the circumstances
       obtaining at the date of decision even under Article 8.  Even  if  I
       were to take that matter into account, I do not see how it makes the
       decision disproportionate to  the  respondent's  legitimate  aim  in
       circumstances where the appellant could submit a fresh  application.
       That would involve cost, and delay before being  able  to  join  her
       husband, if successful. However, the  previous  application  was  in
       fact decided within about three months.

   36. In addition, there is  something  to  be  said  for  consistency  of
       treatment amongst  applicants  for  entry  clearance  as  a  spouse.
       Furthermore, it would, potentially, defeat the purpose of  the  rule
       requiring evidence at the date of decision of an English  test  from
       an approved provider if an applicant could provide the evidence post
       decision.

   37. That none of the other requirements of the Rules are said to  be  in
       issue in this appeal does not advance the  proportionality  argument
       at all. A 'near miss' argument is  not  a  permissible  approach  to
       proportionality (see Miah [2012] EWCA Civ 261).

   38. Accordingly, the appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR is  also  to  be
       dismissed.

Decision

   39. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  an
       error on a point of law. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is
       set aside and the decision re-made, the appeal being dismissed under
       the Immigration Rules and under Article 8 of the ECHR.







Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek
                                                 14/10/13
