



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
OA/21698/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 28 May 2015                             |On 9 June 2013             |
|                                           |                           |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DRABU CBE

                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - CHENNAI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Mrs KAMALAMUTHTHU SANTHAKUMARI RAMAMOORTHY
                            (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:
    For the Appellant:     Mr Esen Tufan, Senior Presenting Officer
    For the Respondent:    Mr R Layne of counsel instructed by Genga &  Co,
solicitors.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1.   The appellant in this  appeal  before  me  is  the  Entry  Clearance
      Officer, Chennai who appeals against the decision of Judge Canavan,  a
      Judge of the First Tier Tribunal. Judge Canavan had for reasons  given
      in her determination promulgated on 10  September  2014,  allowed  the
      appeal of the respondent in the appeal before me.  She  concluded  her
      determination by stating that the decision to  refuse  the  respondent
      entry clearance as the partner of a British citizen was in  accordance
      with the immigration rules but it was unlawful under Section 6 of  the
      Human Rights Act 1998  as  being  incompatible  with  the  appellant's
      rights under Article 8 of the European Convention. The Entry Clearance
      Officer sought and was granted  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal by Judge  Shimmin,  a  Judge  of  First-Tier  Tribunal  on  2
      February 2015.


   2. At the hearing before me the representatives agreed that Judge Canavan
      was wrong in finding that the sponsor in this case "did as a matter of
      fact meet the minimum threshold for the financial  requirements  ...."
      Mr Tufan argued that the evidence before her did not  warrant  such  a
      finding. He also submitted the Entry Clearance Officer  had  not  been
      provided relevant documentary evidence on  financial  ability  of  the
      sponsor as specified under Appendix FM - SE. Mr Layne did not  dissent
      from these arguments made by Mr Tufan.

   3. Mr Tufan went on to argue that it was the mistake that the  Judge  had
      made in respect of her finding of fact that the sponsor  had  met  the
      financial income threshold that may  have  caused  her  to  allow  the
      appeal on Article 8 grounds. He said she should  not  have  done  that
      anyway without finding a compelling reason as to why and how Article 8
      of the ECHR was breached as a result  of  the  impugned  decision.  He
      relied on paragraph 51 of Lord Justice  Richards's  judgement  in  the
      Court of Appeal decision in SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387.  Mr  Tufan
      also drew my attention to the judgment  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
      Agyarko and Others [2015] EWCA Civ 440 and relied on paragraphs 21 and
      25 thereof.

   4. Having read the determination of Judge Canavan most carefully, I  find
      that the appellant's grounds upon which permission to  appeal  to  the
      Upper Tribunal had been granted are  made  out.  The  decision  is  in
      material error of law and is therefore set aside.

   5. In remaking the decision I find that the  respondent  (applicant)  had
      not met the Rules at the time of making the application or even at the
      time of the decision of refusal. Further, I find that no  evidence  of
      any compelling circumstances to justify allowing  the  appeal  outside
      the Rules (Article 8 of ECHR) was adduced. I am most grateful to  both
      representatives for their succinct  and  cogent  submissions.  In  the
      circumstances the appeal of the Entry Clearance Officer is allowed.



K Drabu CBE
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
       Date:   5 June 2015


Anonymity Direction
On the facts of this case anonymity direction is neither necessary nor
appropriate.

Fee Award
The direction made by Judge Canavan is maintained.  There  is  no  award  of
costs as the substantive appeal has been dismissed.

K Drabu CBE
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


