
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/21968/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 February 2015                           |On 11 March 2015              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               Ms Hania Zarqui
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Vidyadharan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Collins, Counsel instructed by Ashtons
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Morocco born on 19 April 1972.   She  has
    no immigration  history  of  any  consequence  that  either  party  has
    referred to during the course of the current proceedings.  She  applied
    for entry clearance for the purpose of settlement as the partner of the
    sponsor, a British citizen, which application was made in August 2013.

 2. That application was refused on 13 November 2013, the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer taking essentially three points against the Appellant  although
    they were really all part of one larger point.  Put simply he  did  not
    believe that the Appellant intended to come to  the  UK  to  marry  the
    sponsor and to live with him as his spouse in  a  genuinely  subsisting
    marriage. So the three pathways for that refusal were  Appendix  FM  to
    the Immigration Rules, paragraph E-ECP.1.1(d), 2.6, 2.8, and 2.10.

 3. The Appellant appealed that refusal and her appeal  came  before  Judge
    Walters at Taylor House on 22 October 2014.  By a decision  promulgated
    on 18 November 2014 the appeal was allowed under the Immigration Rules.

 4. The Respondent then applied to the First-tier Tribunal  for  permission
    to appeal against that  decision,  raising  by  way  of  challenge  the
    complaint that the judge's decision was not properly reasoned.   Issues
    of credibility were said to have been  taken  by  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer in his refusal which the judge had not adequately  dealt  with.
    Permission was granted to the Appellant by Judge Lever on  all  grounds
    on 21 January 2015.

 5. There is a Rule 24  response  from  the  Appellant  to  that  grant  of
    permission dated 5 February of this year and so the matter comes before
    me.

 6. At the heart of the Entry Clearance Officer's decision was his  concern
    that the evidence of ongoing contact  between  the  Appellant  and  the
    sponsor was not sufficient to satisfy him that the  couple  were  in  a
    genuine relationship.  Part of that evidence can be found  at  Appendix
    FF to the Respondent's bundle.  It is a  lengthy  document  that  reads
    line by line as a transcript of a form of conversation. As a standalone
    document it does not explain who the parties to that conversation were,
    or the dates and times during which its constituent parts took place.

 7. At the appeal hearing a document was produced which used the same  text
    for the conversation but added an  additional  four  columns  of  text,
    which purported to identify who the writer was at any given  time,  and
    who the recipient or reader would be. Each line of text has against  it
    both a date and a time in the  24  hour  clock.  So  from  this  latter
    document, although it could not be seen from  the  document  originally
    produced,  the  reader  can  see  that  this  is  a  transcript  of   a
    conversation  which  started  on  12  January  2012  and  ran  on  over
    successive weeks so that the last entry is dated 18 October 2012.   The
    Rule 24 response asserts that this document was not challenged  at  the
    hearing. However the sponsor was asked questions about  both  of  these
    two documents in the course  of  cross-examination  and  was  asked  to
    explain why the text appeared in  a  different  form  in  the  document
    produced for the appeal hearing as opposed to the document produced  to
    the Entry Clearance Officer in support of the  Notice  of  Appeal.  She
    offered  an  explanation  for  that  difference,   referring   to   the
    difficulties of  obtaining  any  written  record  or  printout  of  the
    electronic exchanges that take place in an internet forum, whether that
    be a chat room or some other  site  that  lacks  the  formality  of  an
    exchange by way of email letters.  It seems to me quite clear from  the
    decision when it is read as a whole that although the judge did not set
    out all of this evidence and his assessment of it in  the  detail  that
    one might ordinarily expect, and indeed hope for,  he  did  accept  the
    explanation that he was being offered for the  difference  between  the
    two documents, and that he did accept the sponsor's  evidence  and  the
    Appellant's written evidence to the effect  that  this  was  a  genuine
    conversation and not something simply created  artificially  after  the
    event of the decision in an attempt to bolster a flawed application.

 8. The second point that appears to have  exercised  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer was the lack of a demonstrable  intention  to  marry.   Leaving
    aside the references to the nature of the relationship  that  might  be
    found in the lengthy conversation taking place during 2012 to  which  I
    have referred above, the Appellant had obtained the document  dated  14
    December  2012  following  an  approach  that  had  been  made  to  the
    Superintendent Registrar on 22 November 2012  to  clarify  whether  the
    parties  would  be  free  to  marry.   This  is  the  document   headed
    Superintendent Registrar's Certificate of No  Impediment  to  Marriage,
    Pursuant to the Marriage with Foreigners Act 1906. The author being the
    Superintendent Registrar for the District  of  Bradford  and  Keighley.
    Although the Entry Clearance Officer says in terms in his decision that
    he had no evidence before him to demonstrate any  intention  to  marry,
    the documents that were before  the  judge,  and  are  before  me  now,
    demonstrate  that  his  assertion  to  that  effect  was  wrong.    The
    certificate was referred to in a solicitors' letter  dated  8  November
    2012 at Appendix L written on behalf of  the  Appellant  to  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer in Rabat in support  of  the  application  for  entry
    clearance.  This was one of those letters that a number  of  solicitors
    practising  in  this  field  consider  is  a  sensible  and   expedient
    supplement  to  the  information  required  of  their  clients  in  the
    computerised Visa Application Form.  It is used generally as a  vehicle
    for advancing perhaps a little more detail or explanation of  what  has
    taken place as the background to  the  application.   Here  the  author
    plainly used his letter as a vehicle to introduce,  and  to  supply,  a
    series of documents relied upon in support of the application for entry
    clearance, and not just to advance an argument.  So at item  5  of  the
    list of enclosures to  this  letter  we  find  the  Certificate  of  No
    Impediment.  That can only be a reference to the certificate issued  by
    the Registrar for the District of Bradford and Keighley.

 9. Now the Respondent before me fairly takes the point; how could both the
    Entry Clearance Officer and the Entry Clearance Manager  on  review  in
    the face of the Notice of Appeal both have overlooked the existence  of
    this document so that both were able to conclude that there was  before
    them no independent evidence to corroborate the  claimed  intention  to
    marry?  I do not think it is for me to advance an answer to  that.   It
    is enough to look at the decision and the  judge's  acceptance  of  the
    evidence that he was being given on behalf of the Appellant.  That view
    can only be bolstered in my judgment by the unchallenged terms  of  the
    Rule 24 response.

10. Accordingly, whilst this was a decision that is sparse in  its  detail,
    and does not provide the reader  with  the  detailed  analysis  of  the
    evidence that the majority of judges would undertake with an appeal  of
    this sort, I am satisfied that the decision is one that falls short  of
    the  dividing  line  between  a  challenge  that  is  no  more  than  a
    disagreement  with  the  judge's  conclusions  and  a  challenge   that
    overcomes the threshold of demonstrating that the judge's reasoning and
    analysis of the evidence were so inadequate as to  amount  to  a  fatal
    error of law.  There is no suggestion that  the  judge  overlooked  any
    evidence that was material to the appeal or that he took  into  account
    evidence that was  irrelevant  and  immaterial  to  the  appeal.   Both
    parties now accept before me that these were findings of fact  that  he
    was entitled to come to on the evidence, provided he had analysed  that
    evidence adequately and given adequate reasons for his findings. So  in
    those circumstances this challenge must fail, amounting as it  does  to
    no more than a disagreement with the wrap-up finding  to  be  found  in
    paragraphs 28 and 29 of the decision in the following terms:

         "28. I found the sponsor and all his witnesses  to  be  honest  and
             reliable and accepted their evidence.

         29.  I found that the relationship  between  the  sponsor  and  the
             Appellant is genuine and that they intend to marry and to live
             permanently together in the UK."

11. For the reasons set  out  above  in  my  judgment  whilst  the  judge's
    approach lacked the detailed analysis of the evidence that the  parties
    were entitled to, those findings were upon a proper analysis sufficient
    to dispose of  the  appeal  and  to  provide  an  explanation  for  the
    decision. That being the case, there is no error of law demonstrated in
    his approach to the evidence requiring me to set aside his decision and
    to remake it.  The decision on the appeal is therefore confirmed.

Notice of decision

The appeal is dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes


