
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/21506/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham|                  Decision & Reasons  |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 27th August 2015                   |                  On 22nd September   |
|                                      |2015                                  |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                Mrs Jit Kaur
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Neville (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge E Lagunju, promulgated on 12th August 2014, following  a  hearing
    at Sheldon Court Birmingham on 12th June 2014.  In  the  determination,
    the judge allowed the appeal of Mrs Jit  Kaur.   The  Respondent  Entry
    Clearance  Officer,  subsequently  applied  for,   and   was   granted,
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the  matter  comes
    before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of India, who was born on 5th December 1934.
     She appealed against the decision of the Entry  Clearance  Officer  in
    New Delhi rejecting her application to come  to  the  UK  as  an  adult
    dependent relative under Appendix FM of  the  Immigration  Rules,  with
    specific reference to paragraph EC-DR.1.1.  She wished to  settle  with
    her son in this country because she felt alone, and had a disability of
    age, illness, and a need of long-term personal  care.   The  Respondent
    reasoned that the Appellant had a daughter in India, and also had lived
    all her life in that country, with other close relatives and friends to
    turn to for social support.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge's findings were that,

         "According to the evidence, which is not in dispute, the  Appellant
         suffers  from  hypertension,  diabetes  mellitus  with  angina  and
         bronchitis.  She was also almost blind in one eye with  her  second
         eye now also affected due  to  the  diabetes.   The  Appellant  has
         provided a letter from her personal  physician  who  confirms  that
         diagnosis and states that she requires 'constant  care,  especially
         in her daily routines'" (see paragraph 12).

 4. The judge also went on to say that,

         "According  to  the  Sponsor,  he  has  considered  more  long-term
         permanent care for his mother, however, because he is  not  present
         to supervise this, he states it is hard to trust his mother's  care
         entirely to a stranger.  His sister however is present in India and
         lives with  her  husband's  family  ten  miles  away,  however  for
         cultural reasons  ...  she  is  unable  to  offer  her  mother  any
         significant assistance ..." (paragraph 15).

 5. The judge further went on to conclude that, "The  Appellant's  daughter
    cannot provide the level of care required as she has her own family  to
    care for.  The local helper cannot provide the level of  care  required
    as she is only able to do a few hours a day and is still not  available
    at night ..." (paragraph 19).

 6. The appeal was allowed.

Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application state  that  the  judge  failed  to  provide
    adequate reasons for findings that required the level of care not being
    available for the Appellant in India where she has a daughter who could
    assist her, coupled with the Sponsor's financial assistance of adequate
    care from the long distance.

 8.  On  23rd  September  2014,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissed   the
    application for permission to appeal.

 9. However, on 5th January 2015, the Upper Tribunal granted permission  to
    appeal.

Hearing

10. At the hearing before me on 27th August 2015, Mr Richards, appearing on
    behalf of the Respondent Entry Clearance Officer, stated that he  would
    rely upon the Grounds of Appeal.  He submitted that, although the judge
    had  directed  herself  adequately  at  the  outset  in  terms  of  the
    consideration of the evidence (see paragraph  6),  the  fact  was  that
    there was a daughter living just ten miles away, to whom the  Appellant
    could turn to, and this had not been properly dealt with by the judge.

11. In reply, Mr Neville submitted that the emphasis on the  daughter,  who
    it is said is ten miles away, had never been  properly  raised  in  the
    initial hearing, but that the judge had, nevertheless,  dealt  with  it
    foursquare by stating that, "The Appellant's  daughter  cannot  provide
    the level of care required as she has  her  own  family  to  care  for"
    (paragraph 19).

12. Furthermore, there was a reference with the  undisputed  evidence  (see
    paragraph 12) together with the doctor's  letter  confirming  that  the
    Appellant required "constant care, especially in  her  daily  routines"
    (paragraph 12).

13. In addition, there was a clear finding that the Appellant did need long-
    term permanent care, and that the Sponsor was unable  to  arrange  this
    from the long distance because he could not trust his care entirely  to
    strangers.  In these circumstances the Sponsor had done  "his  best  to
    provide some daily care for her although it  is  clear  that  the  care
    throughout the day and night is required ..." (paragraph 17).

14. As against this, the sponsoring son could look after his mother in this
    country (paragraph 20) and she could be adequately housed in his  three
    storey five bedroom property (paragraph 21).  Mr Neville also  drew  my
    attention to the case of MR (permission to appeal: Tribunal's approach)
    Brazil [2015] UKUT 00029 (IAC) which affirmed the rule of law in  Nixon
    (permission to appeal: grounds) [2014] UKUT 368, where the President of
    the Tribunal  had  made  it  quite  clear  that  a  judge  granting  an
    application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  must  avoid
    granting permission in what, properly  analysed,  is  no  more  than  a
    simple quarrel with the First-tier Tribunal Judge's assessment  of  the
    evidence.  Mr Neville submitted that this is exactly what had  happened
    in this case.

No Error of Law

15. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  This is  because
    in a specific number of paragraphs, the  judge  has  given  proper  and
    sufficient consideration to all the issues that were  before  her.   In
    paragraph 12 she recognises that the Appellant suffers  from  blindness
    in one eye and near blindness  in  another  eye  such  that  she  needs
    constant care for her  daily  routine  activities.   Consideration  was
    given at paragraph 15 to the Sponsor  having  taken  into  account  the
    Appellant's long-term care (at paragraph 15).

16. The Sponsor had done his best to provide  daily  care  (paragraph  17).
    The Appellant required meals at certain times throughout  the  day  and
    her sugar  levels  were  dropping  in  her  blood  and  she  often  got
    breathless due to the angina and the percentage of her  heart  that  is
    effectively functioning,  "thus  the  level  of  care  currently  being
    provided is not sufficient" (paragraph 18).

17. It is to be noted in this case that the  First-tier  Tribunal  declined
    permission to appeal on the grounds that,

         "The judge carefully and properly considered the evidence and  made
         appropriate  findings  which  were  open  to  the  judge  to  make,
         including the Sponsor's oral evidence on the day  of  the  hearing.
         The judge allowed the appeal under the Immigration  Rules  and  not
         ECHR" (see paragraph 3).

    In the circumstances, the  strictures  in  MR  (permission  to  appeal)
    Brazil do apply in this case.  There is no  basis  for  there  being  a
    finding of an error of law.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity order is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 21st September 2015




