
IAC-AH-DP-V2
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/21908/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16th December 2014                         |On 10th March 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                        mrs ibtisam ageel aldhufairi
                        (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Siddique
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant claims to be an undocumented Bidoon from Kuwait  born  on
    1st January 1985.  The Appellant  applied  for  entry  clearance  as  a
    spouse  in  the  family  reunion  category  and  her  application   was
    considered by the Entry Clearance Officer under paragraphs 320 and 352A
    of the Immigration Rules.  By notice of  refusal  dated  24th  November
    2013 the Appellant's appeal was dismissed.  The Appellant was found  to
    have not provided satisfactory evidence to satisfy the Entry  Clearance
    Officer of her identity and that she had submitted her  application  in
    Amman but had provided no verifiable details or credible explanation as
    to how she travelled to  Jordan  or  why  she  had  not  submitted  her
    application in Kuwait.  The Entry Clearance Officer was  not  satisfied
    on the balance of probability that the Appellant was a  Kuwaiti  Bidoon
    and in the light of any evidence was not satisfied as  to  her  claimed
    identity.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Malik sitting at Manchester on 4th  August  2014.   In  a
    determination promulgated on 8th August 2014 the Appellant's appeal was
    allowed.  On 15th August 2014 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds  of
    Appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  On 6th October 2014 First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Parkes granted permission to appeal.  Judge Parkes noted that the
    Appellant applied to enter the UK under family reunion and that it  was
    not accepted that the Appellant was married to the Sponsor or that  the
    documents submitted could be relied on or that she was a Kuwaiti Bidoon
    and she had not produced a valid passport.  Judge Parkes noted that the
    appeal was allowed with the judge finding that the parties were married
    as claimed, but they had met since the  Sponsor  came  to  the  UK  and
    remained in contact.  In granting permission  to  appeal  Judge  Parkes
    noted that the grounds argued that the  judge  at  first  instance  had
    erred  in  not  addressing  the  mandatory  Grounds  of  Refusal  under
    paragraph 320(3) and the failure to produce a valid  national  passport
    which was not defeated by other positive credibility findings.

 3. There is no Rule 24 response served on behalf of the Appellant.  It  is
    on that basis that the appeal comes before me  to  determine  initially
    whether there is a material error of law in the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant appears by her instructed solicitor
    Mr Siddique.  Mr Siddique is familiar with this matter having  appeared
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  The  Appellant  appears  by  her  Home
    Office Presenting Officer Mr McVeety.  I note that this is an appeal by
    the Secretary of State.  For the purpose of continuity  throughout  the
    appeal process the Secretary of State is  referred  to  herein  as  the
    Respondent and Mrs Aldhufairi as the Appellant.

Factual Development

 4. Both Mr McVeety and Mr Siddique draw my attention to two factual issues
    which they asked me to bear in mind and  which  postdate  the  date  of
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  Firstly they advise me that
    on 11th December 2014 the Appellant entered the United Kingdom and made
    application for asylum.  Secondly they point out that  the  Appellant's
    application is based on family reunion and that as the Appellant is now
    within the United Kingdom it is not possible for entry clearance to  be
    granted for family reunion as her application was and has  to  be  made
    from outside the UK and the Appellant is now of course currently within
    the UK.  Mr Siddique  acknowledges  that  theoretically  the  Appellant
    could return to  Jordan  in  order  to  obtain  the  appropriate  entry
    clearance stamp although Mr McVeety is of the view that it would not be
    possible for her to be able to obtain a visa in such circumstances.

 5. I deliberated as to whether  or  not  these  developments  affected  my
    ability to hear the appeal and concluded that they did not  bearing  in
    mind that the relevant date in an out of country appeal is the date  of
    decision  which  is  when  the  Appellant  was  out  of   country   and
    consequently it was possible to go on to consider this matter on appeal
    within the Upper Tribunal.

Submissions/Discussions

 6. Mr McVeety indicates that the Appellant quite simply could not meet the
    Immigration Rules and I am considerably assisted in this matter  by  Mr
    Siddique  who  acknowledges  that  position.   Consequently  there   is
    agreement  between  the  Secretary  of  State   and   the   Appellant's
    representative that there is a material error of law in the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal and that it should be set aside.

Findings on Error of Law under the Immigration Rules

 7. I acknowledge that the judge made a series of findings  in  respect  of
    the history and substance of the Appellant's marriage and I accept that
    those were findings that were open to her as was  the  conclusion  that
    the Appellant is an undocumented Bidoon.  However amongst  the  Grounds
    of Refusal of entry clearance  was  a  ground  referring  to  paragraph
    320(3) of the Immigration Rules.  Paragraph 320(3) states:

    Grounds on which entry clearance or leave to enter the  United  Kingdom
    is to be refused

    (3)  Failure by the person seeking  entry  to  the  United  Kingdom  to
         produce to the Immigration Officer a  valid  national  passport  or
         other  document  satisfactorily  establishing  his   identity   and
         nationality.

 8. I accept the submission that that is a mandatory Ground of Refusal  and
    not one which can be defeated by a favourable  credibility  finding  or
    (as the First-tier Tribunal Judge sets  out  at  paragraph  28  of  her
    determination) by an observation that, as an undocumented  Bidoon,  the
    Appellant would be unable to produce such a document.   The  judge  has
    failed to deal with the  mandatory  nature  of  such  a  decision.   AM
    (Somalia) [2009] UKAIT 00008  whilst  concerned  principally  with  the
    appealability of paragraph 320(3)  refusal  accepts  without  challenge
    that such a decision (if supported by the facts) is  indeed  mandatory.
    In such circumstances I  endorse  the  view  expressed  by  both  legal
    representatives that the Appellant cannot succeed under the Immigration
    Rules and consequently there  is  a  material  error  of  law  and  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal must be set aside.

Submission/Discussion on Error of Law re Article 8

 9. The appeal under the Immigration Rules is however not the end  of  this
    matter.  The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal also involved an  appeal
    pursuant to Article 8 of the European Convention of Human Rights.   The
    judge has not gone on to make  such  a  consideration  (quite  possibly
    because she considered it was appropriate to allow the appeal under the
    Immigration Rules).  Mr  McVeety  acknowledges  that  it  is  "Robinson
    obvious"  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   has   not   made   a
    consideration under Article  8  and  that  it  is  appropriate  if  the
    Appellant cannot meet the Rules  give  due  consideration  to  it.   He
    further concedes the Secretary of State does not challenge any  of  the
    findings of fact made by the judge.  Mr Siddique endorses this view.

The Law

10.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account   immaterial   consideration,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

11. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings under Article 8

12. It is clear that the judge has failed to go on to  consider  Article  8
    (perhaps quite possibly because  she  did  not  consider  it  necessary
    bearing in mind her finding under the Immigration  Rules)  but  in  the
    light of the correct analysis of the Immigration Rules it is a material
    error of law not to go on to consider it.  In such  circumstance  I  am
    satisfied that there is a material error of law in the failure  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge not to go on to address the issue pursuant to
    Article 8 of the European Convention of Human Rights.

13. In considering the position with regard to other documents Mr  Siddique
    points out that there were other documents produced which  he  contends
    go to the identity of the Appellant namely her marriage certificate and
    birth certificate were produced so he submits that it was  not  correct
    to say that the Appellant did not do anything but that she  did  do  as
    much as she could.  However he accepts that this does not  take  him  a
    great deal further  as  he  accepts  that  it  is  necessary  that  the
    documents produced must establish, in order for him  to  succeed  under
    the Rules, the Appellant's nationality and as she has been found to  be
    stateless as an undocumented Kuwaiti Bidoon it is not possible that she
    can succeed under the Immigration Rules.

Findings under Article 8

14. It is appropriate for me to go on to  reconsider  this  matter  and  to
    remake the decision bearing in mind that the findings of  fact  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge are not challenged and  secondly  because  of
    the concessions made and submissions by Mr McVeety on the  Home  Office
    behalf.  It is possible and  indeed  I  consider  appropriate  in  this
    matter to remake the decision allowing the  appeal  outside  the  Rules
    under Article 8 of the European Convention of Human Rights.   There  is
    very little reference made to me by either legal  representative  other
    than an acknowledged agreement that that is the  correct  way  forward.
    Whilst that may be a substantial push in the right direction as far  as
    the Tribunal is concerned that does not  mean  automatically  that  the
    Tribunal is merely  going  to  endorse  that  course  of  action.   The
    Appellant has to be in a position to succeed  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules as a matter of law.

15. The general starting point is Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 in which the  House
    of Lords set out the five steps to follow when  determining  Article  8
    outside the Rules namely:

      i) Does family life, private life, home or correspondence exist within
         the meaning of Article 8?

     ii) If so, has or  will  the  right  to  respect  for  this  have  been
         interfered with?

    iii) If so, is the interference in accordance with the law?

     iv) If so, is the interference in pursuit of one of the legitimate aims
         set out in Article 8(2)?

      v) If so, is the interference proportionate  to  the  pursuit  of  the
         legitimate aim?

16. There have  been  a  considerable  number  of  authorities  since  then
    including a line of cases which  started  to  suggest  that  where  the
    Immigration Rules were not met it would not always be necessary  to  go
    on and consider the appeal under Article 8 outside the Rules.   However
    applications pursuant to Article 8 depend upon all the circumstances of
    the case and provisions dealing  with  the  application  of  Article  8
    including the period of leave normally to be granted are  contained  in
    relevant statements of policy and are not required to be set out within
    the Immigration Rules.  It is necessary to formulate a view on  whether
    overall there is a good arguable case of  disproportionality  if  leave
    was not granted and I am satisfied  giving  due  consideration  to  the
    facts of this case which are not challenged by the Secretary  of  State
    there are arguable grounds.  There is a requirement that there needs to
    be compelling or exceptional circumstances not sufficiently  recognised
    under the new Rules that outweigh the public  interest  in  deportation
    and this was confirmed in Haleemudeen [2014] EWCA Civ 558.  This is now
    necessary to find compelling circumstances which go outside the  Rules.
    In two recent authorities MM (Lebanon) and Others [2014] EWCA  Civ  985
    it was suggested that where a particular set of the  Immigration  Rules
    are not a complete code then the issue of proportionality under Article
    8 would be more at large and  further  in  R  (on  the  application  of
    Ganesabalan [2014] EWHC 2712 (Admin) it was  held  unlike  other  Rules
    which have a built in discretion  based  on  exceptional  circumstances
    Appendix FM and Rule 276ADE are not a "complete code" so far as Article
    8 compatibility is concerned because Appendix FM and Rule  276ADE  have
    no equivalent "exceptional circumstances" provision.

17. Consequently there is now a strong argument for reapplying when  making
    an assessment under Article 8 outside the  Immigration  Rules  the  old
    approach that was adopted and the accepted premise under Razgar.  To  a
    certain extent the law has gone full circle.  That is not to  say  that
    allowing an appeal outside  the  Rules  should  be  made  without  very
    careful and due consideration of the facts.  The factual  situation  in
    this matter is that the Appellant  and  the  Sponsor  have  been  found
    having married before the Sponsor sought asylum in the UK and that they
    married in Kuwait back in 2010 and that they have the intention to live
    together as spouses and that they are both resident within the  UK  and
    are both undocumented Bidoons.  It seems to me  that  this  is  a  case
    which meets the criteria for the Appellant to succeed under  Article  8
    of the European Convention of Human Rights and this indeed does  little
    more than endorse the view expressed by  both  Mr  McVeety  and  by  Mr
    Siddique.   It is important however that I had set out my reasons as to
    why I was satisfied both factually and as a matter of law that they met
    the requirements of Article 8 and in doing so I am satisfied that  this
    is an appeal that therefore should succeed  but  not  for  the  grounds
    originally allowed by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of  law
and is set aside.  The decision is remade allowing the  appeal  pursuant  to
Article 8 of the European Convention of Human Rights.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        Date 16th December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed        Date 16th December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
