
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: oA/21862/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision and Reasons  Promulgated    |
|On 21 October 2014                   |On 20 November 2014                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                        master joel alex george wiles
                       (Anonymity Direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Royston instructed by Heath and Power
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISIONS AND REASONS
The Appellant

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica, born on 13  March  1996  and  he
    appealed against the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer made on 19
    November 2013 to refuse him entry as a dependant child under  paragraph
    297 of HC 395 as amended.

 2. In a determination by Judge Maxine Myers promulgated on 12 August  2014
    she dismissed the appellant's appeal under the  Immigration  Rules  and
    under the Human Rights Act.

 3. The  particular  section  of  paragraph  297  in  issue  was  paragraph
    297(i)(f) which reads:

         "One parent or a relative is present  and  settled  in  the  United
         Kingdom or being admitted on the same occasion for  settlement  and
         there are serious and compelling  family  or  other  considerations
         which  make  exclusion  of  the  child  undesirable  and   suitable
         arrangements have been made for the child's care."

 4. There is an unfortunate background to this appeal which Judge Myers set
    out.  The sponsor who was the appellant's mother married the father  in
    1995 and was a victim of domestic violence.  She  did  not  report  the
    incidents to the police but left Jamaica in 2001 as she was  frightened
    of her husband and wanted the appellant to  go  with  her  but  he  was
    refused his passport.  She returned  to  Jamaica  in  2002  in  another
    attempt to take her son but was again assaulted by her husband.

 5. The appellant made an application to join his mother on 19 August 2013.
     An application for permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Landes.

 6.  I shall deal with the grounds of the application for  appeal  as  they
    are set out.

 7. The first ground was that the judge had  not  taken  into  account  the
    circumstances of the appellant's mother and sister in conjunction  with
    the  appellant's  own  circumstances  could  amount  to   serious   and
    compelling  considerations.   The  findings  were   confined   to   the
    appellant's circumstances in Jamaica  and  failed  to  have  regard  to
    material consideration.

 8. I can see that at the skeleton  argument  provided  by  Mr  Royston  he
    quoted sections of Macdonald which confirmed at 11.97 that:

         "The IDI state that where the UK sponsor is the UK-settled  parent,
         the circumstances may relate to the child or the parents but  where
         the sponsor is not settled or is not a parent, the  factors  to  be
         considered must relate only to the child... In  Saluguo  IAT  18815
         the fact that the child was living comfortably with  her  aunt  and
         siblings in the Philippines was outweighed by  the  fact  that  her
         mother, a Filipino  domestic  worker  who  had  worked  under  poor
         conditions for a number of  years  to  provide  her  children  with
         financial security and an education, had a strong desire  to  bring
         her youngest child to the UK, and secondly, at 11.98 in  Rudolph  v
         Entry Clearance Officer (Colombo) [2984] Imm  AR  84  the  Tribunal
         rejected the "intolerable conditions" test pointing  out  that  the
         underlying purpose of the Immigration Rules is to  unite  families,
         not divide them, and holding that where a  father  was  capable  of
         caring for a child that in itself  would  be  grounds  for  deeming
         exclusion  undesirable.   Voluntary  abandonment   may   make   the
         circumstances compelling: this rule, unlike certain of the adoption
         rules, does not require inability to care for the child on the part
         of the parent or carer abroad: Sharma  v  Entry  Clearance  Officer
         (New Delhi) [2005] EWCA Civ 89."

 9. First  I  would  state  that  the  judge  did  take  into  account  the
    circumstances  of  the  mother  and  the  sister  when  one  reads  the
    determination overall.  The judge set out the circumstances  and  wrote
    at [15]

         'The picture painted is that of a couple who split  up,  ultimately
         divorced and were in dispute about where their child  should  live.
         However objectionable the father's parenting may have been at times
         the fact is that the  appellant  lived  with  him  for  almost  the
         entirety of his childhood and many of the allegations of inadequate
         parenting are historic.

    The judge noted at paragraph 16 "furthermore as the sponsor is  settled
    in the UK the serious and compelling circumstances can relate  both  to
    the child and parent".  The judge did not accept that  there  was  sole
    responsibility on the part of the mother.  It was clear that the  judge
    had the consideration of the mother in her mind.  This is  not  a  case
    whereby the sponsor was seeking to be reunited with a minor child.  The
    judge's findings indicated  at  [16]  she  had  taken  account  of  the
    circumstances.

10. Further, the judge states:

         "The sponsor has been separated from her son  for  many  years  and
         although she has done what she can to keep in contact with him this
         has frequently been frustrated by the father.  In this  case  there
         is also the consideration of the appellant's half-sister who  lives
         with her mother; she has a right to  enjoy  family  life  with  her
         brother.  The appellant and her daughter it  was  found  could  not
         live  in  Jamaica  as  it  would  not  be  safe  and  it  would  be
         unreasonable to expect them to uproot themselves."

11. Although her findings were short I do not consider that this  discloses
    a material error.  The mother has made her life in the  United  Kingdom
    over many years albeit having removed herself because  of  the  unhappy
    marriage and conduct  of  the  appellant's  father  but  there  was  no
    indication that the mother alone had raised this child, unlike  Salugo,
    and this was a finding that the judge made.

12. It would seem that the judge accepted that she needed to  consider  the
    circumstances of the sponsor but she noted from Mundeba (s.55 and  para
    297(i)(f)) [2013] UKUT 88 (IAC) it was held that family  considerations
    required an evaluation of the child's welfare including emotional needs
    and "other considerations" come into play where there are other aspects
    of a child's life that are serious and compelling, for example where an
    applicant is living in an unacceptable social and economic environment.
     The focus needed to be on the circumstances of the child in the  light
    of his or her age, social background and  developmental  history.   The
    assessment which included whether there was a neglect or abuse, whether
    there were unmet needs or whether there are stable arrangements for the
    child's  physical  care  included  a  consideration  of   whether   the
    combination  was  sufficiently  serious  and  compelling   to   require
    admission.

13. Not least serious meant that there needed to be  more  than  the  party
    simply desiring a state of affairs to  obtain  and  compelling  in  the
    context of paragraph 297(i)(f) indicated considerations were persuasive
    and powerful.  She  noted  that  such  an  interpretation  set  a  high
    threshold and she noted that  "other  considerations"  came  into  play
    where there were other aspects of a child's life that were serious  and
    compelling and that the focus needed to be on the circumstances of  the
    child  in  the  light  of  his  or  her  age,  social  background   and
    developmental history.

14. The judge took as a starting point and focus the circumstances  of  the
    child and leading on from that the considerations of the parent.

15. She took into account the  fact  that  at  the  date  of  decision  the
    appellant was a minor but he was only a few months away from a majority
    and he had lived all his life in Jamaica and it may well be in his best
    interest to continue with residence there.  This was one of the factors
    identified in Mundeba.

16. She considered whether he was still subject to abuse and concluded that
    he was not despite the fact that she had acknowledged  that  there  had
    been abuse previously.  She did not find that  there  were  needs  that
    should be catered for and thirdly, which was  also  the  subject  of  a
    challenge, found that there were stable arrangements for his living.

17. It was submitted by Mr Royston, the  second  ground  of  appeal,   that
    although she had attributed  weight  to  all  statements  there  was  a
    contradiction between the statement of Pastor Jackson and the appellant
    himself.  I do not find that there is a contradiction.  The  judge  was
    very clear when she stated that "a letter from Pastor Jackson dated  28
    July 2014 stated that the appellant is now living in a more settled and
    stable home environment with his uncle and his family, hence suggesting
    that contrary to what might have been said  the  arrangements  are  far
    from temporary."   Although the judge preferred  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant and the Pastor to that of  the  mother,  who  does  not  live
    there,  leading on from that, it was open to the judge  to  prefer  the
    evidence of Pastor Jackson which is, in effect, what she did,  to  that
    of the  appellant  himself  who  stated  that  his  position  was  only
    temporary. But the Judge went on to make an  even  further  finding  at
    paragraph 19 which was that "although I accept that the  appellant  may
    still need emotional support from a parent  or  parent  figure,  he  is
    working and is of an age when it is not unusual  for  young  people  to
    leave home and care for themselves".

18. Thus, the judge not only found that she accepted the evidence of Pastor
    Jackson and indeed as the appellant's evidence was  that  it  was  only
    temporary accommodation, she by  inference  accepted  Pastor  Jackson's
    evidence over and above that of the appellant's but she also went on to
    state that he was in a position to find a home for himself.

19. I have addressed  the  criticism  of  the  appellant's  present  living
    arrangements and it is correct to  state  that  the  judge  quoted  the
    evidence of the pastor.  Nowhere does the judge  state  that  they  are
    "now reasonably permanent" and indeed, on  a  careful  reading  of  the
    letter of 28 July 2014, the pastor states:

         "I have been the church pastor for the Wiles family over  the  past
         (4) years and have full knowledge of the situation.  Therefore,  it
         is my firm belief that while Joel is now living in a  more  settled
         and stable home environment with his uncle Robert and  his  family,
         notwithstanding  I believe visiting or living in the United Kingdom
         with his mother will offer far greater opportunities  for  personal
         growth and future prosperity."

20. The pastor did not state that the arrangement was  temporary.   It  was
    clear from a reading overall of paragraph 19 that the judge placed more
    weight on the evidence of the pastor as opposed to the sponsor  or  the
    appellant whose evidence she stated  lacked  clarity  with  respect  to
    living with other relatives.

21. It is clear that by the time of the decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer he found that the mother only had  a  peripheral  role  in  the
    appellant's upbringing.  He had lived with the uncle for at  least  six
    months and this the judge  was  clearly  aware  of.  I  find  that  the
    approach taken by the judge started with  the  best  interests  of  the
    child as a primary consideration and focused on the evaluation  of  the
    child's welfare.  She followed the approach that  other  considerations
    came into play when there were other aspects of  a  child's  life  that
    were serious and compelling.  Clearly the judge did not find they  were
    serious and compelling and when reading the determination as a whole it
    is clear that she accepted that the family life of the mother would  be
    interfered with but did not consider this because of the  approach  she
    took.

22. I do not think that the judge was in error in this regard.

23. A further criticism was made on the basis that the judge had failed  to
    cite LD (Article 8 - best interests of child) Zimbabwe [2010] UKUT  278
    (IAC).  In particular this states that:

         "Weighty reasons would be required to justify separating  a  parent
         from a lawfully settled minor child or child from  a  community  in
         which he had grown up and lived for most of his or her  life.   The
         general situation in the relevant home country  is  also  relevant,
         especially if it is known that the conditions  there  are  dire  as
         they are, for example, in Zimbabwe at present."

24. In this context it is not the situation that immediate physical  family
    life has been enjoyed over many years.  It is accepted that family life
    consists of the inter-dependent bonds and the judge  acknowledged  that
    there were specific reasons as to why the appellant's mother  may  have
    come to the UK but the fact is that this is a situation  which  is  the
    status quo and has been the status  quo  for  over  twelve  years.   LD
    referred to the circumstances where the family were  living  with  each
    other in the UK and the parent would be returned to Zimbabwe.  That  is
    not the case here.

25. I can appreciate that the submission of Mr Royston was that  the  state
    had an obligation to ensure that the family life was  developed.   Even
    Section 55 of the Borders Citizenship and  Immigration  Act  2009  only
    states that there is onus on the respondent to discharge the  functions
    under Section 55(2) having regard to the need to safeguard and  promote
    the welfare of a child who is in the UK .  The government has  ratified
    the Convention on the Rights of the Child but this, I do not find makes
    it incumbent upon the UK Government to ensure that historic  injustices
    are compensated in this way, particularly where the government has  had
    no part in the development of family life hitherto.  As LD states

         'Although questions exist about the status of the UN Convention  on
         the Rights of the Child in domestic law,  we  take  the  view  that
         there can be little reason to doubt that the interests of the child
         should be a primary consideration in immigration cases.  A  failure
         to treat them as such will violate  Article  8(2)  as  incorporated
         directly into domestic law'.

    Although I appreciate that the State  must  have  regard  to  potential
    family life and refrain from inhibiting the development of real  family
    life in the future, and may be required to consider how to  assist  the
    development of family life I do not find that  the  respondent  can  be
    responsible for forging family life or further developing it  in  these
    particular circumstances.   Indeed, the case  of  R  (on  the  appn  of
    Ahmadi) v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 1721 emphasises an illustration of those
    principles but they do not take this appellant's case further  forward.
    Ahmadi confirmed

         'The pre-existing blood ties, coupled with the  declared  intention
         of the one brother to care for and support his other brother,  are,
         in my  judgment,  of  greater  significance  than  Sullivan  J  was
         prepared to accept. There is ample authority  for  the  proposition
         that the obligations under Article 8 require a state  not  only  to
         refrain  from  interference  with  existing  life,  but  also  from
         inhibiting the development of a real family  life  in  the  future.
         That is not to say that,  where  there  has  been  no  pre-existing
         family life and there exists only a future intention, that will  be
         sufficient to engage Article 8. There is the  world  of  difference
         between interfering with a long-established family life and  merely
         preventing or inhibiting an opportunity in the  future  to  develop
         such a family relationship. Nevertheless, it seems to me  that  the
         judge, in considering the propriety of the certification, failed to
         pay sufficient heed to the declared  intentions  of  the  brothers,
         coupled as they were with at least some experience of  the  support
         that the brother was able to give  to  his  seriously  ill  younger
         sibling'.

    The right to enter the UK is  not  guaranteed  by  Article  8  and  the
    exclusion in not a  breach  in  every  case.   The  fact  is  that  the
    appellant, as the judge identified had a family life in  Jamaica  where
    he had lived all his life first with his father and secondly  with  his
    uncle; the appellant was approaching his majority and  the  status  quo
    was to be maintained.

26. I find therefore that there is no error of law in the decision and  the
    decision shall stand.



Signed        Date 19th November 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

