
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/21190/2013
     OA/21191/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 January 2015                            |On 29 January 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                               OLAGOKE BALOFIN
                         olanrewaju olaboye balofin
                         (ANONYMITY orders not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                          ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER,
                                  SHEFFIELD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms R Baruah of Counsel instructed by Cahill De
Fonseka Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   These are linked appeals against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Raymond promulgated on 21 August 2014 dismissing the  appeals  of
    the Appellants against decisions made by the Respondent on  4  November
    2013 to refuse entry clearance as the children of  Ms Omalara Balofin.

2.   The Appellants are brothers and citizens  of  Nigeria.  Their  personal
    details are a matter of record on file and accordingly  I  do  not  set
    them out here.

3.   The Appellants made applications for entry clearance  as  the  children
    of Ms Balofin ('the sponsor'), which were refused on  4  November  2013
    with reference to paragraphs  297(i)(e)  and  (f)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules. They appealed to the IAC and their appeals  were  dismissed  for
    the reasons given in  the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.  Thereafter they made applications for permission to  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal which were  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Levin on 27 October 2014.

4.   The bases of the challenge that is  brought  against  the  decision  of
    Judge Raymond broadly come under the umbrella that the Judge  erred  in
    law in that he drew negative inferences as to the sponsor's credibility
    based  on  matters  not  put  to  the  sponsor   or   the   Appellants'
    representative in order for them to address such matters.

5.   In particular, four issues are raised under this broad umbrella. In  no
    particular order of priority these are:

          (i) The Judge had been in error to infer that the sponsor had been
         married to the father of the  Appellants  by  reason  of  a  common
         surname alone, without having raised such an issue with the sponsor
         in evidence for her comment.

          (ii) The Judge was wrong to attach adverse weight to  an  apparent
         discrepancy between the sponsor's description  of  the  Appellant's
         father's nationality - which at one point was said to  be  American
         and elsewhere said to be Nigerian.

          (iii) The Judge had wrongly  relied  upon  concerns  over  letters
         written by the Appellants that had  been  submitted  as  supporting
         evidence.

          (iv) The Judge had raised issues in respect of  evidence  relating
         to remittances said to be from the sponsor in  circumstances  where
         the Respondent had not raised any such issue, and the  matters  had
         not been put at the hearing.

6.   In respect of the third of these matters, it  is  now  acknowledged  on
    behalf of the Appellants that such an issue was raised in the review of
    an Entry Clearance Manager dated 29 April 2014 and accordingly reliance
    is no longer placed on this aspect of the challenge.

7.   The matter came before the Upper Tribunal on  3  December  2014.  There
    was an issue between the parties as to  the  evidential  basis  of  the
    grounds of challenge. Consequently an 'Order and Directions' was issued
    by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Plimmer.  The  'Order  and  Directions'
    fully sets out this dispute between the parties at that time and  is  a
    matter of record: accordingly  I  do  not  repeat  its  contents  here.
    Suffice to say that Directions were issued  requiring  the  Appellants'
    representatives to file and serve a witness statement from Counsel  who
    had appeared before the First-tier Tribunal.

8.   A  Direction  requiring  a  witness  statement  from  the  Respondent's
    Presenting Officer who had appeared before the First-tier Tribunal  was
    also made.

9.   A witness statement has now been filed from Ms  Kerry  Ann  Currie  who
    represented the Appellants before Judge Raymond.  The witness statement
    is dated 23 December 2014 and essentially supports the factual premises
    of the grounds - which were drafted by Ms Currie - in  support  of  the
    application for permission to appeal,  save  that  within  the  witness
    statement Ms Currie acknowledges her error  in  respect  of  the  third
    ground identified above.

10.  The Respondent has not filed a witness statement  from  the  Presenting
    Officer,  although  there  is  on   file   the   Presenting   Officer's
    'preparation form' from the First-tier hearing.   Ms  Holmes,  however,
    has taken instructions on the matter and has had communication with the
    Presenting Officer who, in turn, has had sight of Ms  Currie's  witness
    statement.  I am told today that the Presenting Officer does  not  seek
    to  challenge  anything  in  that  witness  statement,   and   in   the
    circumstances Ms Holmes accepts it at  face  value  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent.

11.  Given those circumstances Ms Holmes acknowledges that she is  presented
    with difficulty in resisting the appeal of the Appellants to the  Upper
    Tribunal.  To that end Miss Holmes concedes that there is substance  in
    the grounds of challenge and that the Tribunal should find an error  of
    law.

12.  I accept that concession.

13.  I observe that it will not be in every circumstance that  a  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge will be required to raise each and every  adverse  point
    eventually relied upon.  However  on  the  particular  facts  of  these
    linked cases it seems to me that there are areas of sufficient  concern
    to warrant setting aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    error of law by reason of procedural unfairness.

14.  In  my  judgement  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  observations  in
    respect of the remittances are unclear.  It was not apparent to  either
    of the representatives and it is not apparent to  me  exactly  on  what
    basis the Judge considered the evidence in relation  to  the  sponsor's
    various addresses to undermine  the  credibility  or  veracity  of  the
    documents that had been  advanced  on  behalf  of  the  Appellants  and
    submitted with their application.  Moreover, the Judge's conclusions in
    respect of these remittances - based on matters which were not  put  to
    the Appellants or their representative during the course of the hearing
    - ultimately run contrary to the Respondent's  apparent  acceptance  of
    the remittances as valid evidence of financial support from the sponsor
    for the Appellants.

15.  Further, I also consider there is particular merit  in  the  ground  in
    respect of the Judge's approach to the question of whether the  sponsor
    and the Appellants' father had been married.  Whilst  it  is  the  case
    that the role of the Appellants' father in their lives was a matter  of
    contention, this particular aspect was not something that was raised or
    obviously stood out as requiring to be addressed by the Appellants.

16.  In  all  the  circumstances  and  bearing  in  mind  the  sensible  and
    realistic approach taken by the Respondent  this  morning,  I  conclude
    that there was a material error of law in the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal requiring that it be set aside.

17.  It is common ground between the parties that in such circumstances  the
    decisions require to be remade afresh with all  issues  at  large,  and
    that the most appropriate forum for this is the First-tier Tribunal.

18.  Accordingly the decisions in the appeals  will  be  remade  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal  in  front  of  any  judge  other  than  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Raymond.  I  do  not  propose  to  give  any  particular
    Directions: standard Directions apply. However the Appellants  and  the
    sponsor will now be acutely aware if they were  not  hitherto  that  it
    would be  helpful  -  if  possible  -  to  have  some  input  into  the
    proceedings from the Appellants' father by way of evidence.

Notice of Decision

19.  The decisions of the First-tier Tribunal contained material  errors  of
    law and are set aside.

20.  The decisions in the appeal are to  be  remade  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by any Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Raymond.





The above represents a corrected transcript of an ex tempore decision  given
at the hearing on 15 January 2015.



Signed        Date: 28 January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

