
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/21350/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                        |           Decision & Reasons       |
|                                         |Promulgated                         |
|On 11 August 2015                        |           On 8 December 2015       |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                    OIFA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           entry clearance officer
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Chawdhery, instructed by Arndale solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, OIFA, was born in December 2012.  He appeals  against  a
    decision of the respondent dated 8  October  2013  refusing  him  entry
    clearance to the United Kingdom as the adopted child of parents settled
    in this country (paragraph 310 of HC  395).   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Birkby) in a decision promulgated on 10 February 2015  dismissed
    the appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with permission, to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. There are seven grounds of appeal.  First, although  the  sponsors  (Dr
    and Mrs OFA) had submitted documents in support of the application  and
    appeal concerning  adoption  procedures  in  Kogi  State,  in  Nigeria,
    neither the respondent nor the judge found that this state had "enacted
    adoption laws" [8]. The ground of appeal  appears  to  argue  that  the
    documents submitted had not been referred to in the decision.  This  is
    puzzling because  the  documents  are  referred  to  at  [8]  and  were
    subjected to an analysis  by  the  judge  in  which  he  sets  out  the
    deficiencies in the supporting  documentation  which  led  the  ECO  to
    refuse the application under paragraphs 310(ix), (x)  and  (xi)  of  HC
    395.

 3. Secondly, the judge considered that it was of  "crucial  importance  in
    this appeal" whether the appellants and sponsor had  met  the  specific
    requirements provided by the Adoption Act 2002 and the  Adoptions  with
    the Foreign Legal Element Regulations 2005 [28].  At  [29],  the  judge
    wrote:

    At the hearing on behalf of the Appellants Miss Chawdhery accepted that
    it was the law that all prospective adopting  parents  had  to  contact
    their local authority and/or registered  agency  and  be  assessed  and
    passed by the adoption panel  as  suitable  to  adopt  a  child  before
    travelling abroad to  identify  a  child.   It  was  accepted  by  Miss
    Chawdhery that that had not been done.  Also before they travelled  all
    prospective adopters had to obtain a Certificate  of  Eligibility  from
    the Department for Education or Devolved Authority authorising them  to
    contact the adoption authorities in a named  country  with  a  view  to
    adopt a child.  The prospective adopting  parents  had  after  that  to
    travel to  that  country  to  undertake  and  complete  all  applicable
    procedures necessary  to  adopt  under  that  country's  law.   It  was
    accepted that that was a statement of the law in the  UK  and  although
    the Sponsors  had  travelled  to  Nigeria  to  undertake  and  complete
    procedures, they had not done so after they had obtained a  certificate
    of eligibility in  the  United  Kingdom.   It  was  accepted  that  the
    Sponsors had to show evidence showing that they as adoptive parents had
    approached the authorities of the UK prior to the claimed  adoption  in
    Nigeria, but it was accepted also that that had not been done.

 4. The grounds of appeal do not appear to dispute the  legal  requirements
    identified by the judge [5].  However, the grounds state that:

         The Entry Clearance Manager (ECM) acknowledged that the letter from
         Leeds City Council had been provided  but  stated  that  they  were
         dated after the date of the decisions (sic) and was  therefore  not
         available to the respondent at the time of the decision being made.
          It was submitted by Counsel for the appellant the purpose  of  the
         Adoption Law was that an overseas  adoption  does  not  take  place
         where the prospective adopters are unlikely to  be  approved  by  a
         local authority in the UK, however, in this case the adopters  were
         approved by Leeds City Council in the  UK  and  therefore  all  the
         necessary checks and assessments have now taken place.   Therefore,
         it would be nonsensical not to  allow  the  appeal  simply  because
         Leeds  City  Council  assessments  were  not  undertaken  prior  to
         applying for the visa.  A new application would  be  guaranteed  to
         succeed but this would cause further delay in the young appellant's
         life - he was only 2 years old - and he clearly needed to be in the
         UK with his adoptive parents who have been waiting eagerly for him.

 5. I find that the ground has no merit.  Irrespective of  what  the  judge
    said regarding  the  credibility  of  the  evidence  submitted  by  the
    appellant, the appellant and his representatives acknowledge  that  the
    procedures detailed by the judge in his decision had  simply  not  been
    followed.  The evidence that was needed appears to have been  submitted
    following the application and original decision by the ECO but prior to
    the review carried  out  by  the  ECM.   The  ECM  noted  that  "before
    travelling abroad to identify a child all prospective adopting  parents
    must contact their local authority  and/or  registered  agency  and  be
    assessed and passed by the adoption panel as suitable persons to  adopt
    a child.  This has not occurred as the letters from Leeds City  Council
    are dated after the date of the decision and the date of the adoption."
      It  does  not  assist  the  appellant  to  argue  that  it  would  be
    "nonsensical" for the First-tier Tribunal to  allow  the  appeal  where
    required procedures have clearly not been followed as required by  law.
    The findings made by the judge at [29] are determinative of this appeal
    notwithstanding the merits of any other grounds and,  for  that  reason
    alone, the appeal to the Upper Tribunal cannot succeed.

 6. Thirdly  and  fourthly,  the  grounds  of  appeal  attack  the  judge's
    assessment of credibility and the question as to whether  or  not  this
    adoption was one of convenience only.  It does indeed  appear,  as  the
    grounds state [11], that the judge made an error of fact at  [27]  when
    he noted that the adoption  certificate  had  been  issued  before  the
    appellant's birth in  December  2012.   The  adoption  certificate  was
    issued on 22 July 2013 and the judge's finding that "such a discrepancy
    clearly undermines the reliability of the documentation  from  Nigeria"
    is unsustainable.  I note also that the judge elsewhere  found  in  his
    decision that the two  prospective  adopters,  Dr  and  Mrs  OFA,  "are
    genuine  in  their  desire   to   adopt   the   appellant."    However,
    notwithstanding the judge's unfounded concern regarding the date of the
    adoption certificate, the appeal cannot succeed for the reasons which I
    have set out above.

 7. Grounds 6 and 7 are without merit.  The  grounds  at  [13]  incorrectly
    state that the standard of proof in an appeal of this sort is  that  of
    "a reasonable likelihood" but that statement is incorrect.   The  judge
    correctly stated [4] that the standard  of  proof  is  the  balance  of
    probabilities.  Ground 7 which asserts that  the  judge  rejected  "the
    probative value of the documentary evidence "... mainly on the basis of
    suspicion and surmises rather than solid evidence ..." does  not  stand
    up to any scrutiny.  No details are provided and  any  reading  of  the
    judge's decision shows that he took a fair and even-handed approach  to
    the evidence adduced by both parties.

 8. In conclusion, the appellant cannot overcome the difficulties described
    by the ECM in his review and more particularly described by  the  judge
    at [29].  For the reasons set out in that paragraph alone,  the  appeal
    fell to be dismissed.  The judge's Article 8 assessment [33]  does  not
    appear to have been challenged.  I would say, however, that it is by no
    means clear that this adoption application is one of convenience or  is
    in any way at all dishonest.  The judge made a mistake as  regards  the
    date of the adoption certificate which appears to have led him to doubt
    the credibility of the application.  He was wrong to do so.  It may  be
    the case that the sponsors will make a further  attempt  to  bring  the
    appellant to the United Kingdom and, if they do so, they  would  appear
    to be unlikely to encounter the same problems as regards  adoption  law
    in this jurisdiction which they previously encountered.  However,  that
    is a matter for the sponsors and their legal advisers.




Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed                              Date 10 November 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 10 November 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


