
[pic]
IAC-AH-krl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/21796/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 March 2016                              |On 13 April 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                       Entry Clearance Officer - dhaka

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               mr Abdul Mukit
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:

For the Appellant:              Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent/Claimant:    Mr M Hossain, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Specialist Appeals Team appeals on behalf  of  an  Entry  Clearance
    Officer (post reference Dhaka/645389) from the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal allowing the claimant's appeal against  the  decision  to
    refuse him entry clearance as a spouse on the grounds, inter alia, that
    there had been a failure to disclose material facts in relation to  his
    application in  breach  of  S-EC.2.2  of  Appendix  FM,  and  that  his
    application also fell for refusal pursuant to paragraph  320(11).   The
    First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction, and I  do  not
    consider that the claimant requires anonymity for these proceedings  in
    the Upper Tribunal.

The Entry Clearance Officer's Reasons for Appealing

 2. A member of the Specialist Appeals Team  settled  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer's application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 3. If the claimant did not  refute  the  allegations  made  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer, then the  clear  inference  was  that  the  claimant
    accepted the allegations were correct.  It was therefore  perverse  for
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge to decide on behalf of the claimant  that
    he  did  not  deceive  the  immigration   authorities   regarding   his
    immigration history, when the claimant himself had  seemingly  made  no
    such claim.  It was further submitted that  the  judge  had  failed  to
    provide adequate reasons why the witness and the  appellant  were  both
    found to be credible at paragraph [12] of the decision.  For the  judge
    simply to state that they were credible fell  far  short  of  providing
    adequate reasons.  The  judge  had  failed  to  consider  in  assessing
    credibility that the claimant had been an immigration offender  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The judge failed to provide adequate  reasons  why  it
    was that the Entry Clearance Officer had to provide supporting evidence
    for his allegations, yet the judge accepted the word of the sponsor and
    the  claimant  without  hesitation  and  without  the  requirement   of
    supporting evidence, as was clearly apparent from paragraph [44] of the
    decision.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 4. On 29 May 2015 Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede granted the Entry  Clearance
    Officer permission to appeal on a  renewed  application  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, permission having previously been  refused  by  a  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge:

         There is some arguable merit  in  the  renewed  grounds,  that  the
         judge, in concluding that the [Entry Clearance Officer] had  failed
         to discharge the burden of proof, arguably erred by  rejecting  the
         [Entry Clearance Officer's] unchallenged allegation  of  deception,
         as appears at  paragraph  [25]  of  his  decision,  which  in  turn
         arguably infected his overall findings.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 5. At the hearing before me, I received extensive submissions from both Mr
    Wilding and Mr Hossain on the question of whether an error of  law  was
    made out and, if so, how the decision should be remade.





Relevant Background

 6. In his application form, the claimant left blank question 3 which asked
    him about other names, including any names that he was known by  and/or
    other names that he had been known by.

 7. In the refusal decision,  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  set  out  the
    claimant's adverse immigration history.  He  was  issued  with  a  work
    permit for one year for the period 8 June 2006 to 8 June 2007  in  the
    name of Abdul Mukit with a date of birth of 28 June 1977.  He  did  not
    leave the UK when required to do so on expiry of his visa.  UK  records
    of biometric fingerprints  showed  that  on  19  January  2011  he  was
    encountered by UK Immigration and found to  be  working  illegally  for
    Seagull International Foods.  The Entry Clearance Officer gave  a  Home
    Office reference of M1438547.  The identity and date of birth given  by
    him at that time was Abdul Malik (d.o.b. 16 June 1980).  He stated that
    he had entered the UK illegally with  the  aid  of  an  agent  who  had
    arranged a passport and identity for him.

 8. On 14 January 2011 he was granted temporary admission and requested  to
    report on a regular basis to Loughborough Reporting Centre.  He did not
    report as requested and he was recorded as an absconder in March  2011.



 9. According to UK records and by his own admission, he  had  applied  for
    leave to remain as a spouse in  November  2012,  having  undertaken  an
    Islamic marriage ceremony in July 2012.  The  application  was  refused
    both  initially  and  also  on  reconsideration.   The  second  refusal
    decision was issued on 19 March 2013.  He was again subject to removal.
     The Entry Clearance Officer gave a different Home Office reference for
    this.

10. The claimant left the UK voluntarily on 9 June 2013 using a  Bangladesh
    travel document, claiming that his original  passport  had  been  lost.
    His spouse travelled with him to Bangladesh and they had entered into a
    civil ceremony in Bangladesh on 17 June 2013.

11. His Counsel,  Mr  Hossain,  settled  lengthy  grounds  of  appeal.   At
    paragraph 9, he said that his lay client  had  disclosed  all  material
    information about his identity when applying for leave to remain  on  8
    November 2012.  The Home  Office  had  been  informed  that  while  the
    claimant's name was recorded as being Abdul Malik, in fact his name was
    Abdul Mukit.  He was also known  as  Abdul  Malik  and  Malik  was  his
    nickname.  His friends and relatives called him Malik.  His lay  client
    asserted that his name and date of birth were  not  recorded  correctly
    when he was encountered by UKBA.

12. In the ECM  appeal  review,  the  Entry  Clearance  Manager  noted  the
    solicitor's explanation that the claimant's nickname was  Abdul  Malik,
    and that this was what his friends and family called  him,  instead  of
    his real name, Abdul Mukit:

         It is unclear why the claimant would give a government official his
         nickname instead of his real  name.   Furthermore,  it  is  clearly
         asked on the Visa Application Form if you are known  by  any  other
         names, and the claimant left this blank.

13. The Entry Clearance Manager also noted  that  the  solicitor  had  been
    selective about the parts of the claimant's immigration history that he
    mentioned.  He did not mention the overstaying, the fact  that  he  was
    caught working illegally in 2011, and that  he  lied  to  the  officer,
    telling them that he had entered the UK illegally through an agent.  He
    did not mention that the claimant was then given  reporting  conditions
    which he disobeyed, and was thus  recorded  as  an  absconder  when  he
    failed to report.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

14. The claimant's appeal came before Judge Malone sitting at Taylor  House
    on 31 October 2014.  Mr Hossain appeared on behalf of the claimant, and
    there was no appearance on behalf of the Entry Clearance Officer.

15. In his subsequent decision, the judge noted at paragraph [11] that  the
    issues before him included the question of whether the marriage between
    the claimant and the sponsor Ms Bibi was genuine  and  subsisting,  and
    that they intended to live together permanently as husband and wife.

16. The judge began his findings at paragraph [12].  His first finding  was
    that Ms Bibi was an honest and reliable witness.  He accepted her  oral
    and written evidence, as he did the written evidence  of  the  claimant
    contained in his witness statement of 28 October 2014.

17. The judge went on to make findings  about  the  claimant's  immigration
    history.  He accepted that the claimant was encountered  while  working
    illegally on 19 January 2011, having overstayed from 8 June  2007.   He
    also found that he had been given temporary admission  on  14  February
    2011.  On the question of whether the claimant had absconded, he merely
    found that this is what the Entry Clearance Officer had alleged.

18. At Paragraph [23] he addressed  the  allegation  made  in  the  refusal
    decision that  the  claimant  had  given  the  name  Abdul  Malik  when
    encountered working illegally.  He observed  that  it  was  clear  from
    paragraph 13 of his witness statement that  the  claimant  denied  ever
    having given a name other than Abdul Mukit or a  date  of  birth  other
    than 28 June 1997, when  he  was  apprehended  in  January  2011.   He
    continued in paragraph [24] that the only evidence he had in support of
    the ECO's decision was the decision itself.  As the claimant denied the
    allegation which the ECO had made, he found that the ECO had failed  to
    discharge the burden of proving on the balance  of  probabilities  that
    the claimant had provided the immigration  authorities  in  the  United
    Kingdom with a false name and date of birth.

19. At paragraph [25] the judge found that although the  claimant  did  not
    expressly  refute  the  allegation  that  he   told   the   immigration
    authorities that he had entered illegally with the help of an agent, he
    found that there was no adequate evidence to  support  that  allegation
    either.  Again, all he had to go on was an unsigned notice  of  refusal
    containing the allegation.  There was therefore no  properly  evidenced
    allegation that the claimant was obliged to deny.

20. At paragraph [28] the judge addressed the claimant's failure to  answer
    question 3 of his VAF.  He disagreed  that  the  claimant  should  have
    recorded his nickname in answer  to  this  question.   His  reading  of
    question 3 was that it  did  not  require  an  applicant  to  record  a
    nickname that he or she had acquired over the years. At paragraph  [30]
    he found that the ECO had failed to prove the allegation that in  March
    2011 the claimant had absconded.  There  was  nothing  other  than  the
    unsigned notice of refusal to support the allegation.

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

21. The evidence given by the claimant in his  witness  statement  mirrored
    the case which had been advanced  by  Mr  Hossain  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal.  Accordingly, the claimant did not deny most of the details  of
    the  adverse  immigration  history  attributed  to  him  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer in the refusal decision.  The claimant's  silence  on
    these matters was particularly significant in the  light  of  the  fact
    that in the ECM appeal review the Entry  Clearance  Manager  had  drawn
    attention to the  fact  that  most  aspects  of  the  asserted  adverse
    immigration history of the claimant were not disputed in the grounds of
    appeal.  Since the claimant  had  not  disputed  most  of  his  adverse
    immigration history by way of appeal, the judge should have treated the
    Entry Clearance Officer as having discharged the  burden  of  proof  on
    these matters.  Effectively, the claimant's case was one of  confession
    and avoidance.  It was not a case of denial. Apart  from  what  he  was
    alleged to have said when encountered working  illegally,  he  did  not
    dispute  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's  account   of   his   adverse
    immigration history.  What he heavily relied on was the  fact  that  he
    had eventually decided  to  go  back  voluntarily,  and  therefore  (he
    contended) he did not come within the scope of paragraph 320(11).

22. On the topic of the alleged false information which he had  given  when
    encountered working illegally, the judge misunderstood  the  claimant's
    evidence and also failed to engage with  the  fact  that  there  was  a
    fundamental inconsistency in his case which inevitably  undermined  his
    general credibility.

23. The claimant's evidence fell into two parts.  In  the  first  part,  he
    effectively confessed to having given the "alternative" name  of  Abdul
    Malik when encountered in January 2011. But he relied in mitigation  on
    the fact that he had come  clean  about  this  in  his  application  of
    November 2012.  The thrust of his evidence was that he had explained in
    the November 2012 application that although the  Home  Office  believed
    him to be Abdul Malik (because that was the  name  he  had  given  when
    encountered), his real name was  Abdul  Mukit.   The  other  mitigating
    factor that he sought to rely upon was the proposition that Abdul Malik
    was not a false name, but a nickname which  was  used  by  friends  and
    relatives.

24. The Entry Clearance  Manager  did  not  find  this  to  be  a  credible
    explanation, and the judge wholly failed to engage with his concerns in
    this regard.

25. The second part of the claimant's evidence  in  his  witness  statement
    contradicted the first part.  The  second  part  of  his  evidence  was
    simply that his name and date of birth had been wrongly recorded by the
    Home Office when he was encountered.  But if, as he previously claimed,
    Abdul Malik was a true nickname by which he  was  genuinely  known,  it
    followed that his name had not been incorrectly recorded  by  the  Home
    Office when he was encountered working illegally.

26. The judge's finding at the end of paragraph [23] that  it  was  "clear"
    from paragraph 13 of the witness statement  that  the  claimant  denied
    having given a name other than Abdul Mukit, or a date  of  birth  other
    than 28 June 1977, when he was apprehended in January 2011 is perverse.
      The  claimant's  evidence  was  manifestly   incoherent   and   self-
    contradictory.

27. In light of the claimant's evidence that he was known by  the  nickname
    Abdul Malik, it was perverse of the judge to find  that  there  was  no
    material non-disclosure in the claimant leaving  blank  the  answer  to
    question 3 of his VAF.  As it was  the  claimant's  case  that  he  was
    genuinely known by the name of Abdul Malik, there  was  no  conceivable
    excuse for him not inserting the name Abdul Malik in answer to question
    3 of his VAF.  On the claimant's case, it was an  alternative  name  by
    which he was known by.

28. Accordingly, the judge's findings  on  paragraph  320(11)  and  on  the
    suitability requirement in Appendix FM are vitiated by a material error
    of law, such that the decision appealed against must be set  aside  and
    remade.

29. Before moving on to considering how this appeal should be disposed  of,
    it is necessary to consider whether ground 2 is  also  made  out.   The
    judge had the benefit of receiving oral evidence from the sponsor.  Her
    evidence was, it appears, wholly directed at the  question  of  whether
    the marriage was genuine and subsisting at  the  date  of  the  refusal
    decision.  So the adverse credibility implications  of  the  claimant's
    adverse immigration history, and also the incoherent  and  inconsistent
    evidence which  he  had  given  on  the  topic  of  what  he  had  told
    Immigration Officers when encountered, did not  necessarily  impact  on
    the probative value of the sponsor's evidence.   Although  the  judge's
    finding at paragraph  [12]  is  wholly  unreasoned,  later  on  in  his
    decision, at paragraphs [37] to  [44],  he  supports  this  finding  by
    reference to external evidence such as a utility bill dated 20 May 2013
    with the claimant's name on it, which was addressed to him at Ms Bibi's
    address.  He also referred to a tenancy agreement  which  recorded  the
    tenants of the property as being the claimant, Ms Bibi  and  Ms  Bibi's
    mother.  As was observed by the judge, it was not disputed that Ms Bibi
    had travelled out to Bangladesh in order to  marry  the  claimant.   In
    oral evidence, Ms Bibi told the judge that she spoke  to  the  claimant
    every day on the telephone and also spoke to him on WhatsApp.

30. I consider that it was open to the judge to find, for the reasons  that
    he gave, that, from her perspective, Ms  Bibi  was  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting  marital  relationship  with  the  claimant,  and  that  she
    genuinely wished him to join her in the United Kingdom  so  they  could
    live together permanently here as husband and wife while she carried on
    being a carer for her mother.

31. But in the light of the judge's flawed  acceptance  of  the  claimant's
    general credibility, the  judge  did  not  give  adequate  reasons  for
    finding  that  the  marriage  was  genuine  and  subsisting  from   the
    perspective of both parties to the marriage.

The Remaking of the Decision

32. In the light of my reasons for finding an error of law, I find that the
    Entry Clearance Officer has discharged the burden of proving  that  the
    application for entry clearance fell to be  refused  on  the  mandatory
    ground  that  the  claimant  had  knowingly  failed  to  make  material
    disclosure of the fact that, according to him, he  was  also  known  by
    friends by the name Abdul Malik, and indeed he had given this  name  to
    the Home Office in January 2011.

33. The Entry Clearance Officer has also discharged the burden  of  proving
    that  it  was  a  reasonable  exercise  of  discretion  to  refuse  the
    application under paragraph 320(11).  The claimant was  an  overstayer,
    as  he  admits,  and  there  were  aggravating  circumstances  in   his
    immigration offending.  It is likely that as well as  giving  the  name
    Abdul Malik, rather than his real name of Abdul Mukit, when encountered
    working illegally in January 2011, he also gave a false date  of  birth
    and a false account of his true immigration history.  It is also likely
    that he did not report as requested, and that he  was  recorded  as  an
    absconder in March 2011 making him subject to removal from the UK as an
    absconder.  I find  that  the  claimant  has  previously  significantly
    contrived to frustrate the intentions of the Immigration Rules, and  so
    paragraph 320(11) applies to him.   I  take  into  account  PS  (India)
    [2010], but I do not consider that the claimant's voluntary  return  to
    Bangladesh sufficiently mitigated his disregard for the UK  Immigration
    Rules so as to make it inappropriate for the Entry Clearance Officer to
    exercise his discretion other than in the normal way  by  refusing  the
    application on 11 November 2013.  At that time, the claimant  had  only
    been in Bangladesh some six months, since June 2013.   His  application
    for entry clearance as a spouse was made on 21 August 2013.   In  light
    of his adverse immigration  history,  he  did  not  have  a  legitimate
    expectation  of  being  granted  entry  clearance  so  soon  after  his
    voluntary departure.  Having regard to paragraph 320(7B) of the  Rules,
    the claimant needed to wait for at least one year before  applying  for
    entry clearance, and even then he could only expect to be  admitted  if
    he  was  treated  as  an  ordinary  overstayer  with   no   aggravating
    circumstances.

34. It is regrettable that nearly two and a half years have  elapsed  since
    the refusal decision, and so the effective  period  of  the  claimant's
    exclusion is now some three years.  But I must assess the circumstances
    as they appertained at the date of the refusal decision.

35. Accordingly, the claimant's appeal fails under the Rules.   Turning  to
    an alternative claim under Article 8, I accept that questions 1  and  2
    of the Razgar  test  should  be  answered  in  the  claimant's  favour.
    Questions 3 and 4 of the Razgar test should be answered  in  favour  of
    the respondent.  On the crucial question  of  proportionality,  I take
    into account the relevant considerations of Section 117B  of  the  2002
    Act.  It is a point in the claimant's favour that there  is  no  appeal
    from the finding of the First-tier Tribunal Judge that he is  going  to
    be adequately maintained and accommodated in the United Kingdom without
    recourse to public funds.  It is also likely that the  claimant  speaks
    English with reasonable fluency, having  lived  in  the  UK  for  seven
    years.  Even assuming in the claimant's favour that the  marriage  was,
    and continues to be, genuine and subsisting  from  the  perspective  of
    both parties to the  marriage,  the  refusal  of  entry  clearance  was
    proportionate in November 2013 having regard  to  the  claimant's  non-
    compliance with a mandatory suitability requirement in Appendix FM  and
    also the fact that his application fell  for  refusal  under  paragraph
    320(11).   The  interference  with  family   and   private   life   was
    proportionate to the legitimate  public  end  sought  to  be  achieved,
    namely the maintenance of firm and effective immigration  controls.  It
    is open to the claimant to re-apply in what will now be more propitious
    circumstances, as the public interest in excluding  him  as  a  serious
    immigration offender is  diminished,  and  arguably  assuaged,  by  the
    lengthy period of exclusion which he has now served.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly the  decision  is  set  aside  and  the  following  decision  is
substituted: this appeal against refusal of  entry  clearance  is  dismissed
under the Rules and also under Article 8, ECHR.

I make no anonymity direction.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed this appeal, there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
