
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/22012/2013
                                                               OA/22011/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Promulgated on                       |
|24 July 2015                         |14 September 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                     THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, DHAKA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MOSA JIBUNNAHAR MAHMOOD
                               SANJIDA MAHMOOD
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.
For the Respondent:    Ms L Dickinson, of Fursdon Knapper Solicitors.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The first respondent (whom we shall call "the claimant") is a  national
    of Bangladesh, as is the second respondent, her child.  They applied to
    the Entry Clearance Officer for  entry  clearance  as  the  spouse  and
    dependent child of Shahin Mahmood ("the sponsor").  The application was
    refused on 18 November 2013.  There were four grounds of refusal, which
    we summarise, adding references to the relevant paragraph  of  Appendix
    FM to the Statement  of  Changes  in  Immigration  Rules,  HC  395  (as
    amended).  First, the Entry Clearance Officer was  not  satisfied  that
    the single wedding photograph that had been produced  was  genuine  (S-
    EC.2.2(a)).  Secondly, the Entry Clearance Officer  was  not  satisfied
    that the sponsor was free to marry the claimant  on  the  date  of  the
    alleged wedding, and therefore was not satisfied that the marriage  was
    valid (E-ECP.2.7).  Thirdly, the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  considered
    that the application was not  supported  by  the  necessary  documents,
    required by the provisions of Appendix FM-SE.   Fourthly,  the  officer
    declined to accept the  English  Language  Test  Certificate  produced,
    because "investigations have confirmed that  the  documents  which  you
    have submitted do not reliably demonstrate that  you  have  passed  the
    stated qualification" (E-ECP.4.1).  The child's application was refused
    as dependent upon the claimant's.

 2. The respondents appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Judge  Burnett
    allowed their appeal.  He concluded that the evidence did not show that
    the photograph  was  fraudulent,  and  that  the  documentary  evidence
    satisfied him that the marriage was  valid.   His  examination  of  the
    sponsor's payslips  and  his  bank  account  showed  a  number  of  odd
    features, but it did appear that the pay recorded in the  payslips  was
    indeed being paid  into  the  sponsor's  bank  account,  and  that  the
    documents showed that, which was what the rule required.  So far as the
    English Language Certificate is concerned, the judge noted that  a  new
    certificate (dated July 2014) long post-dated the application  and  the
    Entry Clearance  Officer's  decision.   But  he  considered  that  "the
    process of refusing the appellant's application without offering her an
    opportunity to re-sit the test first [was] procedurally unfair  in  the
    Patel sense".  He therefore allowed the appeal having found  in  favour
    of the appellant on the first three grounds and  considering  that  the
    Entry Clearance Officer's decision was not in accordance with  the  law
    on the fourth.  He evidently took the view  that  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer should consider the  English  Language  Test  Certificates  now
    produced.

 3. The Entry Clearance Officer appealed on the ground that the  judge  had
    erred in considering the requirements of specified  evidence:  contrary
    to what was implied by his determination, the required  documents  were
    not before him or, indeed, before the Entry Clearance Officer.  So  far
    as concerns the English  test,  if  "Patel"  was  a  reference  to  the
    decision  reported  as  [2011]  UKUT  00211,  that  decision   has   no
    application to an out of country application, where the limitations  of
    leave extended by s 3C of the Immigration Act 1971 do not apply.  There
    was no reply under Rule 24.

 4. In his submissions to us, Mr Richards enlarged briefly on the  grounds.
    He submitted that the judge had wholly failed to identify the documents
    he regarded as meeting the requirements of  the  rules;  and  that  his
    conclusion in relation to the test  certificate  was  incoherent.   The
    only proper outcome was for  the  judge  to  dismiss  the  appeal.   Ms
    Dickinson took us through the documents.   She  had  some  considerable
    difficulty in identifying exactly how the applicant's  bank  statements
    reflected the amounts and dates of payment recorded  in  the  payslips.
    She accepted, however, that the position was that, at the date  of  the
    decision, the claimant could not meet the requirements of the rules  in
    relation to the English Language Test Certificate.  She did not seek to
    support the reasoning of the judge in relation to unfairness, but  made
    a brief submission on Article 8.  The problem with  that,  however,  is
    that, as we have said, there had been no Rule 24 reply: Article  8  was
    not before us.

 5. The financial documents are a mess, and we can entirely understand that
    the  Entry  Clearance  Officer,  who  already  had  doubts  about   the
    reliability of the evidence of the marriage, should have regarded  them
    as failing to  show  what  they  were  required  to  show.   Crucially,
    however, the absence of a valid English Language Test Certificate means
    that this application could not succeed, and the appeal to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal could not succeed.  The judge ought to have dismissed the
    appeal.

 6. Although, like Article 8, the issue of the validity of the marriage was
    not before us, we note that it is said to have taken place a  few  days
    after the sponsor divorced his previous wife by Talaq.  If that is  so,
    the divorce cannot have  been  obtained  by  "proceedings"  within  the
    meaning of s 46(1) of the Family Law Act 1986, as would be the position
    if the procedure prescribed by the Pakistan Family Laws Ordinance  1961
    (which runs in Bangladesh) had been followed.  A divorce obtained other
    than by means of proceedings is not recognised in the United Kingdom if
    either party was habitually resident in the United Kingdom  during  the
    year immediately preceding the divorce.   The  non-recognition  of  the
    divorce would not itself invalidate a second marriage by a  Muslim  man
    domiciled in Bangladesh, but clearly raises questions which would  need
    to be resolved in any future application.

 7. As we have said, Article 8 is not formally before us; but we can see no
    ground for saying that the circumstances of the claimant's  family  are
    such that she and her child are entitled to admission  despite  failing
    to comply with requirements of the rules.

 8. Judge Burnett erred in law.  We set aside his decision and substitute a
    decision dismissing the appeals of both of the appellants before him.


                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                     Date: 10 September 2015
