

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/22240/2012
     OA/22247/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined at Field House                     |Promulgated on:              |
|On 1st July 2014                              |On 2nd  July 2014            |
|(following oral hearing on 2nd May 2014)      |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                                ABADUL ISLAM
                                MONIRA BEGUM
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent

Representation at the hearing on 2nd May 2014:

For the Appellant:      Mr M Hussain, Zahra & Co solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appellants' appeals against  the
      refusal of the Entry Clearance Officer to issue them with Certificates
      of Entitlement to a right of abode.


   2. On 17th March 2014 I granted permission to appeal on the grounds  that
      it  was  arguable  that  the  judge  had  failed  to   give   adequate
      consideration  to  the  DNA  evidence  produced  and  had  incorrectly
      asserted that citizenship could not pass unless the appellants' father
      had been a citizen by descent.

      Background



   3. Mr Islam, a Bangladeshi citizen,  date  of  birth  20th  October  1990
      claims to be the son of Nasar Ali and Fateha Begum.  Monira  Begum,  a
      Bangladeshi citizen date of birth 1st February 1994 claims to  be  the
      daughter of Nasir Ali and Bedena  Begum.  The  'sponsor'  is  Shilpara
      Khatun, date of birth 7th April 1977, a British Citizen by descent who
      came to the UK in October 1990 and claims to be the daughter of  Nasir
      Ali and Johura Khatun; she came with her mother and both she  and  her
      mother have remained in the UK since then.


   4. There is no challenge to the claimed birth parents of Shilpara  Khatun
      or that she is a British Citizen by descent - in any  event  this  was
      proved to be so by production of the passport upon which  she  entered
      the UK which confirmed that she was entering pursuant to a Certificate
      of Entitlement to a Right of Abode as the daughter of Nasir Ali.

   5. Nasir Ali's first wife was Sitarun Nesa who died prior to his marriage
      to Johura Khatun, such marriage taking place in 1968 or 1969.  It  was
      claimed that Nasir Ali then married  Fateha  Begum  in  May  1987  (in
      Bangladesh)  and  then  married  Bedena  Begum  in   July   1992   (in
      Bangladesh). He was thus married to three women at the same time.

   6. Nasir Ali, who was registered as a British  Citizen  on  21st  January
      1969, died in October 1995.

   7.  The  marriage  certificates  produced  by  the  appellants  of  their
      respective mothers to their claimed father do not appear to have  been
      correctly completed ie there is no reference to the existence  of  any
      other wives. There is thus an issue as to whether the  appellants  are
      able to assert citizenship by descent  through  their  claimed  father
      because they may not be legitimate.

   8. The DNA evidence produced states that there is a 99.2318%  probability
      that the two appellants and the sponsor have the same father but three
      different mothers.

      Error of law

   9. I heard submissions from both parties at a hearing on 2nd May 2014 and
      found an error of law in the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal
      determination on the following basis


           1. For some unexplained reason  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge
              held that although the DNA evidence  showed  that  the  three
              share the same father and their relationship is  through  the
              paternal line, there  was  evidence  that  Nasir  Ali  had  a
              brother and thus they  had  not  proved  to  the  balance  of
              probabilities that they were Nasir Ali's children.


           2. Before  me  Mr  Avery  confirmed  that  this  was  a  finding
              difficult to justify  on  the  evidence  but  submitted  that
              irrespective of that finding and irrespective of the error by
              the judge as to the passing of citizenship  by  descent,  the
              appeal could not succeed because the two appellants'  mothers
              were not, on the evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
              lawfully married. He submitted that given that they were  not
              legitimate at the time of their birth, they could not in  any
              event succeed in their appeal.


           3. Mr Hussain submitted that although the marriage  certificates
              did not, on their face, appear to comply  with  the  relevant
              requirements, the two mothers considered themselves,  in  the
              context of the society in which they lived and into which the
              two appellants  were  born,  lawfully  married  and  thus  in
              accordance with the Legitimacy Act 1976, British Citizens  by
              descent.


           4. I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal  judge  erred  in
              law in his finding  as  to  the  appellants'  paternity.  The
              evidence before him could hardly have been more indicative of
              the probability of Nasir Ali being their  father.  The  judge
              further erred in his finding that citizenship could  only  be
              passed on if Nasir Ali  were  British  by  descent.  Although
              there are concerns over the validity of the marriage, in  the
              light of the Legitimacy Act 1976 provisions it is conceivable
              that the two appellants are able to assert their  citizenship
              by descent.

  10. Accordingly I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to  be
      remade and gave the following directions:



                    a. Leave to the solicitors to the  appellants  to  file
                       additional material including witness statements  of
                       the  surviving  mothers,  the  appellants  and   the
                       sponsor such further evidence as they intend to rely
                       upon to be filed by 2nd June 2014
                    b. Both parties to file and serve  written  submissions
                       by 14th June 2014
                    c. Thereafter I  would  determine  the  appeal  on  the
                       documentary evidence  and  the  written  submissions
                       before me unless either party states in writing that
                       they wish the opportunity to make  oral  submissions
                       in which case the appeal will  be  listed  for  oral
                       hearing (no interpreter) for one hour.

    11. Mr Hussain, on behalf of the appellants', filed and served  witness
        statements of the  appellants  and  their  respective  mothers  and
        written submissions. He made no request for a hearing to make  oral
        submissions. No further documents were served by the respondent and
        no request for an oral  hearing  by  today  and  I  have  therefore
        determined these appeals on the basis of the documents and  written
        submissions before me.


    12.  The only issue to be determined  is  the  legitimacy  of  the  two
        appellants: if they are or are deemed to be legitimately  descended
        from their  British  Citizen  father  then  they  are  entitled  to
        Certificates of Entitlement  to  the  Right  of  Abode  as  British
        Citizens and their appeal succeeds. If they are not legitimately so
        descended they are not entitled  to  such  Certificates  and  their
        appeal fails.

    13. A child born outside the UK and Falkland  Islands  on  or  after  1
        January 1983 was born a British Citizen by descent if, at the  time
        of the child's birth the father  or  mother  of  the  child  was  a
        British  Citizen  otherwise  than   by   descent:   s2(1)   British
        Nationality Act 1981. In the period 1 January 1983 to 20  May  2002
        inclusive, acquisition by descent from a father required the  child
        to be legitimate at birth.


    14. Nasir Ali was born in Sylhet on 16 November 1937. He was registered
        as a British  Citizen  on  21st  January  1969.  According  to  his
        application for registration he had been ordinarily resident in the
        UK from 6th October 1963 and he was married to Sitarun Nesa. It was
        not now disputed that Sitarun Nesa had died prior to  his  marriage
        to Johura Khatun and there is no challenge to the validity of  that
        marriage or  to  the  legitimacy  of  Shilpara  Khatun.  Nasir  Ali
        returned to Bangladesh in 1991 and died there on 30 October 1995.

    15. The respondent submits that the marriage of  Nasir  Ali  to  Fateha
        Begum is not valid and  thus  Abadul  Islam  is  illegitimate.  The
        respondent submits that the marriage of Nasir Ali to Bedana Beg  is
        not valid and thus Monira Begum is illegitimate.

    16. The appellants submit  that  the  respective  marriages  are  valid
        because at the time of  each  marriage  Mr  Ali  was  domiciled  in
        Bangladesh;  where a person is domiciled in the country  where  the
        marriage is celebrated and the marriage is valid in  that  country,
        then English law requires that the marriage is  valid  in  the  UK.
        There is no challenge by the respondent to this assertion and I  am
        satisfied that this is correct. The appellants also submit that the
        law of Bangladesh does not require registration as a condition of a
        valid marriage. In the  event  that  the  marriages  are  void  the
        appellants submit that in accordance with  the  s1  Legitimacy  Act
        1976, because the parties  reasonably  believed  themselves  to  be
        married, the two appellants are legitimate.

    17. The immediate question therefore is "what was the  domicile  of  Mr
        Ali at the date  of  his  marriage  firstly  to  Fateha  Begum  and
        secondly to Bedana Begum?" Domicile is a distinct concept  separate
        to nationality and habitual residence. Domicile can be acquired  by
        origin, choice or dependence (although this latter is not  relevant
        in this case  because  it  does  not  involve  the  acquisition  of
        domicile by a person under the age of 16).  A  person  must  always
        have a domicile but can only have one domicile. The acquisition  of
        a domicile of choice extinguishes  a  previous  domicile.  Everyone
        acquires a domicile of origin  at  birth  and  this  will  continue
        unless and until a positive  decision  to  acquire  a  domicile  of
        choice is made. This would require an intention  to  settle  and/or
        live permanently in England but residence  in  a  particular  place
        does not necessarily establish domicile there. There  is  a  strong
        presumption in favour of the continuance of the domicile of  origin
        (Agulian and Anor v Cyganik [2006] EWCA Civ  129).  The  burden  of
        proving that a domicile of choice has been acquired lies  upon  the
        person who asserts that  the  domicile  of  origin  has  been  lost
        (Winans v A-G [1904] AC 287). There is no evidence before  me  that
        Mr Ali has or had acquired a domicile  of  choice,  namely  England
        prior to his death.  Registration as a British Citizen is a  factor
        to be taken into account  but  other  evidence  would  normally  be
        required for example  a  statutory  declaration,  relinquishing  of
        original nationality, possession of property, length of residence.


    18. There has been no response by the respondent to the  submission  of
        the applicants and no separate assertion by the respondent that  Mr
        Ali has acquired a domicile of choice in the UK. I have noted  that
        he returned to live (and die) in Bangladesh and that he  founded  a
        family there. I am satisfied  that  he  retained  his  domicile  of
        origin ie Bangladesh.

    19. The next question therefore is whether the marriages in  Bangladesh
        were valid given that both parties were domiciled  there  at  their
        inception. The appellants  submit  that  polygamous  marriages  are
        permitted in Bangladesh. The decisions the subject of appeal  state
        that

             "You have provided no evidence to demonstrate that your father
             was no longer married to the  former  spouses  when  you  were
             born. I am therefore not satisfied that your father's marriage
             to your mother was valid in the UK."

    20. The review carried out  by  the  ECM  did  not  elaborate  on  this
        inadequate exposition of the lack of validity of the  marriages  in
        question. There has been no  challenge  to  the  assertion  in  the
        submissions before me that Bangladesh permits polygamous  marriage.
        The extract from Muslim Family Law 3rd edition by David  Pearl  and
        Werner Menski refers to the registration of polygamous marriages in
        Bangladesh.  I  am  satisfied  that  polygamy   is   permitted   in
        Bangladesh. Thus the mere fact that Mr Ali was  previously  married
        is insufficient to render void the marriages  of  the  mother's  of
        these two appellants to Mr Ali.


    21. There remains however the issue of  the  Marriage  Deeds.  In  both
        cases boxes 21 and 22 were marked with a cross

             21. Whether the bridegroom has any existing wife and,  if  so,
             whether he has  secured  the  permission  of  the  Arbitration
             Council  under  the  Muslim  Family  Laws  Ordinance  1961  to
             contract another marriage.
             22. Number and date of  the  communication  conveying  to  the
             bridegroom  the  permission  of  the  Arbitration  Council  to
             contract another marriage.

    22. The appellants submit that the respondent has failed to present any
        argument/evidence as to why the marriages may not  be  valid;  that
        there is no legal  authority  to  suggest  that  a  defect  in  the
        particulars of another marriage invalidates the registration or the
        marriage (although this submission  is  difficult  to  understand);
        that the extract from Muslim Family Law shows that registration  is
        not required as a condition of a valid marriage. Muslim Family  Law
        [6-48, 6-49] states that any unregistered Muslim marriage is  valid
        in Muslim law and may be proved by means other  than  registration.
        It appears plain that the marriage  deed  has  not  been  correctly
        completed and/or  cannot  be  relied  upon  as  evidence  that  the
        marriage in question  has  taken  place.  The  respondent  has  not
        amplified her assertion  that  registration  is  a  requirement  of
        validity;  it  would  appear  from  Muslim  Family  Law  that   the
        submission by the appellants is correct.


    23. I have also considered the witness statements of the appellants and
        their respective mothers. In each case their unchallenged  evidence
        is that they underwent the usual Islamic  ceremonies  for  marriage
        and they and their children have  throughout  the  relevant  period
        been treated as the spouses and children respectively of Nasir Ali.
        They lived  in  the  same  compound.  I  accept  this  evidence  as
        credible.

    24. In FI and others  (Bangladesh  -  presumptions-marriage-legitimacy)
        Bangladesh [2005] UKIAT 00016 the tribunal considered the issue  of
        the presumption of marriage and found that on  the  facts  in  that
        case (which included that the husband lived and worked  in  the  UK
        sending money back to Bangladesh, the length of  cohabitation  with
        the mother, the  strong  presumption  of  marriage  in  an  Islamic
        Society,  the  stigma  attached   to   illegitimate   children   in
        Bangladeshi society, the presumption of  marriage  arises.  In  the
        appeals before me there are similar facts in  as  much  as  Mr  Ali
        worked in the UK and supported  his  families  in  Bangladesh;  his
        wives lived in the same compound and underwent  Islamic  ceremonies
        of marriage; he returned to Bangladesh in  1991  to  resume  living
        with them full time until his death; the children were  treated  as
        the children of Mr Ali and their mothers were treated as  Mr  Ali's
        spouses.  I  accept  that  there  remains  a  stigma  attached   to
        illegitimate children in Bangladesh which has  not  been  inflicted
        upon these two appellants. Although the  Marriage  deeds  have  not
        been properly completed I accept the evidence  that  has  been  put
        before me that such errors  do  not  invalidate  the  fact  of  the
        marriage.


    25. I am therefore satisfied that taken together the evidence  is  that
        Mr Ali was lawfully and validly married to the mothers of  the  two
        appellants at the date of their birth,  at  which  time  he  was  a
        British citizen. It  therefore  follows  that  the  appellants  are
        entitled to a certificate of entitlement to the right of abode.

    26. I will deal in passing  with  the  second  submission  put  by  the
        appellants, namely  that  they  are  legitimate  by  virtue  of  s1
        Legitimacy Act 1976. This would only apply where the marriages were
        void and Mr Ali was domiciled in England - neither of which is  the
        case here.

      Conclusion

        There is an error of law in the  determination  of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal such that it is set aside to be re-made.


        I remake the decision and allow the appeal against the decision  of
        the respondent in both cases.

                                    Date 1st July 2014
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Coker
