
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/22205/2012
                                                               OA/22207/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 22 October 2013                              |On 1 November 2013         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                       entry clearance officer - lagos
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             Oluwabusayo Fatusin
                             Omobolanle Fatusin
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Spence, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr Rotimi Fatusin (Sponsor)



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The  respondents,  Oluwabusayo  Fatusin  and  Omobolanle  Fatusin,  are
    citizens of Nigeria.  They had  applied  for  entry  clearance  to  the
    United Kingdom under paragraph 297  of  HC  395  (as  amended)  as  the
    children of Rotimi Fatusin (hereafter referred to as the sponsor).   By
    decisions dated 11 October 2012, the applications were refused and  the
    respondents  appealed  to  the  First-tier   Tribunal   which,   in   a
    determination promulgated on 18 July 2013, allowed  the  appeals  under
    the Immigration Rules.  I shall hereafter refer to the  respondents  in
    this appeal as "the appellants" as  they  were  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and to the Entry Clearance Officer as "the respondent".

 2. I find that the judge has fundamentally misunderstood  the  basis  upon
    which the appeal fell to be determined.  The judge considered that  the
    refusal letters were "misleading as they are prepared by  reference  to
    paragraph 297 [of HC 395]." [17].  The judge appears to  have  believed
    [15] that the appeals fell to be considered under the new Appendix  FM.
    That misapprehension appears to have led  the  judge  to  ignore  those
    parts of paragraph 297 which had been cited by the ECO as the basis  of
    refusal of the applications.  In  particular,  the  judge  has  had  no
    regard to the assertion made in the refusal notices that the appellants
    had failed to prove that the sponsor in the  United  Kingdom  had  sole
    responsibility for them; the Entry Clearance Officer had noted that the
    appellants' mother lives in Nigeria and had given  permission  for  the
    children to live in the United Kingdom.  Paragraph 297 was the  correct
    paragraph of the Immigration Rules under which the applications fell to
    be  considered  and  the  misapprehension  upon  which  the  judge  has
    conducted his analysis (I accept that the Presenting Officer before him
    appears to have suffered from a similar misunderstanding) has  led  him
    to ignore crucial parts of the reasons for refusal.  I  set  aside  his
    determination accordingly.

 3. Because the judge misunderstood the basis on which he was  required  to
    determine the appeal, the parties have been denied a proper hearing  of
    the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.  For  that  reason,  I  have
    decided to send the appeal back to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  that
    Tribunal to remake the decision.  None of the findings of fact  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  survive.   The  sponsor  appeared  before  me  at
    Bradford and I explained the position to him.  I told the sponsor  that
    he and the appellants should  expect  to  provide  evidence  (including
    evidence regarding sole responsibility) to prove  that  the  appellants
    satisfied the Immigration Rules at the  next  hearing.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal will need to consider all the  issues  which  arise  from  the
    notices of refusal, including the document verification report.

DECISION

4.   The determination of the First-tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on
    18 July 2013 is set aside.  I direct that the appeal  should  be  heard
    again in the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge  Upson)  and  the  decision
    remade by that Tribunal.



Signed                              Date 30 October 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
