
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/22366/2012
     OA/22375/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 1 May 2014                                 |On 27th May 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ACCRA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  OLIVE LORAINE TCHOUTA (FIRST RESPONDENT)
                      JESSIE MBAMEN (SECOND RESPONDENT)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr B Hoshi instructed by Ismail & Co., Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. These are appeals by the Entry Clearance Officer against  decisions  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Andonian) allowing the appeals of  Olive
    Tchouta and Jessie Mbamen under Art 8 of  the  ECHR  against  decisions
    refusing them entry clearance under para 352D of the Immigration  Rules
    (HC 395 as amended).

 2. For convenience, we will refer to the parties as they  appeared  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

The Background

 3. The background to the  appeals  is  as  follows.   The  appellants  are
    sisters who were born on 24 December 1981 and  11  February  1992.   In
    2004, the appellants' mother left Cameroon and entered  the  UK  on  13
    June 2005 and claimed asylum.  On  leaving  Cameroon,  the  appellants'
    mother left both of the appellants, together with their  siblings  born
    on 27 July 2001 and 6 June 1998, with a neighbour.  On 21 January 2010,
    the appellants' mother was granted humanitarian protection in  the  UK.
    Thereafter, as Judge Andonian found, she sought to be reunited with her
    four children.  As a consequence, the appellants and their two siblings
    made applications for entry clearance,  seeking  to  be  reunited  with
    their mother (the sponsor) who had been granted humanitarian protection
    in the UK.  The appellants' siblings were granted  entry  clearance  on
    the basis that they met the requirement of  para  352FG  as  they  were
    under the age of 18, not leading an independent life and formed part of
    the family unit of the sponsor prior to her leaving  Cameroon  to  seek
    asylum  in  the  UK.   The  appellants  were,  however,  refused  entry
    clearance by the ECO on 28 September 2012.

 4. The decision of the ECO in  respect  of  the  first  appellant  was  as
    follows:

         "You have applied to join your mother, your sponsor in the UK under
         the Rules for Family Reunion.  As evidence of your relationship you
         submit your birth certificate which confirms the date of birth that
         you have given in your application as 24/12/1988.  At the  time  of
         your application you were 23 years of  age.   I  am  therefore  not
         satisfied that you are a child under the age of 18 as  required  by
         Paragraph 352D(ii) of the Immigration Rules HC395 (as amended)."

 5. In relation to the second appellant the refusal was for essentially the
    same reason:

         "You have applied to join your mother, your sponsor in the UK under
         the Rules for Family Reunion.  As evidence of your relationship you
         submit your birth certificate which confirms the date of birth that
         you have given in your application as 11/02/1992.  At the  time  of
         your application you were 20 years of  age.   I  am  therefore  not
         satisfied that you are a child under the age of 18 as  required  by
         Paragraph 352D(ii) of the Immigration Rules HC395 (as amended)."

 6. As is clear, the refusal of entry clearance was  based  upon  the  fact
    that each of the appellants was not, as required by the  Rules,  "under
    the age of 18".  Although the  ECO  refers  to  para  352D(ii)  of  the
    Immigration Rules, in fact the correct rule is para  352FG(ii)  as  the
    appellants' mother had been granted humanitarian protection  (to  which
    para 352FG applied) rather than granted  asylum  (to  which  para  352D
    applied).  The error is, however, immaterial, as the substance  of  the
    Rules is the same.

 7. On 9 July  2013,  the  Entry  Clearance  Manager  confirmed  the  ECO's
    decision.   He  confirmed  that  the  appellants  did  not   meet   the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules, again wrongly referring to  para
    352D.  In addition, unlike the ECO, he went on to consider Art 8 of the
    ECHR and concluded that any interference with  the  appellants'  family
    life was proportionate.  The ECM's reasons were as follows:

         "The decision to refuse the application has  been  reviewed  by  an
         Entry Clearance Manager in  light  of  the  grounds  of  appeal  as
         detailed by the appellant  on  the  IAFT-2  appeal  form.   I  have
         reviewed the decision taking into account the grounds of appeal and
         additional evidence.

         The appellants do not meet the Immigration  Rules  under  paragraph
         352D.

         The appellants are over 20 years old.

         Under paragraph 352D the applicant must be biologically related and
         under the age of 18 to qualify.

         The Grounds of Appeal assert that discretion  ought  to  have  been
         exercised in respect of this application.  This in  itself  appears
         to imply that the appellant cannot meet  the  requirements  of  the
         relevant rule as reliance  is  being  placed  on  the  exercise  of
         discretion.  I have carefully reviewed the decision and  supporting
         evidence available to me and I am satisfied that  the  decision  is
         correct.  I am not  prepared  to  exercise  my  discretion  in  the
         appellant's favour.

         I have also  given  careful  consideration  to  your  rights  under
         Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.   However,  I
         consider that refusal of entry clearance does  not  interfere  with
         family life for the purposes of Article 8(1).  I am satisfied  that
         you could still enjoy family  life  by  virtue  of  your  sponsor's
         visits.  Whilst I acknowledge that family life exists in this  case
         and that refusal of the visa will interfere  with  it,  I  consider
         that the refusal is justified (and proportionate) in  the  exercise
         of the immigration control.

         The grounds of appeal do not satisfactorily address the reasons for
         the decision as detailed in the ECO's notice of refusal.   No  new,
         original, independent, documentation has been produced as  evidence
         to tip the balance of probabilities in the appellants'  favour.   I
         have not been persuaded to reverse the original decision."

 8. The appellants appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.   The  appeal  was
    heard by Judge Andonian.

The First-tier Tribunal's Decision

 9. Judge Andonian heard oral evidence from the  sponsor,  the  appellants'
    mother and also from the appellants' brother.   The  sponsor,  and  the
    appellants' two siblings also made written  statements.   It  is  clear
    that  Judge  Andonian  accepted  the  evidence  as  to   the   family's
    circumstances including the existing circumstances of the appellants.

10. In his determination, Judge Andonian set  out  the  background  to  the
    appellants' claims.  Their mother, the sponsor, had  been  given  to  a
    woman (called Jeanne) when she was 6 and taken from the Ivory Coast  to
    the Cameroon.  The appellants and their siblings were born as a  result
    of multiple rapes by different men.  At para 1  of  his  determination,
    Judge Andonian set out the circumstances as follows:

         "Whilst the younger siblings had been granted entry clearance  they
         were refused.  As a result the appellant's  younger  siblings  were
         torn away from them who had looked after them as their own children
         whilst their sponsor mother was in the  UK.   The  mother  appeared
         before this tribunal and gave evidence.  Her  children  were  as  a
         result of multiple rapes by different men.  This  happened  in  the
         Cameroon.  She was traumatised and fled to the UK.  This was a most
         compelling case, the sponsor and her children had suffered a  great
         deal of abuse at the hands of 3rd parties.   All  4  children  were
         born as a result of rape, the sponsor is in the  UK  but  her  mind
         will not be at rest until she is reunited with her children."

11. At para 2, the judge referred to the evidence given by the  appellants'
    siblings as follows:

         "The younger children are 15 and  12  and  they  were  before  this
         tribunal to give evidence.  After hearing the young 12 year old boy
         give his evidence in which he broke down in tears  recounting  how,
         when he was in Cameroon his sisters used to sing him to  sleep  and
         used to tell him stories so he could  sleep.   I  informed  counsel
         that I did not consider it appropriate for this  boy  to  give  any
         further  evidence;  counsel  agreed  not  to  pursue  any   further
         questioning.  The same is true of  his  15  year  old  sister,  she
         merely appeared to give her name and confirm that she  had  made  a
         statement."

12. Then, at para 6 the judge dealt with the appellants'  circumstances  in
    the Cameroon and, noting that they had not formed an independent  life,
    concluded that they had established family life for the purposes of Art
    8.

         "The sponsor is an Ivory Coast national who was given  to  a  woman
         called Jeanne when she was  6  and  taken  to  the  Cameroon.   The
         applicants have been living a hand  to  mouth  existence  in  harsh
         conditions.  They live in a  shanty  town  in  Edea  and  would  be
         homeless if not allowed to stay with a lady called Marie.  Although
         the applicants have not formed an independent family unit they have
         established family life in an Article 8 sense, although there is no
         presumption of family life between adults and their siblings,  case
         law has established that whether there is indeed family life  is  a
         question of fact.  See the case of Semthuran v SSHD 2004.  What  is
         required in such a case is evidence of dependency which goes beyond
         normal emotional ties.  The applicants in this  case  clearly  have
         more than a normal  relationship  between  siblings.   Indeed  they
         suffered mistreatment at the  hands  of  Jeanne  and  have  had  to
         survive in difficult conditions.   They  have  been  missing  their
         mother, only receiving telephone calls and some financial  support.
         This has forged the applicants into a close unit unlike most normal
         sibling relationships.  They have established a family life to  the
         extent that  Article  8  would  be  engaged  if  they  were  to  be
         separated.  Consequently their applications had  to  be  considered
         together and the ECO did not  give  proper  consideration  to  this
         application.

13. Then, at paras 7-8 the judge continued:

         "7.  The sponsor  did  not  consider  that  the  children  had  any
             fathers.  The children themselves do not know  their  fathers.
             Unfortunately they were all conceived as a result  of  various
             incidents of rape during the sponsor's time in Cameroon.   The
             sponsor left Cameroon in 2004, she left her  children  with  a
             neighbour and entered the UK on 13.6.2005 and  claimed  asylum
             immediately.  She was granted humanitarian protection  in  the
             UK  on  21.1.2010.   It  took  4�  years  for  her  to  obtain
             humanitarian protection on 21.1.2010.  Since that time she has
             been trying to reunite with her children.

         8.   Neither of the elder children are married nor do they lead any
             independent lifestyle.   They  are  destitute  but  have  been
             allowed to stay with an elderly  lady,  Marie  in  the  shanty
             town.  They are part of a family unit with the sponsor granted
             humanitarian protection.  The  appellants  were  part  of  the
             sponsor's family unit before she left to seek  asylum  in  the
             UK, therefore  they  are  not  post  flight  children  in  any
             respect.  The sponsor left them with one of her friends as  it
             was not possible to take them with her.  None of the  children
             have any criminal convictions or have engaged in  any  conduct
             which could affect Article 1F."


14. At para 9, the judge dealt with the issue of whether the appellants had
    established their relationship with the sponsor, concluding  that  they
    had:

         "It is important to note that none of the  children  have  identity
         documents; they have been living in this shanty  town  and  it  was
         important for the ECO to have regard to this in granting them Entry
         Clearance and considering their papers.  They have lived  in  harsh
         conditions and it has  not  been  possible  for  them  to  get  any
         identification.  Indeed they have  been  living  a  hand  to  mouth
         existence in  abject  conditions.   All  resources  they  had  went
         towards feeding and clothing themselves.  ID documentations  should
         not be an issue in this case, this particularly so as  the  sponsor
         has consistently referred to the  children  throughout  her  asylum
         process.  They are mentioned in her  screening  interview,  witness
         statement,  appeal  statement,  medico  legal  report,  psychiatric
         report and letter from  her  occupational  therapist.   It  is  not
         simply the volume of  references  with  regard  to  identification,
         indeed this is not a case where  there  has  only  been  a  obscure
         reference   to   the   children   in   the   screening   interview.
         Paradoxically, the  children's  existence  from  creation  form  an
         integral part of the sponsor mother's  account.   For  example  the
         sponsor has been consistent about harrowing  facts  about  how  her
         children were conceived following rapes.  There are  references  to
         the sponsor in view of making preparations  for  suicide.   It  was
         only the thought of her children and that one  day  being  reunited
         with them that prevented her from taking this step.  This  is  best
         demonstrated  in  paragraph  8  of  the  psychiatric  report  dated
         30.6.2009 which I have read and which states inter  alia  'she  had
         bought drugs from a pharmacy.  She had the drugs ready and went  to
         the kitchen to get a glass of water to take them.  Another woman in
         the house saw into her room and saw the drugs and  asked  her  what
         she was doing.  This woman said to her 'do you  want  to  see  your
         children again'?  Then stayed with her to make sure  that  she  did
         not take the drugs.'  Another powerful identification  point  again
         shrouded in tragedy related to  Jessie.   In  paragraph  7  of  the
         sponsor's asylum application statement the  account  of  her  being
         burnt with cooking oil and being pushed to  the  ground  is  given.
         The sponsor describes the fact that Jessie still has scarring  from
         the incident.  She has very bad scarring on her arm, to  her  elbow
         and around the side  of  her  face  near  her  eyes.   When  Jessie
         presents herself to the High Commission the ECO will note that  she
         still has these scars which match the account given in  the  asylum
         statement nearly 6 years ago.  In the light of all  these  matters,
         the identification is not an issue in this case.   If  the  ECO  is
         still in doubt they would be invited to arrange DNA  testing  which
         has not been discussed before to determine the issue.  The  sponsor
         has confirmed that she and her children are willing  to  co-operate
         with a DNA test if required."

15. The judge's reasons for finding a breach of Art 8 are, in  large  part,
    contained in paras 3-4 and 10-11 of his determination.  At para 3-4  he
    said this:

         "3.  It is very concerning that the siblings have been split up  in
             this way.  The ECO did not attach any weight whatsoever to the
             delay in the sponsor being granted humanitarian protection  in
             the UK and the fact that she had been granted the same  within
             a reasonable period it is likely that  at  least  one  of  the
             elder children would have been under 18 at  the  time  of  the
             decision; this is the proportionality in assessing whether  to
             split the family up and interfere with their Article 8 rights.

         4.   The decision maker did not appear to have considered the  best
             interest of the sponsor's  younger  when  refusing  the  elder
             children splitting up the family.  Neither  did  the  decision
             maker appear to have considered the principles of  the  family
             unity when making a decision  that  allowed  half  the  family
             permission to travel to the UK  whilst  preventing  the  other
             half from doing so."

16. Then, at paras 10-11 he concluded that the  appellants  had  discharged
    the burden of proof upon them in establishing that the ECO's  decisions
    breached Art 8.

         "10. There are certainly compassionate elements in this  case  that
             go over and above the normal Article 8 claim.  This is a  most
             compelling case, the sponsor and her  children  have  suffered
             hugely.  Since the sponsor was granted humanitarian protection
             she has been working towards a reunion with her children.  She
             has been most unfortunate in a short supply  area  for  public
             funded  legal  advisors  and  it  took  some  time  to  secure
             representation.  She has been  worried  about  her  children's
             condition and the poor condition in which they are living.

         11.  In the above circumstances the  Burden  of  proof  is  on  the
             appellants to satisfy this tribunal on the  civil  balance  of
             probabilities that they ought to  be  reunited  with  their  2
             younger siblings.  I believe that this is  a  most  compelling
             case and there is family life  that  goes  beyond  the  normal
             relationship between siblings generally.  The appellants  have
             discharged that burden of proof.  I have also considered  that
             the 2 younger children's Human rights have not been taken into
             account, their best interest have been taken into  account  in
             the way the decision was made.  The respondent has  not  taken
             into account  section  55  of  her  Borders,  Citizenship  and
             immigration Act 2009, neither has she assessed proportionality
             under article 8 in the way that it should be reduced  (see  EB
             Kosovo), has not  taken  into  account  the  rights  of  third
             parties in an  article  8  situation  (see  Beoku-Betts);  has
             failed to do anything by her decision to  foster  and  promote
             family life where practicable, see Sisojeva, and has failed to
             consider the significance of maintaining the ties between  the
             appellants and their two younger siblings and  that  they  are
             strong enough to constitute family life, see Nasri  v  France,
             Beldjoudi v France and Advic v UK."

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

17. On 10 January 2014, the First-tier Tribunal (DJ  Dearden)  granted  the
    ECO permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal against Judge Andonian's
    determination.

18. The ECO's grounds essentially raise three points.  First, the judge had
    failed to determine whether the appellants were related as claimed and,
    in para 9 of his determination, he was  wrong  to  invite  the  ECO  to
    arrange DNA testing if there was any doubt.  Secondly,  the  judge  had
    failed to have regard to the Immigration Rules and that the  appellants
    could not meet the requirements of the  Rules  in  determining  whether
    there was a breach of Art 8.  Thirdly, the judge  had  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons for concluding  that  the  refusal  of  entry  to  the
    appellants was disproportionate and not in their best interests.

Discussion

19. In his oral submissions, Mr Richards who  represented  the  ECO  relied
    upon the grounds although he did not directly refer to the first ground
    concerning the establishment of the relationship between the appellants
    and sponsor.  We are in no doubt that he was correct not to press  this
    point on behalf of the ECO.  First, the Entry Clearance Officer in  her
    decisions of 28 September 2012 (which we have set out  above)  did  not
    raise this issue at all.  The refusals were solely on  the  basis  that
    the appellants were not under the age of 18 and so could not  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules.  The Entry Clearance Manager's decision does
    make reference to the  issue.   We  have  already  set  out  the  ECM's
    decision above.  The only reference to the  issue  of  the  appellants'
    relationship with the sponsor is the single sentence: "Under para  352D
    the applicant must be biologically related and under the age of  18  to
    qualify." No further reasoning is offered and it is far from clear that
    the ECM was seeking to raise this issue which had never been raised  by
    the ECO in her decisions.  It may well be that the  Presenting  Officer
    at  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  did  seek  to  argue  that  the
    appellants had not established their relationship with the sponsor  and
    that may explain why Judge Andonian dealt with the matter at para 9  of
    his determination which we have set out above.

20. In our judgment, Judge Andonian gave entirely adequate reasons at  para
    9, based upon the evidence, for concluding  that  the  appellants  have
    established that the sponsor is their  mother.   We  do  not  read  the
    judge's comment that DNA testing could be organised by the ECO  if  the
    latter was still in doubt as undermining the judge's clear finding  and
    reasons for concluding that the appellants  had  established  that  the
    sponsor is their mother.  For these reasons, we reject the first ground
    upon which Judge Andonian's decision was challenged.

21. Turning now to the remaining grounds, Mr Richards  submitted  that  the
    judge had made a wholly inadequate assessment of Art 8.   He  submitted
    that the judge had failed  to  engage  in  any  balancing  exercise  in
    relation to proportionality taking into account the public interest  in
    effective immigration control and that the appellant could not meet the
    requirements of the Rules because of their ages.  Mr Richards submitted
    that the appellants were adults  and  had  been  separated  from  their
    mother for a number of years.  The decision to separate them from their
    younger sibling was  made  by  the  sponsor.   He  submitted  that  the
    appellants' inability to comply  with  the  Immigration  Rules  weighed
    heavily in the case and the judge had failed to do so.  He acknowledged
    that it was possible to say that their claims were exceptional but  the
    judge had come nowhere near carrying out the balancing  exercise  prior
    to coming to such a conclusion.  Consequently,  Mr  Richards  submitted
    that the judge's decision could not stand.

22. Having carefully read Judge Andonian's decision, there is no doubt that
    his decision could have been better structured in  considering  Art  8.
    However, Judge Andonian does deal with the essential  elements  of  the
    appellants' Art 8 claims.  He clearly found that  the  appellants  have
    established a family life together based  upon  dependency  which  goes
    "beyond normal emotional ties".  That is a  finding  which  undoubtedly
    applied to the  relationship  between  the  appellants  and  their  two
    siblings prior to the younger siblings coming to the UK having obtained
    entry clearance.  Judge Andonian recognised that they formed a  "family
    unit" living together.  The evidence was (and Judge  Andonian  accepted
    the evidence before him) that the appellants looked after  the  younger
    siblings.   Judge  Andonian  also  found  that  the  appellants  (again
    together with the younger siblings) formed  a  "family  unit  with  the
    sponsor" prior to her coming to the UK.  Given the language used, it is
    difficult to argue that Judge Andonian was  not  well  aware  that  the
    appellants could not meet the requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    (namely para 352FG) but only to the extent that they  were  not  "under
    the age of 18".  Although his reasons  could  perhaps  have  been  more
    clearly expressed, we are in  no  doubt  that  he  concluded  that  the
    separation of the appellants from their younger siblings was not in the
    latter's best interests.  At a number of points in  his  determination,
    Judge Andonian referred to the fact that the ECO's decisions  split  up
    the four children who had formed a "family  unit"  initially  with  the
    sponsor and then together following her flight to  the  UK.   Likewise,
    Judge Andonian clearly made a number of positive findings which led him
    to conclude that the appellants' circumstances were "most  compelling".
    Whilst Judge Andonian made no specific reference to the legitimate  aim
    of the economic well-being of the country and  preventing  disorder  or
    crime, we are in no doubt that  this  experienced  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge must have had in mind the rather  obvious  public  interest  upon
    which the appeals were premised, namely that the appellants  could  not
    meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules because of their ages.

23. That said, there are shortcomings in  Judge  Andonian's  determination.
    However, given his very positive finding in relation to the appellants'
    circumstances and relationships with their siblings in the  UK,  we  do
    not see any real basis for supposing that if Judge Andonian had set out
    a more structured analysis of the issue raised in relation to Art 8 and
    had expressly referred to the public interest and more clearly  engaged
    in the balancing exercise involved in proportionality, that the outcome
    of the appeals would have been any different.  The circumstances of the
    appellants were, as Judge Andonian put  it,  "most  compelling",  given
    their history and the dislocation produced with their younger  siblings
    by the ECO's decisions.  It is clear that he  considered  the  case  so
    exceptional or compelling that it went beyond any need for  a  delicate
    balancing exercise. We would have reached precisely the same  decisions
    on the evidence ourselves.  For these reasons, we see no good reason to
    set aside the determination despite any shortcomings.

Decision

24. For these reasons, the decisions of the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing
    the appellants' appeals under Art 8 stand.

25. The ECO's appeals to the Upper Tribunal are dismissed.






                                                                      Signed


                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
