
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/22289/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 13 November 2013                             |On 2nd December 2013       |
|Prepared 13 November 2013                       |                           |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA

                                   Between

                           MOHAMMED KAMRANUL ISLAM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - DHAKA
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Z Khan, Universal Solicitors
For the Respondent: Ms H. Horsely, Senior Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen  of  Bangladesh  born  22  August  1981.  He
    applied for entry clearance as the dependent partner of a Tier 1  (Post
    Study Worker) pursuant to paragraph 319C of the Immigration Rules. This
    application was refused in a decision of 7 October  2012,  pursuant  to
    paragraphs 319C(g) and  320(7B)  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  for  the
    following reasons:

        "You have submitted a bank statement from  export  Import  Bank  of
        Bangladesh Ltd, but all bank statements must be  on  official  bank
        headed paper  containing  the  bank's  logo,  as  required  by  the
        Immigration Rules. The statement that you have submitted  does  not
        bear the bank's logo as part of the original headed  paper  of  the
        bank. The bank letter you have submitted from the  same  bank  does
        not show any funds balance. These  funds  had  not  therefore  been
        taken into account...

        In addition, your previous visa was cancelled and you were  refused
        entry on arrival in the UK for  using  deception  by  making  false
        representations in order to obtain  your  visa  (see  Dhaka/534448,
        submitted on 27/01/10). Your refusal notice was issued  to  you  on
        11/03/10 (see GAN/3138853) and you were removed on 18/06/10.  I  am
        therefore refusing entry clearance under paragraph 320(7B)  of  the
        immigration rules..."

 2. In a document of the 2 April 2013, an Entry Clearance Manager clarified
    the reasons for reliance on paragraph 320(7B) in the following terms:

        "The appellant was refused at  Port  previously  because  of  false
        representations made  in  relation  to  his  student  visa.  It  is
        submitted in the grounds of  appeal  that  during  the  appellant's
        previous student visa application, the college did not require  any
        English language course for his admission.  However,  as  is  clear
        from the summary of the  case,  detailed  in  the  attached  IS.125
        document, the Appellant made false representations to  his  college
        regarding his English language level, and therefore in relation  to
        his application, and was refused under paragraph 321(a) [sic]..."

 3. The ECM conceded that the appellant met the substantive requirements of
    paragraph 319C of the Immigration Rules.

 4. The appellant appealed the ECO's decision to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    but this appeal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Wyman  in  a
    determination signed on the 26 July  2013.  The  only  issue  left  for
    consideration before the tribunal had been that relating  to  paragraph
    320(7B).

Error of Law

 5. At paragraph 33 of her  determination  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    found that the appellant had used deception in his current  application
    for entry clearance as a consequence of his failure to mention  in  his
    visa application  form  that  he  had  previously  been  refused  entry
    clearance  on  two  occasions  [when  he  had  applied  as  a   working
    holidaymaker]. The judge therefore dismissed the appeal in reliance  on
    paragraph 320 (7B) [37]. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was
    subsequently granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Brunnen in a decision
    of 11 September 2013.

 6. It is pertinent at  this  stage  to  set  out  the  material  terms  of
    paragraph 320 (7A) and  320 (7B) of the Rules, which state as  follows:




         "Grounds on which entry clearance or  leave  to  enter  the  United
         Kingdom is to be refused"[That  is  a  provision  for  a  mandatory
         refusal]:-


         "(7A) where false representations have been made or false documents
             or information have been submitted (whether or not material to
             the  application  and  whether  or  not  to  the   applicant's
             knowledge) or material  facts  have  not  been  disclosed,  in
             relation to the application.


         (7B)     ... where the applicant has previously breached  the  UK's
             immigration laws by ...


              (d) using Deception in  an  application  for  entry  clearance
             leave to enter or remain or in order to obtain documents  from
             the Secretary of State or a third party required in support of
             the application (whether successful or not)


              unless the applicant


              (ii) used Deception in an application for entry clearance more
             than ten years ago."


 7. In paragraph 6 of the Immigration Rules, which  is  the  interpretation
    clause, Deception is expressly defined as  follows:  'Deception'  means
    making false representations or submitting false documents (whether  or
    not material to  the  application)  or  failing  to  disclose  material
    facts".

 8. It is of some  significance  in  the  instant  appeal  that  the  ECO's
    decision was not made pursuant to paragraph 320(7A) of the  Immigration
    Rules [a possibility that was clearly postulated and  rejected  by  the
    Entry Clearance Manager], but rather  pursuant  to  paragraph  320(7B).
    This distinction is  important  because  paragraph  320(7A)  acts  upon
    circumstances arising in the current application, i.e. the  application
    to which the refusal decision relates;  whereas  paragraph  320(7B)  is
    dependent upon proof that there has been a previous relevant act by  an
    applicant, as specified in the subparagraphs of the rule. By  previous,
    the rule must  mean  that  the  specified  act  pre-dates  the  current
    application.

 9. If the First-tier Tribunal's decision is considered in this context  it
    is plain that the Judge misdirected herself and came  to  a  conclusion
    that was not open to her. The Judge found that the  appellant  had,  in
    his current application, dishonestly failed  to  refer  to  an  earlier
    refusal of entry clearance.  Whilst  this  finding  is  relevant  to  a
    consideration  under  paragraph  320(7A)  it  is  not  relevant  to   a
    consideration of whether paragraph 320(7B) is of application. The Judge
    gave no further reasons for dismissing the appeal.

10. Given that (i) paragraph 320(7A) was not  raised  by  the  ECO  in  the
    decision letter of the 7 October 2012 (ii) no application was  made  to
    amend the terms of the reasons for refusal  and  (iii)  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge  gave  no  other  reasons  as  to  why  the  appellant's
    application fell to be refused pursuant to  paragraph  320(7B),  it  is
    clear that her determination contains an error on a point of  law  that
    requires it to be set aside. The fact  that  this  is  so  was  readily
    conceded by the Ms Horsley at the hearing before the Upper Tribunal.

Re-making of decision

11.  The  Entry  Clearance  Officer's  decision  notice  relies  upon   the
    allegation that  the  appellant  acted  with  deceit  by  making  false
    representations in an application for  entry  clearance  as  a  Tier  4
    student in January 2010. This application initially led, on the 2 March
    2010, to the appellant being granted entry  clearance;  however  on  11
    March 2010 he was refused leave to enter the  United  Kingdom  and  was
    subsequently removed from the country on 18 June 2010.

12. It is for the Entry Clearance Officer to prove the necessary precedents
    facts for the application of paragraph 320 (7B), and she must do so  to
    the balance of probabilities. It is therefore necessary for  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer to demonstrate that the appellant used deception when
    obtaining his entry clearance in 2010. This deception  must  have  been
    made for the purposes of securing an  advantage  in  immigration  terms
    (Ozhogina and Tarasova (deception within para 320(7B) - nannies) Russia
    [2011] UKUT 00197 (IAC).

13. In her submissions Ms Horsley relied, as  the  ECM  had  done,  on  the
    assertion that the appellant had  made  false  representations  to  the
    London College of Accountancy in 2010 in order to secure a Confirmation
    of Acceptance of Studies which was necessary to obtain entry  clearance
    as a Tier 4 migrant. Such false representations were said to consist of
    the provision of misleading information by the appellant to the college
    as to the level of his English proficiency.

14. We observe at this juncture, as we have done above, that despite having
    been granted entry  clearance  on  2  March  2010,  the  appellant  was
    nevertheless refused leave to enter the  United  Kingdom  on  11  March
    2010. The decision notice of the 11 March records that upon his arrival
    in the United Kingdom it became apparent that the appellant had a  very
    limited grasp of the English language and  that  as  a  consequence  an
    Immigration Officer contacted a lecturer at  his  proposed  college  of
    study  who,  having  spoken  to  the  appellant  over  the   telephone,
    immediately withdrew the college's sponsorship  of  the  appellant  [by
    which we take to mean that the college withdraw the CAS].

15. The Immigration Officer, in reliance on the fact that the appellant had
    presented  a  document  showing  a  pass  mark  in  English  with   his
    application,  concluded  that  the   appellant   had   made   a   false
    representation  and  consequently  cancelled  the   appellant's   entry
    clearance and thereafter refused him leave to enter.

16. The appellant appealed this decision to the First-tier Tribunal. By the
    time of this appeal  the  Secretary  of  State  had  changed  her  case
    entirely; no longer placing reliance on the appellant's  claimed  false
    representations, but rather on the fact that there had been a change of
    circumstances since the grant  of  entry  clearance,  namely  that  the
    college had withdrawn its sponsorship of the appellant. The  First-tier
    Tribunal, for obvious reasons, accepted this was so and  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal.

17. Turning back then to the instant appeal. Ms  Horsley  sought  to  place
    determinative reliance on a letter from the Academic Registrar  at  the
    London College of Accountancy dated 11 March 2010 i.e.  the  day  after
    the appellant arrival in the United Kingdom in 2010. This letter, which
    was only presented for the first time in these proceedings  during  the
    course of the hearing before the Upper Tribunal,  is  addressed  to  an
    employee of the UK Border Agency and states as follows:

        "This is to confirm that after assessing Mr Mohammed Kamrul Islam's
        academic documentation, we enrolled him into our ACCA  professional
        course.

        Based on the information given to us by you and also after a  brief
        interview between Mr. Mohammed Kamrul Islam and one of our academic
        staff..., I understand that his English is not sufficient enough to
        carry out a simple English conversation.

        We as a college have made the following decision;

        I believe that false representations were employed by  the  student
        at the time of submitting his academic credentials as his HSC  Mark
        Sheet shows a pass mark for English.

        The college has no other choice than to  withdraw  our  sponsorship
        for the student."

18.  This  letter  fails  to  identify   with   any   clarity   the   false
    representations the college 'believe[d]' the appellant to have made. No
    evidence has been produced before us to support the contention that the
    college required the appellant to provide information to it as  to  the
    level of his English language abilities, neither has any evidence  been
    provided that the appellant made any  representations  to  the  college
    about the level of  his  English  language  abilities,  save  with  the
    possible exception of the production of his "HSC certificate", which we
    consider further below.

19. It is  also  relevant  for  us  to  observe  at  this  stage  that  the
    Immigration Rules in force at the time of the  appellant's  application
    in 2010 did not impose an English language requirement and such matters
    were left to the college issuing the CAS documentation.  We  have  been
    provided with no information as to the  process  by  which  the  London
    College of Accountancy assessed an  applicant's  level  of  English  or
    indeed on what basis it eventually  decided  to  admit  any  individual
    student.

20.  Without  information  regarding  the  abovementioned  matters  it   is
    impossible   to   ascertain   whether   the   appellant   made    false
    representations to the college. It is reasonable to  expect  that  such
    evidence would have been produced before us. The college would no doubt
    have kept records of the appellant's application. From those records it
    could be ascertained exactly what information the  college  asked  from
    the appellant in order to secure a CAS, and  exactly  what  information
    the appellant provided in  response.  Not  only  do  we  not  have  the
    necessary records of the appellant's application to the college  before
    us but, for reasons which are entirely unexplained, the ECO has  chosen
    not to call any employee of the London College of Accountancy  to  give
    evidence in support of her case before the tribunal. The appellant  has
    therefore been denied the opportunity of having the  evidence  provided
    by the college tested in cross-examination.

21. The production by the appellant, to the college,  of  the  HSC  [Higher
    Secondary Certificate] does not assist the ECO one iota in this  appeal
    without an additional context being provided. This is  particularly  so
    given that (i) the certificate relates to the appellant's  High  School
    studies in 2000 (i.e. 10 years  prior  to  the  application  for  entry
    clearance) and (ii) it does not  provide  any  information  as  to  the
    appellant's English language abilities in  2000,  let  alone  those  in
    2010; but merely shows that in 2000 the appellant scored 82  marks  out
    of 200 in "English" (i.e. 41%). It does not state what level of English
    was required in order for a person to score such a low  mark  in  their
    HSC English examination in 2000, nor indeed is there even an indication
    that the appellant 'passed' this examination; although it does indicate
    that he obtained  a  Third  Division  pass  in  a  combination  of  six
    subjects, only one of which was English.

22. We also find no assistance can be derived from a consideration  of  the
    CAS document issued  by  the  London  College  of  Accountancy  to  the
    appellant in 2010, save to note that  it  makes  no  reference  to  the
    appellant having made an assertion as  to  the  level  of  his  English
    language abilities and that,  under  the  heading  "Documents  Used  to
    Assess Academic Requirements" there is reference to the HSC referred to
    above.

23. In short in our conclusion, having considered the evidence before us in
    the round, and  also  having  taken  into  account  the  terms  of  the
    Secretary of State's decision letters of  March  2010  and  the  appeal
    determination of the same year, we find that the ECO has  come  nowhere
    near meeting the burden of proof placed upon  her  in  this  appeal  to
    demonstrate the existence of the  precedent  facts  necessary  for  the
    application of paragraph 320(7B).

24. Accordingly, and given that  (i)  the  ECO  has  not  relied  upon  the
    application of paragraph 320(7A) and (ii) it was  conceded  before  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  that  the   appellant   meets   the   substantive
    requirements of paragraph 319C of the Rules, we find that the  decision
    of the ECO to refuse entry clearance was not  in  accordance  with  the
    Immigration Rules  and  the  appellant's  appeal  must  accordingly  be
    allowed.

25. We finish this determination with a note of caution to  the  appellant.
    The First-tier Tribunal found that he  dishonesty  failed  to  disclose
    within his current  application  the  fact  of  his  refusal  of  entry
    clearance in 2008. Whilst we have set aside the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    determination, we have not been required ourselves to  make  a  finding
    regarding this alleged dishonesty [the ECO/ECM,  for  reasons  unknown,
    declining to take a point under paragraph  320(7A)].  The  question  of
    whether the appellant did act dishonestly  in  this  respect  therefore
    remains unresolved and it is not beyond the realms of possibility  that
    an ECO  could  take  this  point  against  the  appellant,  relying  on
    paragraph 320(7B) of the Immigration Rules, should  he  make  a  future
    application for entry clearance.

Decision

For the reasons  given  above,  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
contains an error of law requiring it to be set aside.  Upon  re-making  the
decision we allow the appellant's appeal on the basis that  Entry  Clearance
Officer's decision to refuse entry clearance was not in accordance with  the
Immigration Rules.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor                    Dated: 13 November 2013
