
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/22732/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 4 August 2014                                |On 15 August 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF

                                   Between

                                 Rima begum
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - dhaka
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Shah Solicitor of Taj Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J Parkinson of the Specialist Appeals Team

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a Bangladeshi born on 11 November 1990.  On  or  about
    27 June 2012 she applied to the Respondent for  entry  clearance  under
    paragraph 281 of the Immigration Rules for settlement as  the  wife  of
    Salim Ahmed, a person settled and resident in the  United  Kingdom  and
    who is her Sponsor.

 2. On 21  October  2012  the  Respondent  refused  the  application  under
    paragraph 281(iii) of the Immigration Rules because he did not consider
    the Appellant and her husband who is her Sponsor  intended  permanently
    to live together as a married couple.  The Respondent  also  considered
    the evidence of the accommodation  which  would  be  available  to  the
    Sponsor and the Appellant if she were to come to the United Kingdom and
    of the Sponsor's employment and was  not  satisfied  that  he  and  the
    Appellant would be adequately accommodated  as  required  by  paragraph
    281(iv) and able to maintain themselves and any  dependants  adequately
    without recourse to public funds as required by paragraph 281(v).   The
    Respondent also questioned why the  Appellant  had  taken  her  English
    language Spoken and Written tests at  different  centres.  He  made  no
    comment on the explanation for this given by the Appellant when she had
    been interviewed. He also questioned the validity of the certificates.

 3. On 6 January 2014 the Respondent reviewed the decision and accepted the
    relationship was genuine and that there was adequate accommodation  for
    the Appellant and the Sponsor. The Respondent noted  the  new  evidence
    about the change in the Sponsor's employment and re-  affirmed  on  the
    basis the evidence of the change in employment was not submitted before
    the date of the decision the refusal on the basis of  paragraph  281(v)
    of the Immigration Rules.

 4. The Respondent also  affirmed  the  refusal  on  the  ground  that  the
    Appellant had not shown she satisfied the English Language requirements
    of the Immigration Rules. It was considered those who had been involved
    in the examining of candidates for  the  certificates  had  operated  a
    system with procedures which the Respondent and the examining authority
    had found disclosed irregularities in the conduct of  English  Language
    examinations in Bangladesh.

 5. The Respondent in the original decision considered the decision did not
    place the United Kingdom in breach of its obligations  to  respect  the
    private and family life of the Appellant and the Sponsor  protected  by
    Article 8 of the European Convention.

 6. On or shortly after 8 November 2012  the  Appellant  lodged  notice  of
    appeal under Section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002 as amended.  The grounds assert the Sponsor had provided  adequate
    evidence of his employment and that he  would  be  able  adequately  to
    maintain himself and the Appellant without recourse  to  public  funds.
    The other grounds are formulaic or generic.

The First-tier Tribunal Determination

 7. Mr Shah represented the Appellant at the hearing at Hatton Cross on  21
    February 2014.  He informed me  that  on  that  occasion  he  had  been
    instructed in connection with another two appeals  in  the  same  list,
    that of Tahera Begum Suma number OA/24230/2012 and Rabeya Begum  number
    OA/24235/2012 and that all three appeals centred in whole or in part on
    whether in the  light  of  the  irregularities  already  mentioned  the
    Appellant had  satisfied  the  English  Language  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules. He informed me that appeal  OA/24235/2012  had  been
    adjourned and the hearings of the appeals of Tahera Begum Suma and Rima
    Begum were heard in part jointly on the basis that the issues and legal
    arguments about them were similar.

 8. By separate determinations each promulgated on 17 March 2014  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Zahed  dismissed  both  appeals.   Subsequently
    permission to appeal was granted in each case and both appeals appeared
    in my list in the Upper Tribunal on 4 August 2014.  By  that  time  the
    two files had been linked.

 9. In his determination the Judge addressed only the issue of the  English
    Language skills although at paragraph 5  he  referred  generically  and
    generally to the evidence shown in his Record of Proceedings.  There is
    a Record of Proceedings in the file for this Appellant  although  there
    is no Record of Proceedings relating to the  hearing  of  Tahera  Begum
    Suma's appeal.

10. The Judge recorded the issue with  the  certificates  to  evidence  the
    Appellant's  English  Language  skills  but  made  no  mention  of  the
    Sponsor's evidence about the  Appellant's  re-sitting  of  the  English
    language tests and his employment contained in his witness statement of
    21 February 2014 or to the letter of 8 January 2014 from the Respondent
    to the Appellant advising her of the arrangements  made  for  free  re-
    testing of all visa applicants affected by the irregularities.

11. The Appellant sought permission to appeal. The grounds for appeal  make
    allegations about the conduct of the hearing and refer  to  the  letter
    from the Respondent about the availability  of  free  re-testing.   The
    grounds are in identical  terms  for  this  Appellant  and  Rima  Begum
    although it is not clear from the documents submitted in support of the
    allegations made about the conduct of the hearing whether they are made
    in relation to one Appellant or the other or both.

12. On 3 June 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Osborne granted each of
    the Appellant and Tahera Begum Suma permission to appeal  in  identical
    terms.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

13. Mr Shah produced an extract of his contemporaneous  record  a  copy  of
    which is now in the Tribunal file. What is surprising is that there  is
    no evidence of any application having been made for an  adjournment  in
    the light of the fact that the  Appellant  had  recently  re-taken  the
    English Language  test  and  therefore  her  results  would  have  been
    imminently expected. Indeed they became available on 6  March  2014,  a
    fortnight after the hearing and some ten days before the  determination
    was promulgated.  In the event the Appellant Rima Begum passed the test
    but there was no evidence whether Tahera Begum Suma did.

14. The Respondent lodged a response under  Procedure  Rule  24  which  re-
    asserted the Judge's finding that at  the  date  of  the  decision  the
    Appellant  had  not  met  the  English  Language  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  There was no reference to the failure of the  Judge
    to make any findings on the issue of maintenance.

15. Mr Shah was concerned that this and the other appeal raised a matter of
    general concern because many people were affected by  the  difficulties
    which  had  been  identified  with  the  conduct  of  English  Language
    examinations  in  Bangladesh.   He  accepted  the  Respondent  had  not
    published any policy but nevertheless referred to  a  determination  of
    the First-tier Tribunal in another issue in which  reference  had  been
    made to a policy.  There was no explanation why  it  was  necessary  to
    rely on such a determination and indeed there was  no  explanation  why
    the Practice Direction of 31 October 2008 referred to in paragraph 11.1
    of the Practice Statements for the First-tier and  Upper  Tribunals  of
    the Immigration and Asylum Chambers had  not  been  followed.   In  any
    event he was unable to identify the policy referred to.

16. Mr Parkinson made enquiries and submitted there was no policy  and  the
    correspondence  simply  stated  that   following   the   discovery   of
    irregularities in the  conduct  of  English  Language  examinations  in
    Bangladesh the examining body had offered free-re-testing to those visa
    applicants affected.  There was  no  commitment  on  the  part  of  the
    Respondent to consider after a  decision  any  re-test  results  or  to
    withdraw or review any previous refusal of entry  clearance.   Mr  Shah
    suggested there had been a failure by the Respondent to deal adequately
    with the English Language testing  irregularities  issue  and  a  clear
    decision was needed and the Respondent should withdraw the decisions in
    all affected cases.

17. There were further  discussions  between  the  parties  and  myself  in
    chambers which did not result in an agreement on any point between  the
    parties.

Findings and Consideration

18.  The  Judge  failed  to  address  what  the  Appellant  had  said  when
    interviewed about sitting her tests at different centres. He failed  to
    take account of the  Sponsor's  statement.   He  failed  adequately  to
    address the documentation from the examining body  and  the  Respondent
    about the consequences of the discovery of the  identification  of  the
    irregularities in the  conduct  of  English  Language  examinations  in
    Bangladesh.  These amount to errors of law emerging  from  the  grounds
    for appeal as pleaded.  Having  found  there  are  errors  of  law,  as
    pleaded, I also find that the Judge was in  error  in  his  failure  to
    address the other issue in the appeal, namely maintenance,  upon  which
    he had documentary evidence and  which  could  be  said  to  have  been
    particularly important in the light of the fact  that  the  application
    appears (because the Respondent has failed to  supply  a  copy  of  the
    application with the date stamp  evidencing  receipt)  to  attract  the
    benefit of the transitional provisions  of  paragraph  A280(d)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

19. In all the circumstances, the determination is not safe and must be set
    aside in its entirety.  Similarly, it is appropriate for the matter  to
    be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh  because  the
    effect of the error has been to deprive the Appellant before the First-
    tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for her case to be
    put to the Tribunal and considered.



DECISION

    The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law
    such that it must be set aside in its entirety  and  the  matter  heard
    afresh.




DIRECTIONS

    The appeal is remitted for hearing afresh  at  Hatton  Cross  before  a
    Judge other than Judge Zahed.


    No interpreter has been requested.

     No anonymity direction is made.


Signed/Official  Crest                                            Date   14.
viii. 2014




Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal






