

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/22257/2013
                                                               OA/22259/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 31 March 2015                         |On 21 May 2015                    |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                               Iram Ilyas (1)
                             Muhammas Saqib (2)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ISLAMABAD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Iqbal, instructed by Addison and Khan
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are mother and son.  Both are citizens of  Pakistan  and
    were born respectively on 26 July  1993  and  29  January  2012.   They
    applied to join the  first  appellant's  husband,  who  is  the  second
    appellant's father, who has a right of  residence  in  the  UK  as  the
    extended family member  of  his  brother,  who  is  a  German  national
    exercising EU law rights in the UK.

 2. On  4  December  2013  they  were  refused  EEA  family  permits  under
    regulation 12 of the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006.  Their appeals against those decisions were dismissed  by  First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ross  in  a  decision  and   reasons   statement
    promulgated on 10 November 2014.  They have been granted permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal against that decision.

 3. Judge Ross found that although the appellants were related as  claimed,
    they could not rely on regulation 7 because they were  not  the  direct
    relatives of the EEA national (who is the brother in law of  the  first
    appellant)  or  his  spouse.   Therefore,  they  could  only  rely   on
    regulation 8 (extended family members).   Judge  Ross  found  that  the
    appellants had failed to demonstrate that they were  dependent  on  the
    EEA national or that they were members of the same  household  as  him.
    Judge Ross went further and found that the evidence failed to show that
    the appellants were dependent upon the husband of the first  appellant.
    The appellants had also relied, in the alternative, on article 8 of the
    human rights convention.  Judge Ross found that they could not  benefit
    from the provisions of appendix FM, but he only looked at  section  ADR
    (Adult Dependent Relatives).

 4. The grounds of appeal argue that Judge Ross failed to consider relevant
    evidence when reaching his conclusions.  Evidence  of  money  transfers
    direct from the EEEA national to the first appellant had been  provided
    but had been ignored.  That evidence was  supported  by  a  sponsorship
    declaration.  The failure to have regard to this  evidence  meant  that
    the decision in relation to dependency was fundamentally  flawed.   The
    grounds also argue  that  Judge  Ross  failed  in  his  application  of
    regulation 8(4)  because  he  failed  to  have  proper  regard  to  the
    provisions of section ADR of appendix FM to the immigration rules.

 5. Mr Iqbal relied on these grounds and added the following.  He wished to
    focus on whether the appellants could be regarded  as  members  of  the
    household of the EEA national, a factor on which Judge Ross had made no
    finding.  Mr Iqbal took me to the end of paragraph 9 of  the  statement
    of reasons where it  was  clear  that  Mr  Khan,  who  represented  the
    appellants in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  had  made  submissions  that
    indicated the appellants lived in the sponsor's household.  In  relying
    on this aspect, Mr Iqbal reminded me of the guidance given by the Upper
    Tribunal in RK (OFM -  membership  of  household  -  dependency)  India
    [2010] UKUT 421 (IAC) and Moneke  (EEA  -  OFMs)  Nigeria  [2011]  UKUT
    00341(IAC).

 6. Mr Smart said he had little to  add  to  the  rule  24  response.   The
    Secretary of State did not accept that  the  appellants  accepted  they
    could not meet regulation 7 because they were not directly  related  to
    the EEA national and therefore had to meet  the  criteria  set  out  in
    regulation 8.  The  appellants  had  failed  to  show  that  they  were
    dependent on the EEA national, there being  only  two  money  transfers
    direct from him to the first appellant.  Mr Smart reminded  me  of  the
    guidance given by the Upper Tribunal in Reyes  (EEA  Regs:  dependency)
    [2013] UKUT 314 (IAC) and argued that it was not possible to regard the
    appellants as dependent on the EEA national.  With regard to the  issue
    of whether the appellants could be  regarded  as  members  of  the  EEA
    nationals household, Mr Smart argued, as indicated at  paragraph  7  of
    the statement of reasons, the appellants lived  in  the  house  of  the
    parents of the first appellant.

 7. In reply, Mr Iqbal argued that the oral evidence given  at  the  First-
    tier Tribunal hearing included evidence that the  remittances  sent  by
    the first appellant's  husband  included  money  provided  by  the  EEA
    national.  This evidence had not been properly assessed.

 8. Having heard the competing arguments, I reserved my decision,  which  I
    now give with my reasons.

 9. Although I have some sympathy with the appellants regarding the quality
    of Judge Ross's statement of reasons, which is significantly lacking in
    a clear examination of the evidence or legal issues arising, ultimately
    his decision is sound.  None  of  my  concerns  regarding  quality  are
    sufficient to find a material error on a point of law and therefore  my
    decision is to uphold the decision.

10. The appellants' applications for EEA family  permits  were  made  on  8
    November 2013.  The applications were accompanied by a covering letter.
     That letter clearly stated two key facts.

11. First, that the applications were being made  on  the  basis  that  the
    appellants could derive rights of  residence  as  the  extended  family
    members of the same  EEA  national  from  whom  the  first  appellant's
    husband had derived a right of residence.  There was no attempt by  the
    appellants to rely simply  on  the  fact  that  the  first  appellant's
    husband had derived a right of residence; they  clearly  realised  they
    had to establish they derived a right of residence from  the  same  EEA
    national implying they  knew  they  could  not  rely  simply  on  their
    relationship to the first appellant's husband.  It is clear from  these
    points that the appellants were seeking to rely on regulation 8(2)(a).

12. Secondly, having established that the  EEA  national  was  a  qualified
    person, the covering letter included the following paragraph:

        Please note in order to meet our essential  living  needs,  I  [the
        first  appellant]  and  my  son  are  financially  and  emotionally
        dependent on my husband.  Moreover, the family head is  willing  to
        support us financially and emotionally as well.

    The covering letter, clearly provided by the lawyers  representing  the
    appellants,  went  on  to  outline  various  legal  authorities   about
    dependency and membership of households.  None of the cases cited above
    is mentioned.  Nor is there reference to the decision of the  Court  of
    Justice of the European Union in SSHD v Rahman and another  [2013]  Imm
    AR 73, which dealt with the issues referred to that Court by the  Upper
    Tribunal in MR and others  (EEA  extended  family  members)  Bangladesh
    [2010 UKUT 449 (IAC).

13. Obviously, the admission in the covering letter  when  taken  with  the
    very limited evidence of direct support from the EEA national in the UK
    means that the decision of Judge Ross  that  dependency  has  not  been
    established must be correct.  His failure to refer to evidence would be
    an error on a point of law were it not for the fact that  it  is  clear
    that the decision is the  only  possible  outcome  in  respect  of  the
    assessment of dependency, given in particular the judgment of the Court
    of Justice in Rahman and the Upper Tribunal's guidance in  Reyes.   The
    admission in the covering letter points to the fact that the appellants
    were not dependent on the EEA national, his  role  in  the  application
    process being to confirm that he was willing  to  offer  financial  and
    emotional support as well, not that he had provided such assistance.

14. The other aspect, whether the appellants could be regarded  as  members
    of the household of the EEA national is a non-starter because, as Judge
    Ross recorded, the appellants lived in the household of the parents  of
    the first appellant.  Although they visit from time to time the home of
    the EEA national's family in  Pakistan,  visits  would  not  make  them
    members of that  household.   I  accept  that  there  is  very  limited
    jurisprudence on this issue, but the cases referred to (RK and  Moneke)
    both indicate a sense of permanence  about  the  household  arrangement
    rather than the transient nature relied on by the  appellants.   It  is
    also clear from the case law that where a person seeks to rely on being
    a member of an EEA national's household, they must show that they  have
    lived with the EEA national overseas.  No evidence to that  effect  has
    ever been provided.

15. With regard to whether Judge Ross had  proper  regard  to  whether  the
    appellants could succeed under  section  ADR  of  appendix  FM  to  the
    immigration rules by  analogy  (as  required  by  regulation  8(4)),  I
    acknowledge that Judge Ross does not appear  to  have  looked  at  this
    carefully.  However, the following points are clear.  The  relative  on
    who the appellants relied is the brother in law of the first appellant.
     As such, there would be no need to address any other part of  appendix
    FM in relation to regulation 8(4).

16. Section ADR required evidence that the appellants would  need  to  show
    that as a result of age, illness or disability, they require long  term
    personal care to perform everyday tasks.  Details of how  that  can  be
    established is set out in appendix FM-SE.  The appellants  provided  no
    evidence whatsoever to meet this provision, which is not related to the
    immigration  status  of  the  EEA  national  sponsor.   The  fact   the
    appellants failed to provide any evidence whatsoever means there  could
    only be one possible outcome to this ground  of  appeal  which  is  the
    decision reached by Judge Ross.  The fact his reasoning is  unsound  is
    troubling but does not identify that his decision was wrong in law.

17. I add one further observation.  Neither party referred me to the  Court
    of Appeal's judgment in Soares v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 575.  Although it
    is not wholly on all fours with  this  case,  there  are  a  number  of
    similarities.  It makes clear that dependence on the EEA national  must
    be established prior to entry and that dependence on a non-EEA national
    resident in the UK would not itself meet the requirements of regulation
    8.  The reasoning in that case supports the conclusion to which I  have
    come, that the appellants have not made out that  any  legal  error  in
    Judge Ross's statement of reasons is material.



Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed because the decision of First-
tier Tribunal Judge Ross does not  contain  an  error  on  a  point  of  law
sufficient to set it aside.






                               Signed   Date


                               Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McCarthy
