
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/22343/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 15th July 2014                               |On 18th August 2014        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                            ABDUSELAM SALEH ABDU
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                      Entry Clearance Officer - nairobi
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Siddique, Parker Rhodes Hickmotts, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Abduselam Saleh Abdu, was born on 20 May 1997 and  is  a
    male citizen of Ethiopia.  The appellant has appealed to the First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Tully)  against  a  decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer, Nairobi dated 24 May  2012,  to  refuse  to  grant  him  entry
    clearance to the United Kingdom to join his mother (Kada Omar Ibrahim -
    hereafter referred to as the sponsor) a person present and  settled  in
    the United Kingdom.  The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the  appellant's
    appeal and the appellant now appeals, with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2.  The  Entry  Clearance  Officer's  refusal  notice  records  that   the
    application was assessed under paragraph 297 of HC  395  (as  amended).
    The Entry Clearance  Officer  concluded  that  the  appellant  had  not
    provided any evidence to show that he was related  to  the  sponsor  as
    claimed.  In addition, he had not  shown  that  the  sponsor  had  sole
    responsibility for him.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal had before it DNA test results provided by  the
    appellant.  At [37] the Tribunal concluded that "given the  results  of
    the DNA test and the lack of the sponsor's credibility I do not  accept
    that the appellant has discharged the burden of proof that  he  is  the
    sponsor's child".  The judge  found  the  sponsor  (who  gave  evidence
    before the Tribunal) to have been "generally evasive and did not answer
    questions readily".  The judge identified a number  of  inconsistencies
    in the appellant's evidence [33-34].   The  judge  concluded  that  the
    appellant is not the child of the sponsor as claimed and  went  on,  in
    any event, [38] to consider the question  of  sole  responsibility  and
    concluded that there was no evidence  to  show  that  the  sponsor  did
    exercise sole responsibility for the appellant.   The  Article  8  ECHR
    appeal was also dismissed.

 4. The DNA test report had concluded that the sponsor was 66572 times more
    likely to be the mother of the appellant than  an  unrelated  woman  of
    similar ethnic origin.  The probability of  maternity  is  assessed  at
    99.9992%.  The report also stated:

         If there is a possibility that a  close  relative  of  the  alleged
         mother may be the biological  mother  of  the  child  or  that  the
         individuals being tested are closely related in any other way  i.e.
         grandmother/grandchild,  siblings  etc.  this  may  invalidate  the
         results of the test.

    In her assessment of the report, the judge wrote as follows:

         In my view the  report  concludes  that  the  parties  are  closely
         related but does not rule out another close relative as the  mother
         of the appellant.  Mrs  Archibald  [Presenting  Officer]  submitted
         that it was possible the appellant  is  the  sponsor's  brother  or
         nephew and whilst there is no specific evidence to support this,  I
         find that this is a possibility on the basis of the DNA report.

 5. The grounds assert that the report did not "conclude" that the  parties
    were closely related; rather, the report concluded  that  there  was  a
    probability of maternity as  high  as  99.9992%.   I  agree  with  that
    submission.  I find the judge  has  placed  too  much  weight  on  what
    appears to be a standard caveat asserted in the DNA report.   The  fact
    remains that (as the judge acknowledged in the determination) there was
    no evidence at all to show the sponsor and appellant might  be  related
    closely other than as mother and child.  I am well aware that the judge
    has sought to assess the DNA report as part  of  the  totality  of  the
    evidence and that she also found parts of the sponsor's testimony to be
    unreliable but I do conclude, on balance,  that  the  DNA  report  very
    strongly supports the sponsor's contention that she is  the  mother  of
    the appellant and, in the absence  of  any  evidence  to  indicate  the
    contrary, I find that the judge has placed too  much  emphasis  on  the
    standard caveat in order to reject the report, the conclusions of which
    she found, perhaps, inconvenient in the light of the poor view she took
    of the sponsor's credibility.  In the circumstances, I have decided  to
    set aside the determination of the First-tier Tribunal  and  to  remake
    the decision.

 6. I did not hear evidence from the sponsor, who was at court.  I did hear
    evidence  from  Ms  Anne  Burghgraef,  clinical   manager   of   Solace
    ("Surviving  Exile  and  Persecution")  of  Leeds.    I   accepted   Ms
    Burghgraef's evidence which, in effect, confirmed what she had said  in
    her letter of 18 June 2012.

 7. The appellant's application to the Entry Clearance Officer was advanced
    on two alternative bases.  First, the appellant submits that he  should
    succeed under paragraph 297(i)(d) on the  basis  that  the  sponsor  is
    settled in the United  Kingdom  and  that  his  father  is  dead.   The
    alternative basis is that the sponsor has sole responsibility for  him.
    Given that the appellant's clear evidence is that his father has  died,
    his alternative basis appears to make little sense.  The appellant  has
    produced a letter from the  Federal  Democratic  Republic  of  Ethiopia
    (Ministry of National Defence) which was submitted in  support  of  the
    application for entry clearance and which confirms that the man who the
    appellant claims is his father (Saleh Abdu Mohammed) died  on  11  June
    2000 "while he was discharging his obligation" in the armed forces.  Mr
    Siddique  submitted  that  the  appellant  had  signed  and   dated   a
    declaration to the effect that the documents  enclosed  with  his  visa
    application were genuine and that  he  was  aware  that  submission  of
    forged documents might expose him to personal liability to  prosecution
    by the Ethiopian authorities.  The declaration further notes  that  the
    British Embassy staff in  Addis  Ababa  "will  make  enquiries  of  the
    relevant  institutions  regarding  this  application".    Mr   Siddique
    referred also to the refusal of entry clearance which states that  "any
    documents you have supplied in support of your  application  have  been
    considered and recorded".  The letter from the Ministry of  Defence  of
    Ethiopia had, therefore, been considered but had not been challenged or
    queried by the respondent.

 8. As I have noted,  I  did  not  hear  evidence  from  the  sponsor.   Ms
    Burghgraef's evidence neither supports nor undermines this part of  the
    appellant's evidence, namely that his  father  is  dead  and  that  the
    sponsor is his mother.  I am aware that the sponsor's witness statement
    [3] dated 8 November 2013 appears to indicate  that  when  the  sponsor
    travelled from Eritrea to the United Kingdom "my husband and  son  were
    in Ethiopia".  In the same statement [4] the sponsor confirms that  her
    husband was killed in 2000.  I am aware also that problems  arose  over
    the translation of that witness statement and which is also the subject
    of a complaint made to the appellant's  previous  solicitors  who  were
    instructed at the time the visa  application  and  First-tier  Tribunal
    appeal bundle were prepared.

 9. In the light of  the  fact  that  there  is  corroborative  documentary
    evidence of the father's death (which has not been challenged in either
    the First-tier or Upper Tribunals or by the Entry Clearance Officer), I
    find that the inconsistency at [3] of the sponsor's  witness  statement
    is likely to have arisen as a result  of  problems  in  translation  or
    communication during the preparation of the statement.  On the standard
    of proof  of  the  balance  of  probabilities,  I  consider  that  this
    explanation is more likely  than  that  the  statement  containing  the
    apparent inconsistency indicates that the sponsor  has  fabricated  the
    account of her late husband's death.

10. As I have noted above, the documentary evidence relating to  the  death
    of the father has not  been  challenged  by  the  respondent.   In  the
    absence of any challenge and  having  attached  little  weight  to  the
    apparent inconsistency in the sponsor's statement, I  find  as  a  fact
    that the appellant's father did die in 2000 as claimed.  I  find  also,
    having proper regard to the DNA test report, that the  sponsor  is  the
    biological mother of the appellant.  It is accepted  that  the  sponsor
    has settled status in the  United  Kingdom.   In  the  light  of  those
    findings, I remake the  decision  by  allowing  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules.

DECISION

11. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on
    19 March 2014 is set aside.  I remake the  decision.   The  appellant's
    appeal against the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer dated 24 May
    2012 is allowed under the Immigration Rules.






Signed                              Date 10 August 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

