
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/22387/2012
     OA/22388/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 9 January 2014                               |On 22 January 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                               Tamadur Mukhtar
                          Mokhtar Siddig Hari Bosh
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                       Entry Clearance Officer - cairo

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mrs S Daley, instructed by Howells, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants, Tamadur Mukhtar (date of birth: 18 February  1984)  and
    Mokhtar Siddig Hari Bosh (date of birth: 17 August 2010)  are  citizens
    of Sudan.  By a decision dated 19 November 2013, Deputy Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Dearden set aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  of  Judge
    Fisher and directed a resumed hearing.

 2. I was much assisted by the very helpful calculations which Mrs Daley of
    Counsel had included in her skeleton argument.  I was also grateful  to
    Mrs Pettersen, for the respondent, who did not seek to challenge  those
    figures.  The problem in this appeal can be stated quite briefly.   The
    sponsor has a variable  income.   The  number  of  weeks  (for  example
    twelve, eight, sixteen) which one takes in order to calculate  his  net
    average weekly income produces differing results with  the  consequence
    that, by reference to one period of time his net average weekly  income
    exceeds the sum which he and the appellants would  receive  by  way  of
    state benefits whilst, by reference to other  periods,  he  falls  just
    short of that threshold.  As  Mrs  Daley  pointed  out,  there  was  no
    judicial guidance or any indication under HC 395 as to  the  period  by
    reference to which the calculation should be made.

 3. It is accepted by both parties that  the  appellants  and  the  sponsor
    cannot choose to live on an income which is below  the  income  support
    threshold.  However, the Immigration Rules which these  appellants  had
    to satisfy are concerned with the  likelihood  in  the  future  of  the
    family living  without  recourse  to  public  funds;  to  that  extent,
    historic data relating to wages are only relevant insofar as they throw
    light on the likely position in the future  and  after  the  appellants
    have joined  the  sponsor  in  the  United  Kingdom.   There  are  also
    practical considerations.  As I understand it, the sponsor  would  need
    to show a number of weeks of income below the income support  threshold
    before he could  apply  for  that  or  similar  means-tested  benefits.
    Applying the standard of the balance of probabilities, I find  that  he
    would be very unlikely to make such an application if his future  wages
    follow a similar pattern to that in the past.  If, for example,  during
    one week his wages fell below the income support level it would  hardly
    be worth his while making an application for benefit when he  would  be
    well aware that in subsequent weeks his income  would  be  such  as  to
    render him ineligible for such benefits.  The focus should,  therefore,
    be on the ability of the appellants to satisfy  the  Immigration  Rules
    and I find that they would  be  able  to  maintain  themselves  without
    having recourse to public funds because the sponsor would not apply for
    such funds.

 4. Neither Mrs Pettersen nor the Entry Clearance Officer have argued  that
    the  appellants  failed  to  meet  any  other  part  of  the   relevant
    Immigration Rules.  In the circumstances, I therefore allow the  appeal
    in respect of the Immigration Rules.

DECISION

 5. These appeals in respect of the Immigration Rules are allowed.

Signed                              Date 21 January 2014



Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
