
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/22175/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 9 April 2014                            |On 17th April 2014         |
|                                           |                           |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN
                          IMMIGRATION JUDGE S CHANA
               sitting as a DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                              MR YAHAYA KASUJJA
                        (No Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - KAMPALA
                                                                  Respondent

    Representation:
                            For the Appellant: Mr D O'Callaghan of
           Counsel instructed by Ahmed Rahman Carr
          For the Respondent: Mr E Tufan a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Uganda who was born on 10 October  1987.
      He  has  been  given  permission  to  appeal  the   determination   of
      Immigration Judge Dennis ("the FTTJ") who dismissed his appeal against
      the respondent's decision of  2  October  2012  to  refuse  him  entry
      clearance as a returning resident to  the  United  Kingdom  under  the
      provisions of paragraphs 18 and 320 (7A) of the Immigration Rules.


   2. The appellant came to the UK when  he  was  about  11  years  old.  He
      entered illegally in late 1999, shortly after his  elder  sister.  His
      mother had come to the UK in 1990 and claimed asylum. She was  refused
      asylum but was later granted leave to remain for reasons which are not
      clear. She became a British citizen in 2006. The appellant was granted
      indefinite leave to remain in the UK in letter dated 1 June 2000.  The
      letter has been produced and it is accepted that  it  is  genuine  and
      that it has never been formally revoked.


   3. The appellant attended secondary education in the UK for approximately
      3 years but his mother said that he got involved with local gangs  and
      was frequently in trouble. She attributed this to bad company and  the
      lack of opportunities.  Exactly  when  the  appellant  lived  in  this
      country or in Uganda is not entirely clear but at one point his mother
      said that she sent him back to her sister in Uganda  "for  a  year  so
      that he could learn to behave  properly".  His  mother  said  that  he
      returned to the UK when he was 17. In his visa  application  form  the
      appellant said that he was in Uganda between 2003 and 2005. His mother
      said that when he returned to the UK he met up with  his  old  friends
      and got back into  the  same  routine  of  playing  football  and  not
      working. Her recollection was that he left her home in 2008  or  2009.
      In 2010 his older sister, who was living in this  country,  died.  The
      appellant, his mother and half-sister, went  to  Uganda  for  a  month
      following the death of his sister. The appellant said that he  was  in
      Uganda from 2010 to 2011. After this period his mother  said  that  he
      returned to this country and found work as a carer whilst renting  his
      own flat in Sussex.


   4. In the summer of 2012, possibly July or  August,  the  appellant  said
      that he flew to Uganda where he has been ever since. However, there is
      no documentary evidence to support the claim as to when he went there.


   5. When the appellant was granted indefinite leave to remain in the UK  a
      stamp to this effect was placed in his then current  Ugandan  passport
      (number B 334197) which had been issued on 26 September 2002  and  was
      valid for five years expiring on 26 September 2007 ("the first Ugandan
      passport"). The appellant claimed to have lost  this  and  produced  a
      Metropolitan police report stating that he had reported  the  loss  of
      the passport at Plaistow police station on 13 July  2012.  The  report
      states that the passport  contained  in  indefinite  leave  to  remain
      stamp. At some stage the appellant acquired another  Ugandan  passport
      ("the second Ugandan passport"). When he flew to Uganda in the  summer
      of 2012 the appellant used the second Ugandan  passport  but  was  not
      able to take the first Ugandan passport with the indefinite  leave  to
      remain stamp in it because it had been lost.  In  2012  the  appellant
      would or should have known that he needed to take  the  first  Ugandan
      passport with him as well as the then current second Ugandan  passport
      because he had taken both of them with him when he travelled to Uganda
      in 2010 and had had to show the indefinite leave to remain stamp  when
      he returned to the UK.


   6. There is a great deal of speculation but little hard  evidence  as  to
      why the appellant made the application to the respondent for leave  to
      return to the UK as a returning resident. However in  the  application
      form  entitled  "Application  for  United  Kingdom  Entry   Clearance.
      Settlement - Returning Resident. Returning Resident" which  he  signed
      on 10 September 2012 the appellant answered both questions 67  and  72
      with the words "No". Questions 67 reads; "do  you  have  any  criminal
      convictions in any country (including traffic offences)?" Question  72
      reads; "have you engaged in any other activities that  might  indicate
      you may not be considered a person of good character?" In refusing the
      application the respondent stated  that  the  appellant  had  previous
      unspent court convictions in the UK. The appellant now accepts that he
      has had such convictions and we are told that there are two  of  them.
      Surprisingly, neither side told the FTTJ or has  told  us  what  these
      convictions were or what penalties were imposed. The  respondent  said
      that under paragraph 320 (7A) there had to be an automatic refusal  if
      false representations or documents were used (whether or not  material
      to the application and whether or not the  applicants  knowledge),  or
      material facts were not disclosed  in  relation  to  the  application.
      False representation for this purpose was a lie, or a false  statement
      in the visa application, made orally or in writing.


   7. The appellant appealed to the First-Tier Tribunal and the  FTTJ  heard
      the appeal on 20 September 2013. Both parties  were  represented.  The
      appellant's mother attended but no oral evidence  was  given  and  the
      FTTJ heard oral submissions from both representatives.


   8.  The  appellant's  counsel  argued  that  the  application  for  entry
      clearance as a returning resident was entirely unnecessary.  All  that
      the appellant need to do was to go to the UK High Commission,  present
      his second Ugandan passport together with either the photocopy of  the
      ILR stamp in his first Ugandan passport or  the  letter  granting  him
      indefinite leave to remain, or both and ask that a new  ILR  stamp  be
      placed in his second Ugandan passport. It was submitted  that  as  the
      application  for  entry  clearance  as  a   returning   resident   was
      misconceived the application and the decision should be treated  as  a
      nullity. Any false statements should also be disregarded.  As  he  was
      entitled to  return  to  the  UK  in  any  event  without  making  the
      application he had gained nothing from any false representations.


   9. In the alternative it was argued that because the appellant still  had
      indefinite leave to remain in the UK he was entitled to return to live
      with his family in the UK and that to prevent him from doing so  would
      be a disproportionate interference with his right to respect  for  his
      private and family life.


  10. The FTTJ found that the appeal raised interesting and difficult  legal
      issues. No authorities had been provided to assist him.  He  concluded
      that  paragraph  320  (7A)  was  intended  to   facilitate   effective
      immigration control by requiring true and correct  information  to  be
      supplied. There was no room for "leeway". He was  satisfied  that  the
      appellant had made false statements in his application  and  the  fact
      that the application may not have been the correct  one  or  even  the
      correct  route  was  irrelevant.  The  Rules  were  clear  as  to  the
      consequences of a breach of these provisions. It  could  not  be  said
      that the appellant had made an inadvertent mistake. The FTTJ  rejected
      the submission that as the application  was  not  necessary  all  that
      followed from it was a nullity.


  11. The FTTJ went on to  consider  the  Article  8  human  rights  grounds
      concluding that there was no extra-territorial operation of  the  ECHR
      for a Ugandan citizen present in Uganda.  However,  he  accepted  that
      Article 8 grounds needed to be considered. The evidence did  not  show
      that the appellant had been living a family life with  family  members
      in the UK. He was  a  26-year-old  single  man  who  had  been  living
      independently for five years. His mother did not know when he had left
      the family and he had had spent lengthy periods in Uganda.  There  was
      no suggestion that he would return to live with his mother  and  half-
      sister. The evidence did not establish that  refusal  of  leave  would
      have sufficiently serious consequences as  to  engage  his  Article  8
      family life rights  but,  had  they  done  so,  the  FTTJ  would  have
      concluded that it would have been a proportionate interference. As  to
      the appellant's private life in the UK, the FTTJ  concluded  that  the
      appellant did have such a life but that to deny  him  the  ability  to
      return to the UK would not be a disproportionate interference.


  12. The FTTJ dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules and on human
      rights grounds.


  13. The appellant applied for permission to appeal, which was granted by a
      judge in the First-Tier Tribunal. The  grounds  argue  that  the  FTTJ
      erred in law in two respects. Firstly, by failing to conclude that the
      appellant's application for entry clearance as  a  returning  resident
      was null and void. The application had been made  for  a  purpose  not
      covered by the Immigration Rules and should have been refused as  such
      under paragraph 320 (1). The refusal  under  paragraph  320  (7A)  was
      fundamentally misconceived. Secondly, the  respondent  had  failed  to
      consider the appellant's Article 8 representations and  the  FTTJ  had
      erred by concluding that an Article 8 based refusal  would  have  been
      legitimate and pursuant to lawful process where, for the  reasons  set
      out in relation to the first ground of appeal, an  application  and  a
      decision arising from it which was null and void  could  not  serve  a
      legitimate and lawful purpose.


  14. At an earlier hearing before one of us (Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
      Chana) the respondent's representative produced documents which it was
      claimed might show that somebody other than the appellant had  claimed
      asylum using a false Ugandan  passport  in  the  appellant's  identity
      (except for the photograph) and that someone else had used the same or
      similar passport to apply for a visit visa to the UK from Uganda.  The
      appeal was adjourned for further enquiries to  be  made  and  we  have
      since received witness statements from the appellant  and  his  mother
      which deny any knowledge  of  or  involvement  with  either  of  these
      applications or the use of a false or doctored passport. It is not now
      suggested that these matters have any bearing on this  appeal  and  we
      disregard them.


  15. Mr O'Callaghan stated that after careful consideration of the position
      the appellant and those advising him accepted that when the  appellant
      travelled to Uganda and then wished to return to the UK the fact  that
      he had only his second Ugandan passport  and  not  his  first  Ugandan
      passport containing the indefinite leave to remain stamp meant it  was
      most unlikely that he would be allowed to board  an  aircraft  or  any
      other form of transport heading for the UK. In the  circumstances  the
      only avenue open  to  him  was  to  make  the  application  for  entry
      clearance as a returning resident. It followed that the appellant  was
      no longer pursuing the argument that the respondent  should  not  have
      considered or decided the application.


  16. Mr O'Callaghan started to suggest  some  changes  to  the  appellant's
      grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  We  are  surprised  that  no
      application had been made to amend the grounds at some earlier  stage,
      particularly bearing in mind the fundamental nature of the changes. It
      soon became clear that minor changes to the existing grounds would not
      be  sufficient  and  that  fundamental  rewriting  was  required.   We
      adjourned in order to enable Mr O'Callaghan to prepare amended grounds
      of appeal, which he did.


  17. We asked Mr Tufan whether he was in a  position  to  deal  with  these
      amended grounds. He said that he was and did not need to  ask  for  an
      adjournment. We permitted the amendments to be made.


  18. There are two amended grounds of appeal. The first submits that at all
      material times since 2000 the appellant enjoyed and continued to enjoy
      indefinite leave to remain in the UK. The Secretary of State had never
      directed that this leave be curtailed.  In  refusing  the  appellant's
      appeal against the respondent's decision  to  refuse  the  application
      under paragraph 320 (7A) the FTTJ had  failed  to  consider  that  the
      appellant was settled in the United Kingdom and  that  the  denial  of
      settlement  could  only  be  undertaken  by  way  of  revocation  with
      attendant appeal rights. A bar on the enjoyment of  settlement  rights
      by way of a decision under this provision was unlawful and ultra vires
      because an Entry Clearance Officer did not have the power to revoke de
      facto settlement.


  19. The second amended ground of appeal is also based on the premise  that
      the appellant continued to enjoy indefinite leave to remain in the UK.
      Because the FTTJ found that the ECHR  did  not  have  extraterritorial
      operation he did not engage with the fact that the  appellant  enjoyed
      settlement in the UK under domestic law. The Secretary  of  State  had
      taken no steps to revoke the appellant's indefinite  leave  to  remain
      and as a result the FTTJ had failed properly  to  consider  Article  8
      proportionality. The respondent  should  be  directed  to  permit  the
      appellant to re-enter the United Kingdom as a returning resident.


  20. Mr O'Callaghan relied on the amended grounds  and  accepted  that  the
      circumstances of this case were most unusual. It was not disputed that
      the respondent had power to apply the provisions of paragraph 320  but
      it was argued that he erred in doing so in the  circumstances  of  the
      appellant's case by failing to give proper consideration to  the  fact
      that he had indefinite leave to remain in the  UK.  In  reply  to  our
      question Mr O'Callaghan accepted that the circumstances of  this  case
      gave rise to a mandatory refusal but pointed out that the Secretary of
      State taken no steps to revoke the  appellant's  indefinite  leave  to
      remain. This would appear to be a scenario which  the  draughtsman  of
      the Immigration Rules had never contemplated. If the appellant managed
      to reach a point of entry in the UK  then  and  only  then  could  the
      Secretary of State decide whether to attempt to revoke his  indefinite
      leave to remain. Mr O'Callaghan argued that  the  Secretary  of  State
      could not bar the appellant from entry to the UK without taking  steps
      to revoke his indefinite leave to remain.


  21. In relation to the Article 8 grounds  Mr  O'Callaghan  submitted  that
      notwithstanding that the application had been made out of country  the
      appellant's Article 8 human rights were engaged. He accepted that  the
      FTTJ went on to deal with proportionality but not on the basis that he
      should have done with  proper  weight  given  to  the  fact  that  the
      appellant had indefinite leave to remain.


  22. Mr Tufan submitted that those who had indefinite leave to remain  were
      subject to immigration control under section 3 of the Immigration  Act
      1971. Indefinite leave to remain did not have to be revoked before  an
      individual with such leave could be refused readmission. The appellant
      now accepted that he had to make the application to the respondent  in
      Uganda in which case the relevant Immigration  Rule  for  a  returning
      resident was Rule 18.  It  was  not  correct  to  say  that  an  Entry
      Clearance Officer dealing  with  an  application  for  leave  from  an
      individual with indefinite leave to remain had to grant this. The word
      "may" in the first line made this clear. Refusal under  paragraph  320
      (7A) was mandatory.


  23. Mr Tufan argued that the FTTJ did give  proper  consideration  to  the
      Article  8   grounds   in   paragraph   16   of   the   determination.
      Proportionality was properly decided in the light of the  findings  of
      fact. There was no evidence that the appellant had a relationship with
      his mother or any other relatives in the UK which went  beyond  normal
      ties between adult relatives. We were asked to find that there was  no
      error of law.


  24. In his reply Mr O'Callaghan reiterated that this  was  a  complex  and
      unusual case. If the appellant was subject to immigration control then
      the  Secretary  of  State  should  have  taken  steps  to  revoke  his
      indefinite leave to remain. If he managed to reach a port of entry  in
      the UK it might then be alleged that the refusal  of  entry  clearance
      prevailed over the pre-existing indefinite leave to remain.  The  risk
      the appellant of  such  an  argument  being  advanced  should  not  be
      ignored. In reply to our question as to how the FTTJ could be said  to
      have erred in law in relation to a case which was now being argued  on
      a substantially different basis from  that  advanced  before  him,  Mr
      O'Callaghan submitted that whatever was relied on  by  counsel  before
      the  FTTJ  still  required  him  to  consider  what  happened  to  the
      application when indefinite leave to remain had not been revoked.


  25. We reserved our determination.


  26. We find that the FTTJ cannot be said to have erred in law in  relation
      to grounds of appeal to the First-Tier Tribunal which are now conceded
      to have been misconceived and are no longer relied on.  The  FTTJ  was
      asked to find that the appellant's application to the  respondent  for
      entry clearance as a returning resident was unnecessary and that  both
      the application and the decision should be treated as a  nullity.  The
      FTTJ ruled against this argument. He was in our judgement  correct  to
      do so and this is now conceded by the appellant.

  27. The provisions of paragraph 18 of the Immigration  Rules  relating  to
      Returning Residents provide;


         "18. A person seeking leave  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
         returning resident may be  admitted  for  settlement  provided  the
         Immigration Officer is satisfied that the person concerned:


                  (i) had indefinite leave to enter or remain in the  United
                  Kingdom when he last left; and


                  (ii) has not been away from the United  Kingdom  for  more
                  than 2 years; and


                  (iii) did not receive assistance from public funds towards
                  the cost of leaving the United Kingdom; and


                  (iv) now seeks admission for the purpose of settlement."


  28.  We find that the respondent must have been aware that  the  appellant
      had indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom. The  application
      had been made on the form designed for this specific  purpose  and  in
      the first paragraph of the decision the respondent stated  that;  "You
      have applied for and entry clearance as a Returning  Resident  to  the
      United Kingdom". The respondent went on to refer to  paragraph  18  of
      the Immigration Rules which relates to Returning Residents.


  29. Paragraph 320 of the Immigration Rules sets out the "Grounds on  which
      entry clearance or  leave  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  is  to  be
      refused". One of them is contained  in  paragraph  "(7A)  where  false
      representations have been made or false documents or information  have
      been submitted (whether  or  not  material  to  the  application,  and
      whether or not to the applicant's knowledge), or material  facts  have
      not been disclosed, in relation to the application."

  30. This is a mandatory  not  a  discretionary  ground  for  refusal.  The
      appellant admits  that  he  falls  within  these  provisions.  In  the
      circumstances there was no good  reason  for  the  respondent  not  to
      refuse the application. The fact that the appellant still had existing
      leave to remain which had not been revoked was not a good  reason;  on
      the  contrary  it  was  an  essential  prerequisite  for  making   the
      application.


  31. What the appellant should have done before he travelled to  Uganda  on
      the last occasion was to make an application for the indefinite  leave
      to remain stamp to be placed in his second Ugandan passport. This  was
      made clear in the original grant letter of 1 June 2000  which  stated;
      "if you obtain a new passport or travel document you  may  ask  us  to
      stamp it to show your immigration status before you travel. You should
      send it to this Directorate at the address at the top of  this  letter
      at least two months before you intend to travel". The appellant should
      have been and  probably  was  aware  of  this  because  he  must  have
      travelled to Uganda and returned to the UK on a previous occasion with
      his first and second Ugandan passports. Even though the first  Ugandan
      passport had expired it was needed in order  to  show  the  indefinite
      leave to remain stamp which was not in the second Ugandan passport.


  32. The submissions advanced on behalf of the appellant are based  on  the
      assumption that if the appellant had  returned  to  the  UK  he  would
      automatically have been re-admitted unless the Secretary of State  had
      taken or then took steps to revoke his  indefinite  leave  to  remain.
      This is incorrect as the original grant letter of 1  June  2000  makes
      clear. The latter states; "if you do not have  your  passport  stamped
      before you travel, when you return to the United Kingdom you will have
      to satisfy the immigration officer that you had  indefinite  leave  to
      remain when you left. To do this, you will need to produce either  the
      enclosed  passport  or  other  documentary  evidence  such   as   bank
      statements, notices  of  income  tax  coding,  school  law  employment
      records etc relating to the earlier years of  your  residents  in  the
      United Kingdom. It may also be helpful to carry this letter with you."


  33. Also, in the same letter of 1 June 2000 there is a statement that; "If
      you leave the United Kingdom  you  will  normally  be  readmitted  for
      settlement as a returning resident provided that: you did not  receive
      assistance from public funds towards the cost of leaving this country:
      you had indefinite leave to enter or remain here when you  last  left:
      you have not been away  for  longer  than  two  years;  and:  you  are
      returning for the purpose of settlement. In order to be considered  as
      settled here, you will have to be able to show that you are habitually
      are normally resident in this country, and any absences  have  been  a
      temporary or occasional nature.  You  will  not  be  readmitted  as  a
      returning resident if you are resident overseas and only  return  here
      for short periods."


  34. We find that the requirements which an individual has  to  satisfy  in
      order to obtain leave to enter  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  returning
      resident are the same whether that individual  makes  the  application
      out of country or in country on  arrival  in  the  UK.  They  are  the
      requirements set out in paragraph 18 of  the  Immigration  Rules.  The
      appellant has not been disadvantaged by having to make the application
      in Uganda rather than on arrival in the UK. If, on arrival in the  UK,
      he had  made  the  same  false  representations  as  he  made  on  his
      application form in Uganda then the Secretary of State would have been
      entitled to refuse the application  on  the  same  basis  as  did  the
      respondent. Furthermore, in paragraph 22,  the  FTTJ  found  that  the
      appellant, who had shown that he  was  prepared  to  misrepresent  his
      circumstances, had not established that he actually intended to return
      to the UK. The lease of the place where he had lived  in  the  UK  had
      expired and there was no suggestion that he was absent  on  a  holiday
      from his previous employment. He was  described  as  a  footballer  in
      Uganda and had claimed to have a residential address and a  girlfriend
      there. His circumstances could have caused him difficulties in seeking
      to persuade an Immigration Officer that he was returning to the UK for
      the purpose of settlement.


  35. It has not been argued that the  appellant  could  have  succeeded  on
      Article 8 grounds under the current Immigration Rules.  We  find  that
      the FTTJ did not err in law in his alternative  consideration  of  the
      Article 8 grounds outside the Immigration Rules. For  the  reasons  we
      have given there is no overarching argument relevant to the Article  8
      grounds that the appellant was bound to be readmitted as  a  returning
      resident if he presented himself at a port  of  entry  in  the  United
      Kingdom or that his indefinite leave to remain remained in  force  and
      was some sort of trump card unless and until revoked by the  Secretary
      of State.


  36. We find that the facts advanced by the appellant  in  support  of  his
      Article 8 grounds were properly assessed and considered by  the  FTTJ.
      It was open to him to conclude  that,  for  the  reasons  set  out  in
      paragraph 20, the appellant did not have a family life in the  UK  and
      certainly not a family life where  interference  with  it  would  have
      consequences of such severity as potentially to engage  the  operation
      of Article 8. Even if he had reached the opposite conclusion it  would
      still have been open to him to find that refusal  of  entry  clearance
      would not be a  disproportionate  interference  with  the  appellant's
      right to respect for his family  life.  The  FTTJ  accepted  that  the
      appellant had a private life in the UK having made efforts  to  obtain
      basic qualifications, employment and independence.  Interference  with
      the private life which he had formerly enjoyed in the  UK  would  have
      consequences of such severity as potentially to engage  the  operation
      of Article 8 but it was open to the FTTJ to find that in the light  of
      the  whole  of  the   appellant's   history,   including   his   false
      declarations, it would not be disproportionate to refuse him leave  to
      return to the UK.


  37. We have not been asked to make an anonymity direction and can  see  no
      good reason to do so.


  38. We find  that  the  FTTJ  did  not  err  in  law  and  we  uphold  his
      determination.




      .............................................
            Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden                Date 13
      April 2014
