
IAC-PE-SW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/22037/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 23rd  February 2015                          |On 2nd March 2015          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                    the Entry Clearance Officer freetown
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MR GOURESSI CAMARA
                        (No ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting officer
For the Respondent:    No attendance


                      PROVISIONAL DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent, Mr Gouressi Camara date of birth 15th March 1978, is  a
    citizen of Sierra Leone. Having considered all the circumstances  I  do
    not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the ECO against the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Beach promulgated on 24 November 2014, whereby the judge
    allowed the respondent's appeal against the decision of the  ECO  dated
    14 November 2013. The decision by the ECO was to refuse the  Respondent
    a family permit as an extended family member of an EEA qualified person
    exercising treaty rights, who was resident and working  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 3. By decision made on the 14th January 2014 leave to appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal was granted.

 4. In allowing the appeal Judge Beach had allowed the appeal outright. The
    grounds of appeal raise the issue that there was  a  discretion  to  be
    exercised under Regulation 12(2) and that consistent with the cases  of
    Aladeselu v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ  144  and  Ihemedu  (OFMs  -  meaning)
    Nigeria [2011] UKUT 340  (IAC)  the  appropriate  course  was  for  the
    discretion in the first instance to be considered and exercised by  the
    ECO.  Whilst  the  cases  are  concerned  with  the  discretion   under
    Regulation 17, the provisions are in the same  terms  and  contain  the
    same discretion.

 5. There was no attendance by the respondent or his representative at  the
    hearing. There is on the file correspondence, which indicates that  the
    respondent accepts that the judge in allowing the appeal outright erred
    in law and that they were aware of the limitations of the  jurisdiction
    of the judge in line with the case law.

 6. Notice had been sent out that as it was  accepted  that  there  was  an
    error of law and that the case would be disposed of as a paper case  in
    accordance with the parties agreed approach. That approach  appears  to
    be whilst the appeal would continue to be allowed it would  be  allowed
    to the limited extent that it was for the ECO to  consider  whether  to
    exercise the discretion in accordance with the findings of fact made by
    the judge.

 7. The full correspondence between the parties however is not  before  the
    Tribunal. It appears to be accepted that in  the  first  instance  that
    discretion has to be exercised by the  ECO  and  that  the  appropriate
    course is for this matter to be allowed with the direction that the ECO
    should consider the application and consider exercising discretion.  As
    I do not have the full correspondence, I make a provisional decision in
    the following terms:-

    There is an error of law in the  original  decision  and  I  allow  the
    appeal by the ECO and substitute the following decision :-

    The appeal is allowed to the limited  extent  that  there  is  a  valid
    application before the Entry Clearance Officer, which requires  him  to
    consider exercising  the  discretion  under  Regulation  12(2)  of  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 and requires him to  make  a  lawful
    decision in accordance with the findings of fact made by the judge.

    No fee award is made

    If either party disagrees with the provisional decision,  they  have  5
    working days to notify the Upper Tribunal and ask for the appeal to  be
    listed for a further hearing.



Signed        Date 02/03/2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure
