
IAC-AH-DP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/22183/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1st May 2015                        |On 19th May 2015                     |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                robel ghermay
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NAIROBI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Stevens of Duncan Lewis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal N J Bennett promulgated on 28th October 2014.

 2. The Appellant is a male Eritrean citizen born 27th  November  1982  who
    applied for entry clearance as the  spouse  of  a  refugee,  Selamawiit
    Tekeste (the Sponsor).

 3. The application was refused on 21st November  2013  with  reference  to
    paragraph 352A(i) and (ii) of the Immigration  Rules.   The  Respondent
    was not satisfied that the Appellant was married to a refugee, and  was
    not satisfied that the marriage did not take  place  after  the  person
    granted asylum left the country of their former habitual  residence  in
    order to seek asylum.

 4. The Respondent accepted that when the Sponsor applied  for  asylum  she
    stated that she was married to Robel Ghermay but the Respondent was not
    satisfied that the Appellant  had  provided  satisfactory  evidence  to
    prove that he is Robel Ghermay.  The Appellant had provided  an  Asylum
    Seeker Certificate issued 8th October 2013 by the Office of the Ugandan
    Prime Minister, but the Respondent noted that this was not an  original
    document, and that it was simply a record of what  the  authorities  in
    Uganda had been told.  The Appellant had not proved  what  evidence  he
    had produced to obtain this certificate  or  whether  any  checks  were
    conducted to verify the information.

 5. The Respondent noted that the Appellant and  Sponsor  claimed  to  have
    married on 20th May 2007, and that they last saw  each  other  on  25th
    July 2008, and made contact with each other again in September 2013 and
    thereafter had maintained telephone  contact.   It  was  accepted  that
    evidence of recent contact had been provided,  but  no  evidence  of  a
    marriage had been produced.  The application was therefore refused with
    reference to the Immigration Rules, and the Respondent did  not  accept
    that refusal of entry clearance breached Article 8 of the 1950 European
    Convention on Human Rights.

 6. The appeal was heard by Judge Bennett (the judge) on 1st October  2014.
    The judge heard evidence from the Sponsor and a witness Daniel  Rezene,
    and accepted that the Sponsor  probably  married  a  man  called  Robel
    Ghermay in Eritrea before she  came  to  the  United  Kingdom  and  was
    granted asylum.  The judge found in paragraph 35;

         "The real issue in this appeal is therefore whether  the  Appellant
         is the Robel Ghermay whom  the  Appellant  married  in  Eritrea  in
         2007."

 7. The judge did not accept that the Appellant had discharged  the  burden
    of proof, and was not satisfied that it was the Appellant who  probably
    married the Sponsor in Eritrea, and the appeal was therefore  dismissed
    with reference to the Immigration Rules and Article 8.

 8. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal,  and  the  appeal  came
    before me on 25th February 2015.  I found that the judge had  erred  by
    not making specific findings as  to  whether  he  found  the  Sponsor's
    evidence credible or not.  The judge erred by not adequately explaining
    why cumulatively, the  documentary  evidence  and  the  Sponsor's  oral
    evidence was not given sufficient weight to  discharge  the  burden  of
    proof.  The judge did not specifically make a finding that the  Sponsor
    was not a credible witness.

 9. Full details of the application for permission, the grant of permission
    by Judge Cox, and my reasons for finding an error of law are  contained
    in my decision dated 26th February 2015.

10. The hearing was adjourned to enable the decision to be re-made  by  the
    Upper Tribunal.  The finding made by the First-tier Tribunal  that  the
    Sponsor had married a man called Robel Ghermay in  Eritrea  before  she
    left that country was not challenged and was therefore preserved.

                           Re-Making the Decision

Preliminary Issues

11.  The  Sponsor  attended  the  hearing.   There  was  no  difficulty  in
    communication between the Sponsor and interpreter in Tigrinya.

12. I ensured that I had all documentation upon which the parties  intended
    to  rely,  and  that  each  party  had  served  the  other   with   any
    documentation upon  which  reliance  was  to  be  placed.   I  had  the
    Respondent's bundle with 73 pages, and the Appellant's bundle  with  89
    pages.  I also had a supplementary  bundle  served  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant comprising 40 pages, and the Sponsor's supplementary  witness
    statement dated 13th April 2015 together with  further  money  transfer
    receipts and telephone cards.

13. Both representatives confirmed that they  had  seen  my  error  of  law
    decision, and understood the  issue  to  be  decided  was  whether  the
    Appellant is the Robel Ghermay whom the Sponsor married in  Eritrea  in
    2007.

14. The representatives indicated that they were ready to proceed and there
    was no application for an adjournment.

The Sponsor's Evidence

15. The Sponsor adopted her witness statements dated  30th  September  2014
    and 13th April 2015 as  her  evidence.   She  was  questioned  by  both
    representatives and I have recorded all questions  and  answers  in  my
    Record of Proceedings and it is not necessary to reiterate  them  here.
    The Sponsor's evidence may be summarised as follows.

16. The Appellant and Sponsor married in Eritrea on 20th  May  2007.   They
    lived together as husband and wife following their marriage  until  the
    Appellant had to return to National Service on 20th July 2007.

17. The Sponsor last saw the Appellant on  25th  July  2008  in  Asmara  in
    Eritrea.  In November 2008 the  Eritrean  authorities  arrived  at  the
    Sponsor's home to search for the  Appellant  who  had  absconded.   The
    Sponsor was told to report  to  the  local  administration  office  and
    warned that if the Appellant did not surrender by 7th December 2008 the
    Sponsor would be put in detention if she did not give information as to
    his whereabouts.  On 5th December 2008 the  Sponsor  fled  Eritrea  and
    eventually arrived in the United Kingdom and claimed asylum.   She  was
    granted refugee status on 3rd June 2009.

18. The Sponsor was told by her nephew in  Eritrea  (who  was  subsequently
    granted entry clearance to join her in the United Kingdom) that on  7th
    December 2008 her home in Eritrea was raided and all the  documents  in
    the house taken away including wedding  photographs  and  her  marriage
    certificate.  Therefore  the  Sponsor  could  not  produce  documentary
    evidence of her marriage to the Appellant.  The Sponsor  did  not  feel
    able to contact her family in Eritrea, because she had left  illegally,
    and contact would put them in danger.  The Sponsor  produced  a  letter
    from Daniel Rezene, an Eritrean who had been granted leave to remain in
    the United  Kingdom,  and  who  confirmed  that  he  had  attended  the
    Appellant and Sponsor's wedding in Asmara in Eritrea.

19. On 5th September 2013 the Appellant made contact with the Sponsor again
    by telephone from Uganda, having obtained her contact  details  from  a
    mutual friend in Uganda.  The Appellant explained that he had  deserted
    the National Service and had been imprisoned but escaped on  10th  June
    2013 and travelled to Uganda via Sudan.  He had arrived  in  Uganda  on
    27th August 2013.

20. The Sponsor confirmed she had been using telephone  cards  to  maintain
    regular telephone contact with the  Appellant,  and  had  been  sending
    funds to him in Uganda,  and  this  was  evidenced  by  money  transfer
    receipts.

21. The Sponsor had obtained some photographs of herself and the  Appellant
    attending a friend's wedding in Eritrea on 14th July 2007.  Her  friend
    now lived in Finland, but had posted the photographs to  her,  and  the
    Sponsor contended that these photographs showed both  herself  and  the
    Appellant attending that wedding.

22. A friend of the Appellant, who because he was a trader was  allowed  to
    travel abroad from Eritrea, had obtained from  the  Appellant's  family
    home the Appellant's Eritrean identity card, and  academic  transcript,
    both of which contained photographs  of  the  Appellant.   The  Sponsor
    produced these documents as evidence of the Appellant's identity.

23. The Sponsor explained that Daniel Rezene who had given evidence  before
    the First-tier Tribunal, is suffering with mental health problems,  but
    this only became apparent after the First-tier  Tribunal  hearing.   He
    was therefore not fit to give further evidence.

24. The Sponsor confirmed that the Appellant  had  been  a  student  before
    being taken to  National  Service  in  April  or  May  2000.   A  peace
    agreement was signed on 20th June 2000, and he  then  returned  to  his
    studies, before being taken back into National Service in the summer of
    2001.  The Sponsor confirmed that she had not known  the  Appellant  at
    this point, but he had told her this information.

The Respondent's Submissions

25. Mr Avery relied upon the decision to refuse entry clearance dated  21st
    November 2013 and submitted that it was a matter for me to  assess  the
    oral and documentary evidence that had been provided.  I was  asked  to
    find that there had been no satisfactory explanation given as to why no
    documentary evidence of the Sponsor's wedding had taken place, although
    it was accepted that a wedding had taken place, it was the identity  of
    the groom that was relevant.

The Appellant's Submissions

26. Mr Stevens relied upon his skeleton argument contained at  pages  36-40
    of the Appellant's supplementary bundle.  In very brief summary  I  was
    asked to find that the cumulative effect of the  documentary  and  oral
    evidence was that the burden of proof  had  been  discharged,  and  the
    Appellant is Robel Ghermay who married the Sponsor  in  Eritrea  before
    she left that country and was granted  refugee  status  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

27. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusion and Reasons

28. When considering the Immigration Rules I remind myself that the  burden
    of proof is on the Appellant and the standard of proof is a balance  of
    probabilities.  This is an appeal against refusal  of  entry  clearance
    and therefore I must consider the  circumstances  appertaining  at  the
    date of refusal of entry clearance, which was 21st November 2013.

29. I have taken into account all the evidence both oral  and  documentary,
    placed before me, and considered that evidence  in  the  round.   If  a
    piece of evidence is not specifically referred to, this does  not  mean
    that it has not been considered, as it is impractical, and  unnecessary
    to rehearse every individual piece of evidence.

30. I find the Sponsor to be a credible witness.  I find her evidence to be
    consistent, and she  did  not  exaggerate  or  seek  to  embellish  her
    evidence.  She answered all questions put to her.

31. It is common ground that the Sponsor has been granted refugee status in
    this country.  The finding made by the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  she
    married an individual called Robel Ghermay in  Eritrea  before  leaving
    that country is preserved.

32. I am satisfied that the Sponsor's marriage took  place  in  Eritrea  on
    20th May 2007.  I note that when she claimed asylum, she named  as  her
    husband Robel Ghermay.  She also  named  as  part  of  her  family  her
    nephew, and subsequently she gave evidence at a Tribunal hearing, which
    was an appeal against the nephew's refusal of entry clearance.  I  have
    seen a copy of the Tribunal determination,  in  which  the  appeal  was
    allowed, and the Sponsor was described as "an essentially credible  and
    impressive witness" (paragraph 23 of the  determination).   It  is  not
    disputed that the Sponsor has maintained  telephone  contact  with  the
    Appellant after they established contact again in September  2013,  and
    has been sending money to him in Uganda.

33. The Sponsor made clear when the application  for  entry  clearance  was
    made by the Appellant, that it was not possible to produce  a  marriage
    certificate or photographs of their wedding, as these had been taken by
    the Eritrean authorities from her home in December 2008.

34. I note  that  the  Appellant's  original  Eritrean  identity  card  and
    academic transcript have been produced.  The originals, which have been
    retained by the Sponsor, contain the Appellant's photograph.   I  place
    weight upon these documents having considered the principles in Tanveer
    Ahmed [2002]  UKIAT  00439,  which  confirmed  that  if  an  individual
    produces documents, he or she must show  that  the  document  on  which
    reliance is to be placed, can be relied on.  A  decision  maker  should
    consider whether a document is one on which reliance should properly be
    placed after looking at all the evidence in the round.

35. The Appellant submitted a photograph with his Visa Application Form and
    the Appellant's photograph is attached to the Asylum Seeker Certificate
    dated 8th October 2013, issued by  the  Office  of  the  Ugandan  Prime
    Minister.  The copy that has been produced has been  certified  by  the
    Prime Minister's Office, and I accept that the original  has  not  been
    produced, as the Appellant would require this in Uganda.  I accept  the
    point made in the refusal decision, that it is not clear what  evidence
    the  Appellant  produced  to  the  Ugandan  authorities  to  prove  his
    identity.

36. However I am satisfied that the photographs  on  the  Visa  Application
    Form, the Eritrean identity card,  the  academic  transcript,  and  the
    Asylum Seeker Certificate are of the same person.

37. I have also seen the photographs produced of the Sponsor and  Appellant
    attending a friend's wedding in Eritrea on 14th July  2007.   This  was
    shortly before the  Appellant  had  to  return  to  undertake  National
    Service.  I am satisfied that both the Sponsor  and  Appellant  can  be
    identified in these photographs.  I am satisfied that the Appellant  is
    the same person whose photograph appears  on  the  documents  mentioned
    earlier.

38. I am satisfied, on a balance of probabilities, that  a  combination  of
    the documentary and photographic evidence, and the  Sponsor's  credible
    oral evidence, proves that the Appellant is Robel Ghermay  who  married
    the Sponsor in Eritrea before the Sponsor left that  country  to  claim
    asylum in the United Kingdom.

39. I therefore conclude that the Appellant is married to the  Sponsor  who
    has refugee status in the United Kingdom, and the marriage  took  place
    before the Sponsor left Eritrea to claim asylum.  The  requirements  of
    paragraph 352A(i) and (ii) are satisfied and the appeal succeeds  under
    the Immigration Rules.

40. Because I allow the appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules,  it  is  not
    necessary to go on and consider Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and  was
set aside.  I substitute a fresh decision.

The appeal is allowed under the Immigration Rules.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made no anonymity  direction.   There  has  been  no
request for anonymity and I see no reason why an anonymity order  should  be
made.



Signed        Date: 6th May 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Because the appeal is allowed I  have  considered  whether  to  make  a  fee
award.  I take the  view  that  the  appeal  has  been  allowed  because  of
additional evidence placed before the Tribunal, which  was  not  before  the
original decision maker.  I therefore do not make a fee award.



Signed        Date: 6th May 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
