

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers:
                                                               OA/23024/2012
                                                               OA/23025/2012
                                                               OA/23026/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 18th September 2014                       |On 22nd October 2014         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                               Hawo Osman Abdi
                         Abdiweli Mohammad Gar Hirsi
                          Ayaan Mohamed Garad Hirsi
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                      Entry Clearance Officer, Nairobi
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:            Mr Brown,  Counsel instructed by Bolton and
District CAB
For the Respondent:     Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are all nationals of Somalia. They  are  respectively  a
    mother and her two minor children born in 2006 and  2009.  They  appeal
    with permission[1] the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Heynes) to dismiss their appeals against the ECO's decision  to  refuse
    them entry clearance as the dependent family members of a refugee.

 2. The Sponsor is a Mr Mohammad Hirsi Esse. He is a  national  of  Somali,
    formerly habitually resident in Hargadera refugee camp,  Kenya. On  the
    28th September 2011 Mr Esse was interviewed by  an  official  from  the
    UNHCR in respect of his application to be admitted to the UK under  the
    "Gateway" programme.   He told that officer that he was single and that
    he had no children.  His application was successful  and  on  the  16th
    January 2012 he entered the UK having been granted refugee status.

 3. On the 13th September 2012 the Appellants made applications to join him
    as  his  dependent  family  members.  The  First  Appellant   made   an
    application as his spouse  under  paragraph  352A  of  the  Immigration
    Rules. She stated that they had married in August 2002.  The Second and
    Third  Appellants  made  applications  as  Mr  Esse's  children   under
    paragraph 352D.   They relied  on  birth  certificates  issued  by  the
    Kenyan authorities which named Mr Esse as their father.

 4. The applications were all rejected. In notices dated 18th October  2012
    the Respondent points out that Mr Esse had made  no  mention  of  being
    married with children in his application for entry clearance under  the
    Gateway programme. He had in fact been part of a different family unit,
    it being claimed that  he  was  a  dependent  member  of  his  sister's
    household.

 5. By the time the matter came before the First-tier Tribunal DNA evidence
    had been produced which confirmed that the Second and Third  Appellants
    are the biological children of Mr Esse.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    regard to the evidence given by Mr Esse. It was  the  Appellants'  case
    that his relationship with the First Appellant had been kept secret  in
    the camp where they were both living for  fear  of  discrimination  and
    trouble. He is from  the  Ogaden  tribe  and  the  First  Appellant  is
    Madiban. When he met her she already had a child by another man. He was
    concerned that his family would not approve.   She was  concerned  that
    she would be at risk from her own clan. They  therefore  conducted  the
    relationship in secret.  Documentary evidence included money remittance
    slips showing  he  had  sent  her  money  and  a  marriage  certificate
    purportedly issued on the 6th May 2002.  He admitted to having lied  to
    the officer who conducted the Gateway interview. He wanted to hide  his
    relationship  with  the  First   Appellant   from   his   sister;   his
    representative acknowledged that it was also in order to gain advantage
    under the resettlement scheme.


 6. The First-tier Tribunal accepted that since  Kenya  was  the  Sponsor's
    former country of habitual residence, a marriage conducted there  prior
    to entry to the UK could qualify for consideration  under  the  refugee
    family reunion provisions:  AA  (Marriage  :  Country  of  Nationality)
    Somalia [2004] UKIAT 00031. It  was  accepted,  on  the  basis  of  the
    unchallenged marriage certificate,  that the marriage had  taken  place
    in 2002. The DNA evidence  demonstrated  that  the  children  were  the
    Sponsor's, and on that basis the Tribunal was prepared to  accept  that
    the relationship between the First Appellant and Sponsor was subsisting
    at least until the birth of the Third Appellant in 2009.  The  Tribunal
    was not however prepared to find that the Appellants were part  of  the
    Sponsor's family unit at the date that he left the camp. His account of
    their secret relationship was "wholly incredible".  It was not possible
    that he would have managed to keep the  relationship  hidden  from  his
    family for ten years and the fact that his  sister  apparently  has  no
    problem with it  illustrates  how  unlikely  it  is  to  be  true  (the
    determination also notes that his account of making off at night to see
    his secret family was at odds with the evidence  given  by  his  sister
    during the Gateway process which was that he was always  at  home  with
    her).   The Sponsor had shown himself to be  "transparently  untruthful
    and unreliable" and the Tribunal was not prepared to accept anything he
    said without corroborative evidence. There was no evidence that he  had
    been supporting the Appellants before he left Kenya, nor  indeed  until
    shortly before they made their applications.   The  fact  that  he  was
    prepared to leave them behind, unprotected, in a refugee camp indicated
    that he was no longer in a relationship with the First Appellant at the
    time that he left.  It was therefore not accepted that  he  intends  to
    now live with her in the UK. As to the Third and Second Appellants,  it
    followed from the finding in respect of their mother  that  they  could
    not succeed, being unable to show that they were part of the  Sponsor's
    family at the time that he left Kenya.


 7. The grounds of  appeal  are  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  the
    following errors of law:


        . Perverse reasoning. If the Sponsor is found to have lied  in  his
          Gateway  interview  about  having  a  wife  and  children,   that
          conclusion cannot rationally lead to a conclusion that they  were
          not part of his family unit when he was interviewed
        . Failure to take into account the evidence of intervening devotion
        . Inadequate assessment of Article 8 ECHR

 8. The Respondent opposes the appeal on all grounds.




    Error of Law

 9. In granting permission Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley found  some  merit
    in the first point:

         "It is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  approach  to
         the sponsor's evidence was impermissible, given that his  deception
         related to whether he was married, and it was accepted that he  was
         married"

    In other words,  it  could  be  said  to  be  perverse  to  reject  the
    proposition that this man is currently married (and intends  to  remain
    so) because he lied and said that he wasn't in 2011. If he lied on that
    occasion  and  was  in  fact  married  with  children,  that  raises  a
    presumption that he is still married now. That is not however  the  sum
    total of the First-tier Tribunal's reasoning. The Tribunal rejected the
    contention that this was a subsisting relationship on  another  ground,
    namely that the Sponsor voluntarily left the Appellant's in  a  refugee
    camp without his protection.   The point in the grounds of appeal  that
    there are "no protection needs" in the camp is surprising  to  say  the
    least, given that  this  Tribunal  frequently  hears  evidence  of  the
    vulnerability of lone women (with or without young children) in Dadaab.
      That was a finding properly open to the First-tier Tribunal.


10. In respect of the Sponsor's reliability as a witness,  the  point  that
    the determination makes is a simple one. He has shown a willingness  to
    lie to immigration  officials  for  his  own  end:  little  weight  can
    therefore be attached to  his  evidence  about  the  claimed  situation
    today.   It is apparent from the determination that  Judge  Heynes  was
    singularly unimpressed with the Sponsor.  He  had  told  lies  to  take
    advantage of the Gateway scheme, he had lied in the present  appeal  in
    concocting the account of the 'secret' relationship and on  that  basis
    Judge Heynes was not prepared to take anything he said at  face  value.
    At 40 he says this: "a person who shows such a persistent disregard for
    the truth cannot complain if the fact-finding exercise is  obscured  by
    his dishonesty". That is effectively a finding that the Appellants have
    not discharged the burden of proof. It is not irrational.


11. In respect of the evidence of intervening devotion this amounted to one
    photograph sent to the Sponsor from Kenya, and  nine  money  remittance
    slips, all but two of which are recorded as having been  considered  in
    the determination. Aside from these  two  slips,  dated  in  the  weeks
    following the application, all of  the  other  material  was  expressly
    considered. The  First-tier  Tribunal  declined  to  place  significant
    weight on the material that  was  recorded,  and  I  cannot  think  its
    conclusions would have been different if the two later slips  had  also
    been included in its deliberations. It was accepted that  the  children
    are his, and it would be natural - and  indeed  obligatory  -  that  he
    support them financially. That does not  establish  that  he  is  in  a
    subsisting relationship with the First Appellant.

12. This leads to the troubling aspect of this case.  That  is  that  these
    children are excluded from enjoying refugee family reunion rights  with
    their father.  The grounds of appeal rely  on  Article  8,  and  it  is
    correct to say that the reasoning on Article 8 in the determination  is
    scant.   It is however clear that any interference with the  children's
    right to enjoy a family life with their father is in this case entirely
    disproportionate since on their case their father has only gained entry
    to, and status in, the UK by lying about their existence.   The  simple
    answer to any Article 8 case is that he should return to Dabaab  to  be
    with his children. The question remains whether the biological children
    of the Sponsor could be considered to be members  of  his  family  unit
    even if he were not living with them at the time that  he  left  Kenya.
    The relevant paragraph of the Rules is 352D:
         352D. The requirements to be met by a person seeking leave to enter
         or remain in the United Kingdom in order to join or remain with the
         parent who is currently a refugee granted status as such under the
         immigration rules in the United Kingdom are that the applicant:
         (i) is the child of a parent who is currently a refugee granted
         status as such under the immigration rules in the United Kingdom;
         and
         (ii) is under the age of 18, and
         (iii) is not leading an independent life, is unmarried and is not a
         civil partner, and has not formed an independent family unit; and
         (iv) was part of the family unit of the person granted asylum at
         the time that the person granted asylum left the country of his
         habitual residence in order to seek asylum; and
         (v) would not be excluded from protection by virtue of article 1F
         of the United Nations Convention and Protocol relating to the
         Status of Refugees if he were to seek asylum in his own right; and
         (vi) if seeking leave to enter, holds a valid United Kingdom entry
         clearance for entry in this capacity.
13. The only matter in issue is (iv). Mr McVeety submitted that  the  plain
    and ordinary meaning of those words would  exclude  children  who  were
    living in a another household with another  main  carer  prior  to  the
    Sponsor's departure from Kenya. I would agree. At  the  hearing  I  did
    however indicate that I would look, with the parties' consent,  at  the
    relevant Immigration Directorates Instructions to see if there  is  any
    policy or concession therein that might assist  the  Second  and  Third
    Appellants.  I could find nothing. Any references to the  term  "family
    unit" are invariably preceding by the words "living together in...".


14. I find that the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  contains  no
    error of law. The burden of proof was on  the  Appellants  and  on  the
    limited evidence available the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  entitled  to
    reach the conclusions it did.



      Decisions


15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error of law and it
    is upheld.

16. I make no direction as to anonymity. No such  direction  was  requested
    and I see no reason to make one.

                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           21st October 2014
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission to appeal was initially refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge
Nightingale on the 24th December 2013 but was granted upon renewed
application on the 28th January 2014 by Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul.

