
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/23545/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 22 July 2014                               |On 18 August 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY



                                   Between

                               ABHISEK GURUNG

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No attendance
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, a Home Office Presenting Officer

        DETERMINATION AND REASONS FOR FINDING A MATERIAL ERROR OF LAW

Introduction

1.   This is an appeal  by  the  respondent  in  the  Tribunal  below  ("the
    Secretary of State") against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to
    allow  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer ("ECO") refusing entry clearance to the UK.   I  will
    refer to  the  appellant  by  his  designation  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal even though he is the respondent in this tribunal.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Nepal who was born on  30  October  1994.
    He applied for entry clearance to the UK as a dependent child  of  Roma
    Gurung.  Roma Gurung claimed to be the widow of  an  ex-  British  army
    Gurkha. She applied to settle in the UK and the appellant applied to go
    with her.  Following an interview by telephone with Roma Gurung  on  10
    and 11 September 2012, on 12 November 2012 the ECO  decided  to  reject
    the  application  for  entry  clearance  under  paragraph  297  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

3.   The Entry Clearance Officer decided that the  appellant  could  not  be
    accommodated without recourse to public funds  in  accommodation  which
    his parent, parents or relative of the child was seeking to join  owned
    or occupied exclusively.  In addition, the ECO was not  satisfied  that
    the appellant would be maintained adequately by the parent, parents  or
    relative without recourse to public funds under paragraph  297(iv)  and
    (v).  In addition, the ECO took into account the  requirements  of  the
    Human Rights Act which  incorporated  into  English  law  the  European
    Convention   on   Human   Rights   (ECHR)   and   in   particular   the
    responsibilities on the  UK  to  comply  with  Article  8.   Article  8
    protects the right of an individual to a private or family  life.   The
    ECO considered the  requirements  of  Article  8  but  noted  that  the
    appellant had step-siblings in Nepal, the appellant's father had  lived
    in Hong Kong but had since died and there was  no  guarantee  that  the
    family unit would be reunited in the UK.  The  appellant's  mother  was
    not present and settled in the UK at  the  date  of  the  decision  (12
    November 2012) and the appellant was by then 18.  Mrs  Gurung  did  not
    come to the UK until 10th January 2013, according to paragraph 7 of the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal. The ECO  therefore  considered  he
    was justified in refusing the appellant's application on  human  rights
    grounds as well as under the rules.

4.   Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  L  K  Gibbs  considered  that  the
    appellant had not demonstrated  that  he  satisfied  the  accommodation
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.  Accordingly, the appellant  did
    not qualify for entry clearance under paragraph 297(iv) of those Rules.
     However, having considered the correct approach to Article 8 in  cases
    such as Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640 IAC there were,  in  the  Immigration
    Judge's view, reasons for finding that on balance the refusal of  entry
    clearance was a breach of Article 8 of the ECHR.

Proceedings before the Upper Tribunal

5.   The Secretary of State lodged an application for permission  to  appeal
    with accompanying grounds.  These were lodged  on  2  May  2014.   They
    state that the First-tier Tribunal erred in its assessment  of  Article
    8.  The Immigration Rules sufficiently recognised the need for  private
    or family life to be promoted in certain circumstances but there was no
    evidence that the relationship between the  appellant  and  his  mother
    amounted to "more than the normal emotional ties" that existed  between
    such close relations.   It  was  therefore  submitted  that  the  Judge
    materially  misdirected  herself  on  law  and  there  were  compelling
    circumstances justifying setting aside the decision.

6.   In granting  permission,  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Brunnen
    thought that it was arguable that there was no  sustainable  basis  for
    finding that family life existed or for finding that  the  respondent's
    decision  was  disproportionate  for  the  purposes   of   Article   8.
    Accordingly, there were no arguably  good  grounds  for  the  judge  to
    conclude that  Article  8  was  engaged  and  the  Secretary  of  State
    therefore was given permission to appeal on that basis.

7.   A notice of hearing was sent out on 17 June 2014  indicating  that  the
    appeal would be heard at 2pm on 22 July at Field House.  It was sent to
    the appellant's stated representatives,  then  an  organisation  called
    Enough is Enough, and  sent  to  the  appellant  personally.   Standard
    directions were issued which indicated that the  Upper  Tribunal  would
    decide the case on the evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    would not hear fresh evidence not before that Tribunal.   Bundles  were
    to be filed with any  documents  to  be  relied  on  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

8.   Shortly before the  lunch  adjournment  a  fax  was  submitted  to  the
    Tribunal by Enough is Enough indicating  that  the  appellant's  direct
    access barrister was "unaware of  the  hearing."   I  caused  an  email
    response to be written.  This stated that the hearing would proceed  at
    2pm notwithstanding the lack of attendance by any legal representative.
     There was in fact no attendance on  behalf  of  the  appellant  and  I
    proceeded to deal with the appeal in his absence.  Having regard to the
    requirements of Rule 38 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 I decided it was appropriate to proceed with the hearing  in
    the absence of the appellant since he had clearly been given notice  of
    the hearing. The absence of his legal  representative  was  regrettable
    but not a matter justifying adjourning the proceedings and it  did  not
    appear to be in the interests of justice to do so.

9.   I heard brief submissions by Mr Tufan who  said  that  the  Immigration
    Judge had erred in allowing the appeal under Article 8.   He  had  made
    contradictory  findings.   Having  clearly  found  an  absence  of  the
    required  accommodation  in  paragraph  14  of  her  determination  the
    Immigration Judge should not have even gone on to consider Article 8 on
    these facts.  As an "out of country" case the appellant had the  burden
    of showing there was some exceptional basis  for  allowing  her  appeal
    outside the Immigration Rules before a claim based on Article  8  could
    be justified.

10.  At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision as to whether  or  not
    there was a material error of law in the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Discussion

11.  The appellant has a complicated family background.  His father,  Manbah
    Adur, was in the Gurkhas and his mother, Roma, was Manbar Adur's second
    wife. Manbah Adur's first wife, Chandrakurmari, had chosen not to  take
    up her right to  settle  in  the  UK  having  considered  the  guidance
    outlined in the IDI at chapter 15.  The appellant's father had died  in
    Hong Kong on 3 March 2008.

12.  I remind myself that as  this  was  an  entry  clearance  case  it  was
    necessary for the First-tier Tribunal to consider the evidence  at  the
    date of the decision, not at the date of the hearing (see  section  85A
    (2) of the Nationality , Immigration and Asylum Act 2002).  The date of
    refusal was 12 November 2012. As at the date of the decision  Roma  had
    not even settled in the UK.  She claimed to have done so by the date of
    the hearing, it seems,  from  the  Immigration  Judge's  determination,
    solely for the purpose of giving evidence at that hearing.

13.  It seems that by the date of the hearing the appellant and  his  mother
    were separated, the appellant remaining  in  Nepal  with  Mrs  Gurung's
    sister and her sister's daughter.  By the  date  of  the  decision  the
    appellant had reached 18.

14.  It is also relevant to note  that  at  the  date  of  the  hearing  Mrs
    Gurung's stepson , Mr Gurung, gave  evidence  to  the  effect  that  he
    could not accommodate  the  appellant  because  it  had  not  yet  been
    arranged with his landlord.  There was also  evidence  at  the  hearing
    that  Mrs Gurung sent money back to Nepal for the benefit of her son.

Consideration of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal

15.   Dealing  with  the  restriction   on   post-decision   evidence,   the
    Immigration Judge said at paragraph 13 of her  determination  that  she
    was entitled to take into account evidence not before the ECO  provided
    it appertained to  the  circumstances  existing  at  the  date  of  the
    decision.  Having taken account of the evidence she found in  paragraph
    14 of her determination that the refusal had been correctly made  under
    paragraph 297 (iv) of the Immigration Rules. However,  the  Immigration
    Judge then went on to consider Article 8.

16.  The fundamental problem with the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    in relation to the application of that article is the lack of analysis.
     The appellant's mother had not come to the  UK  at  the  date  of  the
    decision is ignored and the appellant and Mrs Gurung  had  not  by  the
    date of the hearing formed any family life in the UK.

17.  The Immigration Judge  attached  weight  to  the  "historic  injustice"
    suffered by the Gurkhas but I find that was not  a  proper  reason  for
    embarking on a "freestanding" Article 8 claim  and  deciding  that  the
    Secretary of State would be in breach of her international  obligations
    by refusing entry clearance to a foreign national.  Article 8 does  not
    guarantee that family life must be exercised within the UK, as has been
    repeatedly said in the cases.

18.  In any  event,  the  Immigration  Judge  appears  to  have  adopted  an
    incorrect approach to Article 8.  She claims to have attached weight to
    the needs of the respondent to control immigration in paragraph  21  of
    her determination.  She then went on to assess proportionality.   First
    of all it was wrong of the Immigration Judge to decide as a  fact  that
    the appellant could be accommodated  in  the  UK  without  recourse  to
    public funds.  She had already found that the appellant  could  not  be
    accommodated by the sponsor in paragraph 14 of her determination.   Who
    else was to accommodate the appellant? Additionally,  she  did  not  in
    fact consider the public interest of controlling immigration  into  the
    UK  or the possible expense to the public purse/pressure  on  resources
    by virtue of the fact that the appellant a foreign migrant  would  have
    no place to live and no employment here.

19.  I find that this was a determination which  did  not  properly  analyse
    the requirements of a freestanding Article 8 claim  if  indeed  such  a
    claim should have been considered at all.  It  seems  the  evidence  of
    family life was questionable even if the Immigration Judge was entitled
    to look at post-decision evidence in that regard (see paragraphs 43 and
    44 in the case of Patel [2013] 1 All ER 1157 which  suggests  there  is
    jurisdiction to consider any new matter).

20.  In the light of  these  criticisms  of  the  approach  adopted  by  the
    Immigration judge I find that there was a material error  of  law  such
    that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal must be set aside.   Given
    that there is no basis on which an Article 8  claim  could  succeed  on
    these facts I find that entry clearance was correctly refused  in  this
    case.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material error of law  in
relation to the allowing of the  appeal  under  Article  8.   That  decision
falls to be set aside.  I substitute the decision of this Tribunal which  is
to dismiss  the  appeal  on  Article  8  grounds.   Accordingly,  the  ECO's
decision       to        refuse        entry        clearance        stands.







Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury


