
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/23480/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14 October 2013                            |On 22 October 2013           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PETER LANE

                                   Between

                         Thilagawathy chelvararagah

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - CHENAI

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Singer, Counsel, instructed by Sriharans
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms H Horsley, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   On 14 October 2013, I sat to re-make the decision  in  the  appellant's
    appeal, as regards Article 8 of the ECHR.  This  followed  the  setting
    aside  in  September  2013  of  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, which  had  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision to refuse her  entry  clearance  as  a  dependent
    relative.  I set out below the decision on error of law and  subsequent
    set aside, made by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray:-

         "1.  The appellant in these  proceedings  is  the  Entry  Clearance
             Officer but for convenience I shall now refer to  the  parties
             as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.


         2.   The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka  born  on  1  December
             1928.  She appealed against the  decision  of  the  respondent
             refusing her entry clearance to the UK as an  adult  dependent
             relative under Appendix FM of HC395 as amended.  The  date  of
             the refusal was 17 October 2012.   The  appeal  was  heard  by
             First-tier Tribunal Judge Hawden-Beale  on  15  May  2013  and
             dismissed under  the  Immigration  Rules  in  a  determination
             promulgated on 28 May 2013.


         3.   An application for permission to appeal was granted  by  Judge
             of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Macdonald.   The   grounds   of
             application state that the judge erred in law by treating  the
             application as having been made after 9 July 2012,  the  judge
             erred in his findings that the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
             requirements of the Rules and erred in  his  assessment  under
             Article 8 ECHR.


         4.   There is a response to the grounds of appeal by the respondent
             under Rule 24, being that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  directed
             itself appropriately and gave full reasons for concluding that
             the application was not validly made prior to the rule  change
             and finding  that  Appendix  FM  now  applies.   The  response
             accepts that the judge's finding on Article  8  is  inadequate
             but states that this is immaterial in light  of  his  findings
             regarding Appendix FM and states that as the judge found  that
             the appeal failed under the Rules no separate  assessment  for
             Article 8 was required.


         5.   Mr Singer, for the appellant, submitted that the appellant was
             aged 83 at the date of the decision and is now 84 and  whether
             the claim should be decided pre 9 July 2012  or  post  9  July
             2012 is extremely important in this case.  He  submitted  that
             in  respect  of  accommodation  the  application  would   have
             succeeded under paragraph 317 before the new Rules  came  into
             being on 9 July 2012.


         6.   He submitted that the judge may not have  considered  all  the
             evidence before reaching her decision.  I was referred to  the
             Affidavits dated in July 2013.  He stated that the facts  were
             before the judge relating to the actual  application  made  by
             the appellant.  I was referred to the letter dated 9 July 2012
             to the Entry Clearance Officer from the appellant.  This gives
             details of how the application was made on 6  July  2012  when
             the appellant went to the VFS centre and  was  told  that  she
             required her birth certificate although she had  her  passport
             with her date of birth therein.  The appellant paid the fee in
             cash on 6 July but because she was unable to produce her birth
             certificate  the  money  was  returned  to  her.   Mr   Singer
             submitted that this was an error on  the  part  of  the  Entry
             Clearance Officer as the appellant's birth certificate was not
             required.  On the same day the  appellant's  daughter  made  a
             correct online application on behalf of the appellant, on  her
             instructions.  When an online  application  is  made  the  fee
             cannot of course be paid.  A reply was received asking for the
             supporting documents to be submitted on 19 July.  She was told
             that the online application dated 9 July was  invalid  as  the
             VFS centre had been advised not to accept any application with
             dates before 9 July 2012.  Because of this the application was
             considered after 9 July 2012.  Mr Singer  submitted  that  had
             the correct advice been given on  6  July  with  the  original
             application then the application would have been successful as
             it would  have  been  considered  before  9  July  2012  under
             paragraph 317.


         7.   I was asked to consider whether the appellant  was  given  the
             wrong advice on 6 July as if so her  application  should  have
             been considered under Rule 317.  It was submitted that if  the
             appellant was wrongly prevented from  making  the  application
             before 9 July 2013 then this  historic  wrong  should  now  be
             righted and the application should be considered under the old
             Rules.


         8.   I pointed to the Entry Clearance Manager's review letter which
             states that some of the documents supplied  after  the  online
             application was made and at interview on 19 July,  were  dated
             after 6 July 2012.


         9.   Mr Singer submitted that  the  appellant  is  an  elderly  and
             vulnerable woman and this issue should be looked at with care.




         10.  Mr Singer then asked  me  to  consider  section  EC-DR2.4  and
             whether  the  appellant,  because  of  her  age,  illness   or
             disability, requires long term personal care to perform  every
             day tasks.  The judge found  that  she  did  not  but  it  was
             submitted that by coming to this  conclusion  he  cannot  have
             considered properly the medical evidence before him, the  oral
             evidence given  in  court  or  the  appellant's  compassionate
             reasons.  The judge refers  to  age,  illness  and  disability
             instead of age, illness or disability.  It was submitted  that
             the substitution of the  word  "and"  for  the  word  "or"  is
             significant and that had the judge properly considered this he
             would have found that the requirements of section EC-DR2.4 had
             been met.


         11.   With  regard  to  the  requirements  of  EC-DR2.5  Mr  Singer
             submitted that this is a very  onerous  rule.   It  refers  to
             there having to be no person in the whole of Sri Lanka who can
             reasonably  provide  the  required  levels  of  care  for  the
             appellant and it was submitted  that  this  appellant's  human
             rights have to be considered relating to  this.   Because  the
             appellant has a maid, the judge found  that  this  requirement
             had not been satisfied.


         12.  Mr Singer submitted that Ground 4 - the  lack  of  a  separate
             assessment under Article 8 of ECHR - is the  strongest  issue.
             He submitted that the appellant in  this  case  can  meet  the
             terms of the new Rules but if I find  that  that  is  not  the
             case, Article 8 of the  ECHR  needs  to  be  dealt  with.   He
             submitted that the respondent has accepted  that  the  judge's
             findings on Article 8 are inadequate.  I  was  asked  to  find
             that this is a material error.  The  judge  has  not  properly
             applied the 5 stage test in Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27  and  the
             rights of the appellant and her wider family members  must  be
             looked at.  It was submitted that the judge has  not  balanced
             this with  the  legitimate  requirements  of  the  Immigration
             Rules.


         13.  The respondent's argument is that if the claim cannot meet the
             terms of the Rules then it must fail but it was submitted that
             that  is  not  the  case,  the   Rules   cannot   meet   every
             circumstances and I was referred to the cases of MS [2013]  CS
             IH52 and Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin).


         14.  In his  determination  the  judge  states  that  the  decision
             maintains the status quo but what he should have considered is
             whether   the   continuance   of   the   status   quo   is   a
             disproportionate violation and I was asked to find  that  this
             is the case.  It was  submitted  that  Article  8  has  to  be
             considered in the proper way and the judge has not done this.


         15.  Mr Singer submitted that there should be a rehearing  of  this
             case with  the  appellant's  daughter  and  son-in-law  giving
             evidence and if I find that an inadequate  decision  has  been
             made then the claim should be remitted back to the First-tier.


         16.  I was also asked  to  take  into  account  when  dealing  with
             Article 8, the issues the appellant faced on 6 July 2012  when
             she made her original application and paid her  fee.   It  was
             submitted that she was unfairly deprived of the opportunity of
             making a pre 9 July 2012 application.  This has not been taken
             into account in the balancing exercise and  it  was  submitted
             that if it had been it is likely that  the  claim  would  have
             succeeded.


         17.  The Presenting Officer made his  submissions  relying  on  the
             Rule 24 response.


         18.  He referred to the said letter of 19 July 2012  and  submitted
             that this letter refers to the refund of the application  fee.
             He submitted that there is no valid application if no  fee  is
             paid and the judge was right to find that this application has
             to be considered under the new Rules and not  under  paragraph
             317 of the old Rules.  He pointed  out  that  several  of  the
             documents submitted at the interview on  19  July  were  dated
             after 6 July 2012.  I was referred  to  paragraph  19  of  the
             determination which deals with this point.  It is  clear  that
             the judge was not satisfied that a valid application was  made
             before 9  July  2012.   He  submitted  that  the  findings  in
             paragraph 19 of the determination were open for the  judge  to
             make.


         19.  With regard to EC-DR2.4 and EC-DR2.5, the  Presenting  Officer
             submitted that the case is being reargued here.  The judge has
             taken into account the terms of the  Rules  and  the  evidence
             before him and has come to  a  decision  he  was  entitled  to
             reach.  He has properly explained his decision.


         20.   With  regard  to  Ground  4  and  the  inadequate  Article  8
             assessment  the  Presenting  Officer  asked  me  to  look   at
             materiality.  He submitted that the judge cannot be blamed for
             looking at the matter in the way he did.  He had clearly taken
             into account all the evidence before him including the medical
             evidence and it was submitted that there was little before the
             judge  for  him  to  consider  relating  to  Article  8.   The
             Presenting  Officer  submitted  that  it  is  not  clear  what
             arguments were put to the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  There is
             nothing to show that the arguments now being made were put  to
             him.  At paragraph 24 of the determination  the  judge  states
             "The decision merely continues the status quo as it  has  been
             for many years and I have heard nothing to suggest that family
             life cannot continue as  it  has  done,  by  choice  over  the
             years."  The  Presenting  Officer  submitted  that  Article  8
             rights are not protected if there is a choice involved  as  to
             where family life should be catered for.   He  submitted  that
             this point was not made to the judge.  Paragraphs 21 and 22 of
             the determination deal with  EC-DR2.4  and  EC-DR2.5  and  the
             judge refers to the lack of evidence to support the fact  that
             the appellant needs help to perform every  day  tasks  and  is
             unable to cook for herself, apart from the statements from her
             family.  He goes on to note that the appellant is being looked
             after by a servant and that practical help in Sri Lanka  is  a
             possibility and is presently  happening  in  Sri  Lanka.   The
             judge at paragraph 23 states that he has  every  sympathy  for
             the sponsor who does not want her elderly mother to be  alone.
             She would rather she was with the family but the sponsor  left
             Sri Lanka voluntarily and it must have  been  known  that  her
             mother would get old and perhaps lose her faculties.   It  was
             submitted that the judge has taken all of  these  points  into
             consideration  and  even  if  all  these  points  were  raised
             specifically before him, his  decision  would  have  been  the
             same.  At paragraphs 21 to 23 the judge deals with Article  8,
             taking into account the appellant's  whole  family  emigrating
             from Sri Lanka over a passage of time.


         21.  The appellant's representative then submitted that the grounds
             of application are pleading Article 8 specifically,  in  light
             of all the above matters. Although the judge may find that the
             Article 8 aspect of  the  Rules  cannot  be  met  the  judge's
             decision must take into account Article  8  of  the  ECHR,  in
             particular the appellant's health and the fact  that  all  her
             family members are in the United Kingdom.   It  was  submitted
             that there is no proportionality assessment by the  judge  and
             this is a case where even if the terms of the Rules cannot  be
             met, to dismiss the appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR must be
             disproportionate.  It is not clear from the determination  how
             the balancing exercise was carried out and Mr Singer submitted
             that  a  rehearing  is  required  with  an  actual  Article  8
             assessment carried out by the judge.  He  submitted  that  the
             determination is silent on Article 8 of the  ECHR  and  I  was
             referred to the Entry Clearance Manager's review in the bundle
             and the appellant's right to family life.   It  was  submitted
             that Article 8 must be engaged  and  the  respondent  has  not
             looked at the wider aspect of Article 8 outside the Rules.


         22.  I was asked to direct a rehearing before me or by  the  First-
             tier Tribunal.


         Determination


         23.  I have given serious consideration as to  whether  the  appeal
             should be considered under the Immigration Rules before 9 July
             2012 or the Rules after 9 July 2012.  It is clear that no  fee
             was paid apart from the fee which was reimbursed before 9 July
             2012.  There  is  no  evidence  of  the  fee  being  paid  and
             reimbursed, apart from the witness's evidence.  Because no fee
             was accepted, no valid application can be said  to  have  been
             made before that date.  There is also the fact  that  some  of
             the evidence which was submitted at the interview on 19  July,
             was dated after 6 July  2012.   I  find  that  the  judge  was
             correct to find that this application  has  to  be  considered
             post 9 July  2012.   This  can  be  given  consideration  when
             Article 8 of ECHR is considered.


         24.  The grounds of application relating to Article 8 of ECHR  make
             a valid point, which is accepted by the respondent in his Rule
             24 response.  "The judge's finding  on  Article  8  is  almost
             certainly inadequate but arguably immaterial in light  of  his
             findings regarding Appendix FM."


         25.  The  judge  has  found  that  the  Article  8  aspect  of  the
             Immigration Rules cannot be met.  I find that there is a "good
             arguable reason" for the claim to be considered under  Article
             8  of  the  ECHR.   There  have  been  problems  outwith   the
             appellant's control relating to her application and  this  has
             to  be  taken  into  account  along   with   the   appellant's
             circumstances in Sri Lanka, her state of health and  the  fact
             that all her family members have left  Sri  Lanka.   I  accept
             that they left through choice and must have  been  aware  that
             what is now happening to the appellant  could  happen  in  her
             later years.  The fact that the judge did not  carry  out  the
             balancing exercise and did not take into account, not only the
             case of Razgar but the other relevant Article 8 cases and  the
             human rights of not only the appellant but also of her  family
             members, is sufficient for there to be an error of law in  the
             determination.  There are points in favour of  her  Article  8
             claim  and  points   against   her   Article   8   claim   but
             proportionality has to be properly argued  and  the  reasoning
             narrated in  the  determination.   A  structured  decision  is
             necessary on this point.


         DECISION


         26.  The original Tribunal made a material  error  of  law  by  not
             considering Article 8 of the ECHR and by not  carrying  out  a
             proper balancing exercise.


         27.  The First-tier  decision  under  the  Immigration  Rules  must
             stand.  The appeal is dismissed under the Rules.


         28.  I direct a second stage hearing on Article 8 of ECHR only.


         29.  No anonymity order is made."

2.   Pursuant to rule 15(2A) of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008, I permitted the appellant to file a  witness  statement  of
    her daughter Mrs Sivayogasuntaram dated October 2013, with attachments.
     These materials related to a visit made by her to the appellant in Sri
    Lanka in August 2013.  I made it plain that  the  question  of  whether
    this evidence could be substantively considered in connection with  the
    remaking of the appeal depended upon the operation of section 85A(2) of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, whereby in an  appeal
    of this  kind,  the  Tribunal  "may  consider  only  the  circumstances
    appertaining at the time of the decision".

3.    Mrs  Sivayogasuntaram  spoke  to  her  witness  statement,  which  she
    confirmed was true (as was the earlier statement adduced in  connection
    with the proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal).  The witness said
    that the servant who had been looking after the appellant had moved  to
    Colombo.   The  servant  had  observed  that  the  appellant  had  been
    frequently getting upset and had not been eating.  Another servant  had
    been hired, but she had indicated that she would be unable to stay  for
    more than a short period.

4.   The appellant was taken by the witness to Jaffna Teaching Hospital  for
    a period of tests and observations, following which she  was  diagnosed
    as having "early  onset  of  dementia".   Reference  is  also  made  to
    depression in the appellant's "diagnosis ticket", comprising one of the
    attachments to the  witnesses'  statement.   The  doctors  advised  the
    witness to give  special  attention  to  safety  issues  regarding  the
    appellant.  The witness said that she was advised  that  the  appellant
    needed 24 hour constant care and  that  that  care  should  be  by  the
    family, in order to improve her current  state  of  mental  health  and
    prevent further deterioration.

5.   The witness said that the appellant had been very happy to see her  but
    had talked about  not  wanting  to  live  anymore,  having  been  badly
    affected by her husband's death in 2011.  The witness  also  said  that
    she and her immediate family had left Sri Lanka in the 1990s, following
    problems with the LTTE.  Ms Horsley objected to that answer, since  the
    reasons for the family's departure had not been raised before the FtT.

6.   Cross-examined, the witness said that she had last been  in  Sri  Lanka
    in 2011, along with her sister.  The witness confirmed that  the  entry
    clearance application had not mentioned  dementia  problems;  what  had
    been mentioned were a stroke, diabetes and loneliness.  In answer to  a
    question from me, the witness said that she had  investigated  to  some
    extent the position regarding care homes in  Sri  Lanka.   There  were,
    however, problems with care homes offering accommodation for those with
    dementia.  In answer  to  a  question  from  Ms  Horsley,  the  witness
    recalled the statement of care needs (page 40 of 88 of the  appellant's
    original  bundle).   That  statement,  dated  11  November  2012,  made
    reference to the appellant having a tendency  to  forget  to  take  her
    medication and that her low mood and loneliness were  "likely  to  have
    had a deteriorative effect on her  cognition,  which  is  why  she  has
    started having memory problems".

7.   In reaching a decision in this case, I have analysed all  the  evidence
    (whether or not specifically identified above) in  order  to  determine
    whether exclusion of the applicant  would  constitute  a  violation  of
    Article 8 ECHR, both as regards her rights and those of her  family  in
    the United Kingdom.  In doing so, I have had regard to the  submissions
    of both parties; in particular, the able submissions of Mr Singer,  who
    advanced vigorously the case for the appellant.

8.   It is common ground that  the  relevant  Immigration  Rules  are  those
    introduced with effect from 9 July 2012.  These  are  to  be  found  at
    section E-ECDR of Appendix FM (eligibility for entry  clearance  as  an
    adult dependent relative).  Although the dismissal  of  the  appeal  by
    reference to the Rules is not directly before me, it is of relevance to
    consider  what  those  Rules  comprise.   For  present  purposes,   the
    following is relevant:-

         "E-ECDR.2.5   The applicant, or if the applicant and their  partner
                      are  the  spouse's  parents  or   grandparents,   the
                      applicant's partner, must be unable,  even  with  the
                      practical and  financial  help  of  the  sponsor,  to
                      obtain the required level  of  care  in  the  country
                      where they are living, because -


                      (a)  it is not available and there is  no  person  in
                           that country who can reasonably provide it; or


                      (b)  it is not affordable."

9.   Mr Singer submitted that, in determining the issue  of  proportionality
    with regard to Article 8, I should have regard to  the  fact  that  the
    application was, in effect, almost made in time, so as  to  be  decided
    under the "old" Rules, and that had it been so  decided  the  appellant
    would have succeeded.  I accept that this is so; but as there are bound
    to be such cases whenever Rules are changed, I  give  the  matter  only
    relatively limited weight.   Mr  Singer  described  the  new  Rules  as
    "Kafkaesque", in that if United Kingdom sponsors are in the position of
    being able to fund care in the foreign  country  concerned,  that  will
    mean that the Rules cannot be complied with.  As can be seen  from  the
    citation above, however, that is  not  actually  the  position.   Entry
    clearance will be demanded by the Rules where, even with practical  and
    financial help, the required level of care is unavailable and there  is
    no person in that country who can reasonably provide it.

10.  It is clear from the structure of the new Rules that they are, in  this
    instance, highly mindful of ECHR rights.  Provided that  a  person  has
    access to "the required level of care", it will  be  difficult  to  say
    that Article 8  would  be  violated  by  a  refusal  under  the  Rules.
    Nevertheless, I have also separately considered whether, given that the
    appellant has been found not to meet the requirements of the Rules, her
    case is such as to constitute an exception, demanding her entry to  the
    United Kingdom pursuant to Article 8.

11.  The problem for the appellant and those of her relatives in the  United
    Kingdom is that the evidence put forward in connection with the present
    application was exiguous, as regards the alleged unavailability of  the
    required level of care for the appellant in Sri Lanka.  The letter from
    the doctor of 4 July 2002 (pp82 and 83 of 88) boldly asserts that

         "There aren't any care homes or old people's homes around in Jaffna
         district.  I also wish to state that care home or old  people  home
         won't be suitable to her  as  she  hasn't  any  family  members  or
         friends to visit her and to take responsibility."

     The last part of that sentence frankly does  not  make  logical  sense.
    The first part is purportedly  supported  by  some  materials  entitled
    "Health security challenges in Sri Lanka and Bangladesh" but these fall
    far short of indicating that there are no  care  homes  of  a  suitable
    nature in Sri Lanka.

12.  The appellant's daughter, who gave her evidence in an open  manner  and
    whose sincerity I do not doubt, was asked by me whether  she  had  made
    enquiries about care homes.  It was manifest that  she  had  made  only
    rudimentary inquiry and, in  particular,  had  not  considered  whether
    there might be suitable facilities available in Colombo.  The family in
    the United  Kingdom  has  concentrated  its  efforts  on  bringing  the
    appellant to live with them here,  rather  than  making  any  concerted
    effort to find care facilities  that  do  not  depend  upon  individual
    servants coming and going to the appellant's own home.

13.  I am not persuaded that the August 2013 evidence involving a  diagnosis
    of early-onset dementia in the appellant satisfies section  85A(2).   I
    say that, notwithstanding the indications, set out in the  evidence  to
    which I have already referred, that the appellant had certain cognitive
    problems in 2011.  A diagnosis of dementia, even in its early stage, is
    a significant  matter  and  there  is  nothing  to  indicate  that  the
    appellant was  suffering  from  that  condition  at  the  date  of  the
    decision.  However, even if she were, there has been no serious attempt
    on the part of the family to  investigate  facilities  for  caring  for
    those with the beginnings of  dementia  in  Sri  Lanka.   Although  the
    appellant lives in Jaffna, no evidence has been forthcoming as  to  why
    it would not be possible for her to receive  appropriate  treatment  in
    Colombo, which, as the capital of Sri Lanka, would plainly be likely to
    have the best of the medical facilities available in that country.

14.   Thus,  even  on  the   best   possible   case   for   the   appellant,
    notwithstanding  section  85A,  she  still  would   not   satisfy   the
    requirements  of  the  relevant  Rules.   I   take   account   of   the
    understandable  desire  of  the  United  Kingdom  family  to  have  the
    appellant live with them, rather than in Sri Lanka,  however  well  she
    might be cared for there. But mere choice of residence is  not  one  of
    the rights guaranteed by Article 8. Something more has to be shown.  As
    matters stand, even accepting that Article 8 has a material application
    outwith the  "new"  Rules,  it  has  not  been  demonstrated  that  the
    appellant's exclusion from the United Kingdom would be a  violation  of
    her rights and/or those of her family.

15.  These proceedings may have the benefit of identifying what  the  family
    need to do in order to ascertain whether the appellant can  be  brought
    within the relevant Immigration Rules. If she can,  then  she  will  be
    entitled to succeed. If not, a case will need to  be  made  as  to  why
    human rights  require  her  to  be  admitted,  when  adequate  care  is
    available in Sri Lanka.  I appreciate that, at the appellant's  age,  a
    further application for entry clearance will be unwelcome.  I  do  not,
    however,  consider  that  this  consideration,  either  alone   or   in
    combination with other relevant factors, requires me to find a  present
    violation of Article 8.

16.  This appeal is accordingly dismissed.


                               Signed                                  Date




                               Upper Tribunal Judge Peter Lane


