
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/23348/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|on 15 January 2014                            |on 21 January 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                           MUHAMMAD KAMRAN FAISAL
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, PAKISTAN
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:       Mr S Martin, Jain Neil & Ruddy Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

(No anonymity order requested or made.)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) The appellant appeals against  a  determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Scobbie, promulgated on 9 September  2013,  dismissing  his  appeal
   against refusal of entry clearance as a spouse.


2) The Entry Clearance Officer was not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  was
   free to marry the sponsor, that the  relationship  was  genuine  or  that
   satisfactory accommodation was available, so that his application did not
   meet the requirements of paragraph 281 of the Immigration Rules.  He  had
   described  himself  as  single  although  he  had  provided  a   marriage
   certificate with his earlier visit visa application.  The ECO also  noted
   that the appellant had overstayed from 5 May 2009 until 6 April 2012.  In
   the absence of explanation of how the appellant  had  supported  himself,
   the ECO presumed that he had taken employment as well as  having  married
   in the UK.    The application was also refused under paragraph 320(11) of
   the Rules.

3) Despite some  misgivings  regarding  the  appellant's  apparent  previous
   marriage, Judge Scobbie found on the evidence before him,  including  the
   oral evidence from the sponsor, her  father  and  her  sister,  that  the
   requirements of paragraph 281 were all met.

4) As  to  paragraph  320(11),  Mr  Martin  referred  Judge  Scobbie  to  PS
   (Paragraph 320(11) discretion: care needed) India [2010] UKUT 440  (IAC).
   The judge said at paragraph 24 that although he was referred particularly
   to paragraph 10 of PS  (which  paragraph  is  simply  a  reproduction  of
   guidance to ECO's) there appeared to him to be "very little  which  could
   be said on behalf of the appellant ... bearing  in  mind  that  the  rule
   actually  says  that  normally  as  an  overstayer  he  should  have  his
   application refused."  At paragraph 25 the judge expressed the view  that
   the appellant had deliberately ignored the Rules and that there had  been
   "more than a suspicion that he was an economic migrant", and  accordingly
   there was nothing to justify that he  should  not  have  his  application
   refused.

5) The judge went on to dismiss the case also under Article  8,  taking  the
   fact that the appellant had returned to Pakistan to try  to  resolve  his
   status as a point in his favour, but finding that  he  had  shown  "scant
   regard" for the Rules and that he and the sponsor  had  married  "in  the
   full knowledge that the appellant had no right to be in  the  UK.   Again
   this in my  view  shows  contempt  for  the  Immigration  Rules  of  this
   country."  At  paragraph  29,  the  judge  concluded  that  an  effective
   immigration  policy  was  a  consideration  rendering  refusal   of   the
   application proportionate.

6) It was common ground that the guidance to Entry Clearance Officers  still
   stands in the terms quoted at paragraph 10 of PS.  The  only  example  of
   aggravating circumstances which applies in this case is this:

    Previous working in breach of visitor conditions within short  time  of
    arrival in the UK (ie premeditated intention to work).


7) The appellant's evidence in his statement  was  that  he  "undertook  odd
   jobs to survive".  The position as amplified through  his  solicitor  was
   that he did so "on behalf of family  members  with  whom  he  resided  to
   assist them and to repay them for accommodating him and feeding him."  He
   justified this as enabling him to survive while he had no  permission  to
   work.

8) Although contested in the grounds of appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  Mr
   Martin conceded in the course of submissions (correctly, in my view) that
   even on the appellant's own admission his conducted amounted  to  working
   in breach of visitor conditions.  What he  actually  did,  and  for  what
   reward, remains  obscure.   There  was  never  anything  to  prevent  him
   returning to Pakistan, so the necessities  of  survival  are  no  excuse.
   However, Mr Matthews accepted my observation that the evidence  does  not
   disclose that the appellant came to the UK principally to work illegally,
   which is presumably the mischief at which the guidance is aimed, and that
   this case fell at the low end of the scale of aggravating circumstances.




9)  After  listing  examples  of  aggravated  circumstances,  the   guidance
   provides generally:

    All cases must be considered on their merits, the activities considered
    in the round to see whether they meet  the  threshold  under  paragraph
    320(11), taking into account family life in the UK ...


10) The aim of the appellant and the sponsor is to have  their  family  life
   in the UK.  At the stage of considering a case on its merits and  in  the
   round, the existence of  such  family  life  interests  plainly  makes  a
   considerable difference.  Where family life exists, the matters in favour
   of refusal must be above the minimum level.

11) This is the ratio of PS:

    In exercising discretion under paragraph 320(11) ... the decision maker
    must exercise great care in assessing the aggravated circumstances  ...
    and must have regard  to  the  public  interest  in  encouraging  those
    unlawfully in the UK to leave and seek to regularise their status by an
    application for entry clearance.


12) While the judge did  mention  the  appellant's  return  in  relation  to
   Article 8, he did not refer to the above considerations  before  deciding
   the case under 320(11).

13) In my opinion, the judge failed to have  regard  to  what  the  guidance
   actually says about taking into account family life, and failed  to  take
   into account the ratio of PS.  He did not look at where this case fits on
   the spectrum of possibilities.  If the appellant had left the UK and then
   sought another visit visa, or if he  had  applied  as  a  spouse  without
   leaving the UK,  he  could  not  reasonably  have  expected  to  succeed.
   However, his conduct in returning to  make  an  application  brought  him
   within the category of those who should  benefit  from  the  exercise  of
   discretion in the guidance, as explained in PS, once the  other  concerns
   expressed by the ECO were taken out of the reckoning.  (Perhaps,  as  the
   judge was not entirely satisfied on those points, they were still at  the
   back of his mind; but having reached the conclusion  that  the  appellant
   was free  to  marry,  the  case  had  to  be  decided  accordingly.   The
   respondent has not sought to put this back in  issue.)   The  aggravating
   circumstances were at the low end, family life was shown,  and  the  case
   became a classic example of an appellant  who  should  benefit  from  the
   exercise of discretion.

14) The First-tier Tribunal determination is set aside, and  the  appeal  is
   allowed under the Immigration Rules.




                               [pic]
                                17 January 2014
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
