
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/23915/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 25 March 2014                              |on 3 April 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between


                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, TURKEY
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              DURMUS ALI ZEYBEK
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:      Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:     Ms A Speirs, of Katani & Co, Solicitors

No anonymity order requested or made

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) This determination refers to parties  as  they  were  in  the  First-tier
   Tribunal.

2) On 7 November 2012, the Entry Clearance Officer refused  the  appellant's
   application for entry clearance as a  partner,  under  reference  to  the
   income requirements of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.

3) The appellant filed notice of appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   An
   Entry Clearance Manager maintained the refusal on 11  June  2013,  saying
   that the decision was also in proportion to the maintenance of  effective
   immigration control.

4) Judge Balloch allowed the  appeal  by  determination  promulgated  on  18
   December 2013.

5) The determination does not set out the  submissions  made  (there  is  of
   course no general requirement to do so) and there was  no  discussion  at
   the hearing in the Upper Tribunal of what submissions were  made  in  the
   First-tier Tribunal.  However, I see from the judge's handwritten  record
   that the Presenting Officer referred to MM & Others v  SSHD  [2013]  EWHC
   1900 (Admin), and said that it was under appeal, and that  the  case  was
   relied upon in the submission by Ms Speirs.

6) The judge refers to MM at paragraphs 25-27 of her  determination,  noting
   that it is the subject of appeal by the respondent "...  but  is  current
   law and I have had regard to it in my overall consideration under Article
   8".

7) The ECO's grounds of appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  refer  to  MM  as  a
   persuasive authority, but they propose an argument along the  lines  that
   this appeal could not have succeeded but by following MM; that MM usurped
   the role of the democratic decision maker, and should have  come  to  the
   conclusion that any interference in Article 8 rights caused  by  the  new
   Rules was proportionate, striking the balance between  the  interests  of
   applicants and their families and the wider interests  of  society  as  a
   whole.  It is said that  MM  is  an  unsafe  authority,  upon  which  the
   conclusions of the FtT in this case cannot rest.

8) In a written response to the grant  of  permission,  the  appellant  says
   that MM was not binding but was persuasive and that the judge did not err
   in relying thereon.

9) At the outset of the hearing, Mr Mullen  sought  an  adjournment,  saying
   that MM has now been heard in the Court of Appeal, and  so  its  decision
   may expected within a reasonably short time.  This  case  should  not  be
   decided until the outcome is known,  which  would  provide  a  degree  of
   certainty not presently available.

10) Ms Speirs opposed an adjournment.  She accepted that MM has  been  heard
   in the Court of Appeal, but she pointed out that the date of decision  is
   still not known.  The issue is so contentious that whatever  the  outcome
   in the Court of Appeal it may go to the  Supreme  Court.    The  ordinary
   rule is that cases should be decided on the basis of the  law  as  it  is
   presently understood, not adjourned for  further  clarification  by  case
   law.  The application to adjourn came very late.

11) I declined to adjourn.  If  it  was  thought  correct  as  a  matter  of
   principle to adjourn cases of this nature pending clarification in MM, an
   application could have been made in advance of the hearing.  I considered
   that the ordinary rule should apply.

12)  Mr  Mullen  submitted  that  the  judge   treated   MM   as   virtually
   determinative of the case before her.  That could now be seen  to  be  an
   error in the light of Gulshan (Article 8 - new rules - correct  approach)
   [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC).  The Supreme Court has  recently  observed  that
   Article 8 is not a  general  dispensing  provision.   In  principle,  the
   maintenance  requirements  of  the  Rules  were  not  a  disproportionate
   interference with the Article 8 rights of those affected.  Judge  Balloch
   had  not  been  entitled  to  ignore  the  rules  and   to   strike   the
   proportionality balance as she did.  The possible earnings of the sponsor
   in this case came nowhere near even the minimum wage threshold  suggested
   by Mr Justice Blake in MM.  The determination should be reversed.

13) Ms Speirs submitted that the judge appreciated that MM was  not  binding
   upon her,  but  was  entitled  to  find  it  persuasive  in  her  overall
   consideration of the case.  Further, Ms Speirs  submitted  that  even  if
   reliance on MM was an error, this  determination  could  nevertheless  be
   upheld under reference to Article 8.

14) I admit to some  difficulty  in  following  the  latter  aspect  of  the
   argument.  While the significance of MM in relation to the minimum income
   provisions of the Rules is not the only point in the  decision,  I  think
   that but for applying MM the result could not  have  been  to  allow  the
   appeal.

15) No doubt intricate and extensive arguments, even over  and  above  those
   deployed before Mr Justice Blake, were put before the  Court  of  Appeal.
   No such arguments were deployed by the Presenting Officer in  the  First-
   tier Tribunal, who  appears  to  have  confined  her  submission  to  the
   observation that MM was under appeal - which takes matters  nowhere.   No
   argument beyond the broad propositions in the grounds has been put to the
   Upper Tribunal in this case as to whether or  not  Judge  Balloch  should
   have applied MM.  Neither side  suggested  that  there  is  any  Scottish
   authority.

16) In the circumstances, I am unable to find that Judge  Balloch  erred  in
   law by being guided by MM to the extent she was.   The  determination  of
   the First-tier Tribunal shall therefore stand.



                               [pic]
                                31 March 2014
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
