

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/23155/2012



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Birmingham                               Decision Promulgated:
On: 4 September 2014                         On 4 September 2014



                                   Before

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

                                   Between

                             Bisrat Tekle Beraki


                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                       Entry Clearance Officer - Cairo

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Howard of Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


This is an appeal by the appellant against the determination promulgated  on
23 October 2013 of First-tier Tribunal  Telford  which  refused  the  appeal
against the respondent's  decision  of  15  October  2012  to  refuse  entry
clearance as a pre-flight spouse of a refugee.

The First-tier Tribunal found that the appellant  had  not  shown  that  she
married the sponsor in January  2004  as  claimed,  at  a  time  before  the
sponsor left Eritrea.

It was conceded for the respondent that the First-tier Tribunal   failed  to
make any reference to the information contained in the first section of  the
sponsor's asylum interview which was conducted  on  27  November  2008.  The
sponsor stated there that he was married to Bisrat Tekle, that she was  born
in 1988 and that they married on 1 January 2004.

It was further conceded for the respondent that it could not  be  said  that
the outcome of the decision would have  been  the  same  had  this  material
evidence   been   taken   into   account   by   the   First-tier   Tribunal,
notwithstanding  the  other  points  taken  against  the  appellant  in  the
determination.

It was my view that an error of law arose from the failure to  address  this
highly material evidence, confirmation of the appellant's identity  and  the
marriage taking place in 2004 being provided  some  4  years  prior  to  the
entry clearance application as part of an asylum claim in which the  sponsor
was found partly credible and granted status at first instance as  a  result
of  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department's  view   of   his
credibility.

I found this to be an error on a point of law such that the decision of  the
First-tier Tribunal had to be set aside and the appeal remade,  specifically
with regard to the question of whether the appellant and sponsor married  on
1 January 2004.

I proceeded to re-make the  appeal.  It  was  my  view  that  the  sponsor's
reference to the appellant, her date of birth and the date of  the  marriage
in his asylum interview in 2008 was  compelling  when  considered  with  the
evidence of the appellant and sponsor as  to  their  marriage  having  taken
place in 2004. How could and why  would  the  sponsor  have  provided  those
details if they  were  not  true  4  years  prior  to  the  entry  clearance
application being made at a time when he could not know whether he would  be
granted asylum?

Further, the respondent did not question in  the  refusal  letter  that  the
couple were in a genuine relationship as of 2012 or that the  appellant  was
at that time pregnant with the sponsor's  child.   Their  having  a  genuine
relationship at that time and having decided to have a child  together  was,
to my mind, consistent with their claim to have known each other before  the
sponsor left Eritrea and to have married in 2004.

I have considered the difficulties with the sponsor's  evidence  before  the
First-tier Tribunal as to the nature of the  marriage  certificate  and  the
endorsement on it from the Vehicular Deployment Unit. I had  nothing  before
me as to how marriages at that time were  documented  in  Eritrea,  however,
and did not find this to be a  point  at  all  sufficient  to  outweigh  the
weight of the sponsor having properly referred to his wife and the  date  of
their marriage in the asylum interview in 2008 and the  consistent  evidence
of the couple to the same effect.

I found the same as regards the sponsor's statement at question  48  of  his
asylum interview that he was only released from detention at some  point  in
January 2004, raising the question  of  how  he  could  have  married  on  1
January 2004. It is something that weighs against the couple having  married
on 1 January 2004 but is not sufficient to outweigh the evidence  suggesting
that they did.

It also appeared  to  me  that  the  sponsor  answered  the  second  set  of
questions about having family in Eritrea in the asylum interview  correctly.
Having already identified his wife, he mentioned only  his  immediate  birth
family and I found nothing exceptional in that.

It was also my view that the approach of the  First-tier  Tribunal   to  the
weight to be placed on photographs and assessing how someone  had  aged  was
correct and that nothing could turn on the appearance of the couple  in  the
photographs provided in support of the application.

I therefore found that it had been shown on  the  balance  of  probabilities
that the appellant and sponsor married  on  1  January  2004  and  that  the
appellant had met the requirements of  paragraph  352A  of  the  Immigration
Rules. I therefore allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error  on  a  point  of
law and is set aside.

I remake the appeal, allowing it under paragraph  352A  of  the  Immigration
Rules.

I direct that entry clearance be issued.


Signed:     [pic]                            Date:
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

Fee Award

I make a full fee award where the appellant has won  her  appeal  under  the
Immigration Rules.

Signed: [pic]                                Date:
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt






