
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/23892/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 6 March 2014                               |On 4th April 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, GUANGZHOU
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 JINHUI WENG
                                JINGMING WENG
                                                                 Respondents


For the Appellant:       Ms Gough, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:     Mr Caskie, Advocate, instructed by Pryde
Immigration Lawyers

No anonymity order requested or made

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) We refer to parties  as  they  were  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
   appellants are brother and sister,  citizens  of  China.   Judge  Scobbie
   allowed their appeals against refusal of leave to enter  the  UK  as  the
   children of a parent present and settled in the UK.

2) The Entry Clearance Officer's first ground of appeal is  that  the  judge
   erred by failing to grant an adjournment for evidence to  be  brought  to
   discredit the sponsor's allegedly false evidence that he  had  permission
   to work in the UK.  The second ground is inadequate reasoning  about  the
   sponsor's sole responsibility for the appellants.  The first complaint is
   an element in the second.  Woven into the grounds is a further complaint,
   that the  judge  failed  to  take  account  of  the  involvement  of  the
   appellant's mother in illegal migration, and that it would be an abuse of
   the Rules for the appellants to benefit from such wrongdoing.  That third
   point was not separately developed in the grounds or in submissions,  and
   we see nothing in it to disclose error in law.  The  essential  complaint
   by the ECO is about refusal of adjournment.

3) The Presenting Officer in  the  FtT  firstly  asked  for  an  adjournment
   because the case had been on a "float list" and he had inadequate time to
   prepare.  He was given an hour and a half, including the lunch break.  At
   a later stage, he sought the adjournment to obtain further evidence.  The
   determination conflates these aspects at paragraphs 4-7 under the heading
   "procedural matters", but they should have been dealt with distinctly.

4) A Presenting Officer should sometimes be given time  to  prepare  a  case
   which he or she is asked to take on at short notice.   Depending  on  the
   time available and the nature of the case, that might extend  as  far  as
   adjournment to another date.  That is not now an issue in this case.

5) There are also cases where fairness requires that a party be  given  time
   to deal with a matter emerging in course of a hearing.  In this instance,
   that might have involved obtaining the sponsor's immigration history  and
   file of papers.  Mr Caskie submitted that this is a matter the Presenting
   Officer should have been ready to deal with, because it should have  been
   anticipated when preparing cross-examination.  We would not  have  upheld
   that submission.  However, the hearing in the FtT was on 25 October 2013.
    On 6 March 2014  the  Presenting  Officer  was  not  equipped  with  the
   information to refute the sponsor's evidence,  if  we  had  offered  that
   opportunity.

6) Lord Reid, giving the opinion of the Court,  said  in  HA  &  TD  v  SSHD
   [2010] CSIH 28 at paragraph 15:

    ... It is necessary to bear in mind that a procedural impropriety  will
    not vitiate a  decision  if  it  is  apparent  that  no  prejudice  was
    suffered: Ahmed v SSHD [1994] Imm AR 457 (following Malloch v  Aberdeen
    Corporation 1971 SC (HL) 85 at pages 104 and 118).


7) We might  have  been  inclined  to  hold  that  there  was  a  procedural
   impropriety in this case; but in absence  of  any  proposed  evidence  to
   improve  the  respondent's  case,  that  is  beside   the   point.    The
   determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.


                               [pic]
                                3 April 2014
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
