
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/23670/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 March 2015                             |On 6 May 2015                 |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB
                  (SITTING AS A FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL JUDGE)

                                   Between


                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - AMMAN

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              HAREM BAIZ SALEEM
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr G Hodgetts, instructed by South West Law


                 DECISION ON WHETHER TO ADMIT AN APPLICATION
                          FOR PERMISSION TO APPEAL




Background

 1. Harem Saleem ("the respondent") is a citizen of Iraq who was born on  1
    July 1995.  In July 2012, he applied for entry clearance  to  join  his
    adoptive parents, both Iraqi nationals, who had come to the UK in  2001
    (in the case of his father) and in 2003 (in the case  of  his  mother).
    On 18 October 2012, the ECO refused the respondent's application  under
    para 301 of the Immigration Rules (Statement of Changes in  Immigration
    Rules, HC 395 as amended).

 2.  The  respondent  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and,  in   a
    determination promulgated on 28 August 2013, Judge Y J Jones  dismissed
    the respondent's appeal.  The Entry Clearance Officer ("the appellant")
    sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.   That  application
    was initially refused by the First-tier Tribunal on  12  December  2013
    but granted by the Upper Tribunal on 7 January 2014.   Thereafter,  the
    Upper Tribunal in a determination promulgated on 4 April  2014  allowed
    the respondent's appeal and  remitted  his  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

This Appeal

 3. The remitted appeal came before Judge Powell in the First-tier Tribunal
    on 22 July 2014.  In a determination promulgated on  28  January  2014,
    Judge Powell allowed the  respondent's  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.

 4. The ECO sought permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   That
    application was made on 18 August 2014 and, as is now accepted, was out
    of time.  It should have been filed by 6 August 2014 at the latest.  In
    Section B of the application form under the  rubric  "Reasons  why  the
    application is made late (if applicable)" it is stated:

         ""The determination was incorrectly served on POU Cardiff,  instead
         of SAT Angel Square, who are responsibility, as  is  widely  known,
         for the assessment of allowed appeal determinations,  The errors in
         the determination  are  such  as  to  render  it  proper  to  grant
         permission to appeal."

 5. In a decision dated 1 October  2014,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Lambert) noted that application had been filed out of time and also the
    reason given by the ECO that the determination, sent on 28  July  2014,
    had been incorrectly sent to the Presenting Officers Unit  ("the  POU")
    Cardiff rather than the Specialist Appeals Team ("the SAT"),  at  Angel
    Square  in  London.   Judge  Lambert  considered   that   the   grounds
    established an "arguable error of law" and her decision  is  stated  to
    be: "Permission  to  appeal  is  admitted".    The  decision  does  not
    expressly record any (reasoned) decision to extend time for the out  of
    time application.

 6. In response to Judge Lambert's decision being sent to the  respondent's
    representatives, a rule 24 reply dated 13 October 2014 was  filed  with
    the Upper Tribunal.  In addition to dealing with the merit of the Entry
    Clearance Officer's appeal against Judge Powell's decision, the rule 24
    reply pointed out that Judge Lambert had not explicitly  extended  time
    for the ECO's out of  time  application  for  permission  and  that  an
    expedited preliminary hearing should be listed in order to consider the
    issue of the extension of time.   As  a  consequence,  the  appeal  was
    listed before me to deal with the extension of time  as  a  preliminary
    issue.

 7. In  addition  to  the  respondent  rule  24  reply,  Mr  Hodgetts,  who
    represented the respondent,  submitted  a  detailed  skeleton  argument
    dealing with the relevant procedure rules in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and case law concerned with extending time.  In addition, there  was  a
    witness statement dated 14 October 2014 from Ms Marie-Christine Allaire-
    Rousse, a  solicitor  with  South  West  Law,  the  respondent's  legal
    representatives.

 8. For the ECO, there was a skeleton argument prepared by Mr Richards  who
    represented the ECO together with a  witness  statement  from  Mr  John
    McGirr of the SAT at Angel Square in London.

The Immigration Rules

 9. The relevant rules applicable in the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  deal
    with permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal are in Part  3  of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230  as
    amended) ("the 2005 Rules").  Since  20,  October  2014,  the  relevant
    provisions have been replaced by  Part  4  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014  (SI
    2014/2604).  I will, however, focus  on  the  Rules  relevant  to  this
    appeal.

10. Rules 24-26 provide as follows:

                                   "PART 3

                        Appeals to the Upper Tribunal

         Application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal

         24.-  (1)     A party seeking permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper
                  Tribunal must make a written application to  the  Tribunal
                  for permission to appeal.

             (2)  Subject to paragraph (3), an application under  paragraph
                  (1) must be sent or delivered to the Tribunal so  that  it
                  is received no later than 5 days after the date  on  which
                  the party making the application is deemed  to  have  been
                  served with written reasons for the decision

             (3)  Where an appellant is outside the UK, the time limit  for
                  that person sending or  delivering  an  application  under
                  paragraph (1) is 28 days.

             (4)  If a person makes  an  application  under  paragraph  (1)
                  later than the time required by paragraph (2)-

                  (a)  the Tribunal may extend the  time  for  appealing  if
                      satisfied that by reason of special circumstances  it
                      would be unjust not to do so; and

                  (b)  unless the Tribunal extends time under  sub-paragraph
                      (a), the Tribunal must not admit the application.

             (5)  An application under paragraph (1) must-

                  (a)  identify the decision of the  Tribunal  to  which  it
                      relates;

                  (b)  identify the alleged error or errors of  law  in  the
                      decision; and

                  (c)  state the result the party making the application  is
                      seeking.

         Tribunal's consideration of an application for permission to appeal
         to the Upper Tribunal

         25.-  (1)     On receiving an application for permission to  appeal
                  the Tribunal must first consider  whether  to  review  the
                  decision in accordance with rule 26.

             (2)  If the Tribunal decides not to review  the  decision,  or
                  reviews the decision and decides  to  take  no  action  in
                  relation to the decision, or part of it, the Tribunal must
                  consider whether to give permission to appeal in  relation
                  to the decision or that part of it.

             (3)  The Tribunal must make a  decision  under  paragraph  (1)
                  and, where relevant, paragraph (2), no later than 10  days
                  after receiving the application.

             (4)  Subject to rule 27, the Tribunal must send to the parties-



                  (a)  written reasons for a decision under this rule; and

                  (b)  if the application is refused,  notification  of  the
                      right to make an application to  the  Upper  Tribunal
                      for permission to appeal and the time  within  which,
                      and the method by which,  such  application  must  be
                      made.

             (5)  The Tribunal may give permission  to  appeal  on  limited
                  grounds, but must comply with paragraph (4) in relation to
                  any grounds on which it has refused permission.

         Review of a decision

         26.-  (1)     The  Tribunal  may  only  undertake  a  review  of  a
                  decision pursuant to rule 25(2) if it  is  satisfied  that
                  there was an error of law in the decision

             (2)  Subject to rule 27, the Tribunal must notify the  parties
                  in writing of the outcome of any review, and of any  right
                  of appeal in relation to the outcome.

             (3)  If the  Tribunal  takes  any  action  in  relation  to  a
                  decision following a review  without  first  giving  every
                  party an opportunity to make representations,  the  notice
                  under paragraph (2) must state that any party that did not
                  have an opportunity to make representations may apply  for
                  such action to be set aside and for  the  decision  to  be
                  reviewed again."

11. Although I have set out rule 26 dealing with "review"  of  a  decision,
    this appeal does not raise any issue in relation to that.

12. Rule 24 makes provision for an application to be made in writing to the
    First-tier Tribunal for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  In
    relation to when such an application must be made, rule 24(2)  provides
    that it must be received by the Tribunal "no later than five days after
    the date on which the party making the  application  is  deemed  to  be
    served" with the determination.  Where the appellant is outside the  UK
    and it is the appellant who is seeking permission to appeal,  the  five
    days is extended to 28 days.  The period  is  always  5  days  for  the
    respondent before the First-tier Tribunal.

13. By virtue of rule 55(5) a  document  is  deemed  to  have  been  served
    "unless the contrary is proved" where that document is sent by post "on
    the second day after it was sent".

14. Where an application is made outside the  permitted  time,  then  under
    rule 24(4) the First-tier Tribunal may extend time  if  satisfied  that
    "by reason of special circumstances it would be unjust not to  do  so".
    If time is not extended, then, by virtue of rule 24(4)(b), the Tribunal
    "must not admit the application".  Consequently, in  such  a  case  the
    First-tier Tribunal does not "refuse" permission to appeal  but  rather
    does "not admit" the application.

15. Rule 25 requires the First-tier Tribunal to first consider  whether  to
    review the decision under rule 26  and,  if  it  does  not,  must  then
    consider whether to grant "permission to  appeal".   Reasons  for  that
    refusal must be served upon the parties thereafter.

16. It was common ground between the parties that where, as here, the First-
    tier Tribunal fails explicitly to  consider  and  make  a  decision  to
    extend time, any grant  of  permission  is  necessarily  "conditional".
    Before the Upper Tribunal can consider the merits of  the  appeal,  the
    First-tier Tribunal - and not the Upper Tribunal itself - must  make  a
    decision on whether to extend time.  If it  does  so,  then  the  Upper
    Tribunal considers  the  appeal  on  its  merits.   If  the  First-tier
    Tribunal does not extend time and so does "not admit" the  application,
    it is open to the unsuccessful applicant for  permission  to  renew  an
    application for permission to appeal directly  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    under its procedure rules, namely Part  3  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI  2008/2698  as  amended).   That  legal
    framework follows, and it was accepted that it did, from the  case  law
    of the Upper Tribunal: Boktor and Wanis [2011] UKUT 00442  (IAC);  Wang
    and Chin [2013] UKUT 343 (IAC); Samir [2013] UKUT 3 (IAC) and  Mohammed
    [2013] UKUT 467 (IAC).


17. In this appeal, despite Judge Lambert's phraseology in her reasons that
    "permission to appeal is admitted", it was common  ground  between  the
    parties that she had in fact not made a decision, let alone a  reasoned
    decision, to extend time.  Indeed, if she had done then, given her view
    of the merits, she should have "granted permission" which she  did  not
    explicitly do.    The  Judge's  decision  did  not  explicitly,  as  is
    required, include a reasoned decision to extend time (see,  AK*  [2004]
    UKIAT 00201 and Mohammed).   Her  decision,  at  best,  amounted  to  a
    "conditional"  grant  of  permission  which  required  the   First-tier
    Tribunal (in which capacity I now sit) to make a decision on whether to
    extend time  in  respect  of  the  ECO  out  of  time  application  for
    permission to the First-tier Tribunal (see, e.g. Samir).

The Submissions

18. Mr Richards, on behalf of the ECO relied upon his skeleton argument and
    the witness statement of John McGirr.

19. Mr Richards did not submit that service on the POU at Cardiff  was  not
    proper service  upon  the  ECO  or  Secretary  of  State.   Rather,  Mr
    Richards' submissions focused on whether the delay caused by service on
    the POU in Cardiff merited an  exercise  of  discretion  in  the  ECO's
    favour to extend time.  He invited me to exercise discretion to  extend
    time and admit (and thereafter grant permission  for)  the  application
    which Judge Lambert had considered had  merits.   He  relied  upon  the
    statements in the ECO's application for permission that the application
    was wrongly served on the POU Cardiff rather  than  the  SAT  at  Angel
    Square in London.  He drew my attention to a  copy  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's notice, attached to his skeleton  argument,  dated  28  July
    2014 and addressed to the POU in Cardiff.  That notice,  he  submitted,
    contained a  date  stamp  "RECEIVED"  and  dated  "14  Aug  2014".   He
    submitted that this demonstrated that the notice of the  decision  sent
    on 28 July 2014 had only been received by the SAT in Angel Square on 14
    August 2014.  It had wrongly been sent to the POU Unit in Cardiff.   Mr
    Richards relied upon the witness statement of John McGirr of the SAT at
    Angel Square which set out the practice, said to have been agreed  with
    the Tribunal, that allowed determination appeals would be sent  to  the
    SAT in Angel Square rather than to the relevant POU.

20. Mr Richards accepted that there  was  no  record  when  the  notice  of
    decision had been received by the Cardiff POU or, indeed, when  it  had
    been sent to the SAT in Angel Square.  He submitted, however, that  the
    initial fault - even if there was some delay in sending it  onto  Angel
    Square - lay with the First-tier Tribunal and the  ECO  should  not  be
    penalised for that.  He submitted that the justice of the  case  should
    lead to an exercise of discretion to extend time.

21. Mr Hodgetts adopted his detailed rule 24 reply, skeleton  argument  and
    response to the Entry Clearance Officer's skeleton argument.

22. Mr Hodgetts' primary submission  was  that  the  Tribunal  should  only
    consider material submitted with the paper application.   He  submitted
    that the First-tier Tribunal had no power to deal with  the  permission
    application - in particular to extend time  in  circumstances  such  as
    this case - at an oral hearing.  In any event, he  submitted  that  the
    ECO should not be put in a better  position  evidentially  if  an  oral
    hearing took place.  Consequently, only  evidence  submitted  with  the
    application and the explanation, if any, contained within  the  written
    application for extending time could be considered.

23. On that basis, Mr Hodgetts submitted that there was simply no  adequate
    explanation for the delay in the ECO filing the permission  application
    on 18 August 2014.  He submitted that there  was  no  evidence  in  the
    application as to when the  POU  in  Cardiff  received  the  notice  of
    decision and no evidence as to when they sent it to the  SAT  in  Angel
    Square.  He submitted that, as the notice was sent  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 28 July 2014,  the  POU  in  Cardiff  was  deemed  to  have
    received it on 30 July 2014 in the absence of  any  contrary  evidence.
    There  was  no  explanation  for  the  delay  in  the  SAT  filing  the
    application on 18 August 2014, some 19 days later and 12  days  out  of
    time.  Time for appealing had expired on 6 August 2014  and  the  delay
    was simply unexplained.

24. In the alternative,  Mr  Hodgetts  submitted  that  if  the  additional
    evidence could be considered there still was  no  explanation  for  the
    delay.  There was no evidence of when the POU in  Cardiff  received  or
    sent on the notice to the SAT in Angel Square.  He submitted  that  the
    date stamp of "14 Aug 2014" did not establish that it was  received  on
    that day by the SAT.  In any event, that did not explain, and there was
    no other evidence which did explain, why the Cardiff POU deemed to have
    received the notice on 28 July 2014, did not send the notice sooner  so
    that it was only received by the SAT on 14 August  2014.   Mr  Hodgetts
    placed reliance upon  the  statement  of  Ms  Allaire-Rousse  dated  14
    October 2014 in which she recounted  an  enquiry  made  by  her  on  14
    October 2014 to the POU in Cardiff.  Having spoken to a  Ms  Thomas  at
    the POU Unit and who had checked the  respondent's  file,  Ms  Allaire-
    Rousse states at para 9:

         "Ms Thomas then told me that she had checked the  appellant's  file
         and had found nothing on it and that if the  determination  allowed
         the appeal then it went directly to Angel Square."

25. Mr Hodgetts submitted that this evidence supported the  view  that  the
    POU in Cardiff had not, in fact, received the notice but rather that it
    had been received directly by the SAT in Angel Square.

26. During the course  of  the  submissions,  I  drew  the  parties  to  an
    additional notice held on the Tribunal's file dated 28  July  2014  and
    sent to the respondent, the respondent's representatives  and  the  SAT
    Unit  at  Angel  Square.   That  notice  states  that  the  "First-tier
    Tribunal's determination" of the respondent's appeal is enclosed.

27. Mr Hodgetts submitted that  also  supported  the  conclusion  that  the
    determination had been properly served on the SAT Unit  and,  given  it
    was sent on 28 July 2014, deemed receipt would be on 30 July 2014.

28. In response, Mr Richards submitted that if Mr Hodgetts was  correct  in
    his submission that this  application  for  permission  could  only  be
    determined on paper, it  would  be  wrong  to  take  into  account  any
    evidence produced or oral  submissions  made  before  me.   The  proper
    course would be for me not to make a decision but to  direct  that  the
    file be considered by a First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  to  determine  the
    extension of time issue on the papers and  material  submitted  at  the
    time of the application.

Discussion

     An oral hearing?

29. I will deal first  with  the  issue  of  whether  an  oral  hearing  is
    permitted in a case such  as  this.   It  is,  of  course,  the  common
    practice that  applications  for  permission  made  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, including decisions on whether to extend time are decided  by
    judges on the basis of the papers alone.  The same applies  to  renewed
    applications for  permission  made  directly  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    There, however, oral hearings are exceptionally convened in appropriate
    cases where, for example, an issue of law  arises  or  a  matter  which
    would  benefit  from  an  oral  hearing  (see,  for  example   Anoliefo
    (Permission to appeal) [2013] UKUT 345 (IAC)).  The power to do  so  is
    clearly recognised in  the  Upper  Tribunal  Rules  dealing  with  case
    management.  Rule 5(2)(f) states that:

         "...the Upper Tribunal may -

             (f) hold a hearing to consider any matter,  including  a  case
             management issue;...."

30. That provision is mirrored in rule 4(3)(f) of the First-tier Tribunal's
    2014 Procedure Rules in effect from 20 October 2014.

31. That particular provision is not, however, to  be  found  in  the  2005
    Rules which are applicable in this appeal.  Nothing in Part  3  of  the
    2005 Rules prevents an application for permission being  determined  at
    an oral hearing,  including  the  issue  of  whether  to  extend  time.
    Indeed, that was precisely what  happened  in  the  cases  to  which  I
    referred above.  However, in Mohammed, a Panel of  the  Upper  Tribunal
    (reconstituting itself as  the  First-tier  Tribunal)  expressed  doubt
    whether an application for permission itself could  be  listed  for  an
    oral hearing by the First-tier Tribunal.  Having noted that  the  Upper
    Tribunal could list  an  application  made  directly  to  it  for  oral
    hearing, the Tribunal continued at [40]:

         "This only applies to applications for permission  to  appeal  made
         direct to the Upper Tribunal; there is no equivalent  provision  in
         the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)  Rules  2005  which
         govern proceedings in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Immigration  and
         Asylum Chamber). As the Upper Tribunal indicates in Wang and  Chin,
         a First-tier Tribunal Judge must consider the  application  on  the
         papers. It is only where the  First-tier  Tribunal  has  failed  to
         complete its task, as here, that the Upper Tribunal  will  have  to
         reconstitute itself to address the issue of  timeliness  since  the
         appeal to the Upper Tribunal cannot be admitted -  irrespective  of
         any merits in the application - unless discretion is  exercised  by
         the First-tier Tribunal."

32. It is not clear upon what basis the Tribunal drew a distinction between
    the First-tier Tribunal itself seeking to list an  application  for  an
    oral hearing and a case being listed in the  Upper  Tribunal  but  that
    tribunal reconstituting itself as the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  being
    entitled to deal with the imperfect grant of leave  as  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The decision in Wang and Chin is not authority  for  drawing
    that distinction.  It was simply a case where the Tribunal assumed  the
    usual situation that  a  decision  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  a
    permission application will be made on the papers (see [17]).  In  both
    situations, the deciding tribunal is governed by  the  relevant  First-
    tier Tribunal Rules.  The fact that a case has initially been listed in
    the Upper Tribunal, but Upper Tribunal  Judges  sitting  as  First-tier
    Tribunal Judges decide the issue, is in my view irrelevant.  Either  an
    oral hearing of a permission application in the First-tier Tribunal  is
    permissible or it is not.

33. Although I was not referred to it by the parties, in my  judgment,  the
    power to determine a permission application in the First-tier  Tribunal
    at an oral hearing can be found in Part 5 of the 2005 Rules  which  are
    "general provisions" applicable to all proceedings  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Rule 43 deals with the "Conduct of appeals and applications"
    and provides in rule 43(1):

         "The Tribunal may, subject to these Rules, decide the procedure  to
         be followed in relation to any appeal  or  application."  (emphasis
         added)

34. The wording of  rule  43(1)  recognises  that  the  "procedure"  to  be
    followed in relation  to  "an  application"  (which  would  include  an
    application for permission) is a matter for  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    In my judgment, that power includes  deciding  to  deal  with  such  an
    application by way of an oral hearing.  As I have already noted,  there
    is nothing in Part 3 of  the  2005  Rules  to  prevent  the  First-tier
    Tribunal from dealing with an application for  permission  at  an  oral
    hearing.

35. It does not appear that the Tribunal in Mohammed was referred  to  rule
    43(1) of the 2005 Rules.  In my judgment, it  clearly  contradicts  the
    position expressed by the Tribunal at [11].  As  a  result,  I  do  not
    agree with Mohammed on this point. However, in any event, the  Tribunal
    in Mohammed accepted that the Upper Tribunal (as in this appeal)  could
    reconstitute itself as  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  deal  with  the
    uncompleted task of determining the application for  permission  at  an
    oral hearing.  Consequently, even though  I  consider  the  distinction
    drawn in Mohammed to be untenable,  nothing  in  Mohammed  prevents  me
    dealing with this application in an oral hearing.

36. For those reasons, I reject Mr Hodgetts' submission that  the  issue  I
    have to decide can only be determined on the  papers  without  an  oral
    hearing.

     Material to be considered

37. That, then, leaves the issue of whether I should decide  the  issue  of
    extension of time on  the  basis  of  the  material  (and  explanation)
    submitted with the application or I may  take  into  account  the  more
    recent material submitted by both parties at the oral hearing.  This is
    not an easy point to determine.  Neither party drew my attention to any
    authority on  the  point.   There  is  undoubtedly  some  merit  in  Mr
    Hodgetts' submission that the applicant seeking  permission  to  appeal
    should  not  be  able  to  adduce  further  evidence,  and  thereby  be
    advantaged, not submitted with the application.  He should not be  able
    to have a 'second bite of the  cherry'.   In  the  ordinary  course  of
    events, the  application  would  be  decided  on  the  papers  and  the
    applicant has an  obligation  to  provide  a  satisfactory  explanation
    established by evidence to justify an extension of time.   It  is  only
    the happenstance that a judge considering the application on the papers
    does not complete her task in dealing with the application that an oral
    hearing may take place and the opportunity to submit  further  evidence
    to explain any delay arises.  Of course, the advantage may be  to  both
    parties - as in this appeal where the respondent also relies on further
    evidence to rebut the ECO's arguments that time should be extended.

38. On the other hand, applying  the  'overriding  objective',  economy  of
    judicial and other  resources may suggest that the First-tier  Tribunal
    at an oral hearing, such as in the present appeal, should have all  the
    relevant and available evidence to reach a decision on the application,
    in particular whether to extend  time.   If  it  cannot  consider  that
    further evidence and decides not to admit the  application,  the  Upper
    Tribunal  will  be  able  to  consider  that  evidence  on  a   renewed
    application made directly to it and consider whether the  "interest  of
    justice" require that renewed application  to  be  admitted  (see  rule
    21(7) of the Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules). Economy of  judicial  and
    other  resources  may  militate  in  favour  of  that  material   being
    considered by the First-tier Tribunal itself and  potentially  avoiding
    the need for a further application to the Upper Tribunal.

39. It is not necessary to decide this point as, in my  judgment,  the  ECO
    cannot succeed whether the extension of time issue is decided solely on
    the basis of the material (or lack of it) submitted  with  the  initial
    application or on the material submitted for the purposes of  the  oral
    hearing before me.

     The proper approach to extending time

40. The proper approach to the exercise of discretion  to  extend  time  is
    well-established in the case law.  In BO and Others (Extension of time
    for appealing) Nigeria  [2006] UKAIT 00035, the AIT summarised in  the
    headnote the approach under the 2005 Rules to extending time  where  an
    appeal notice was filed out of time as follows:

         " the first task in deciding whether  to  extend  time  is  to  see
         whether there is an explanation (or a series of explanations)  that
         cover the delay. If there is, it and all  other  relevant  factors,
         such as the strength  of  the  grounds,  the  consequences  of  the
         decision, the length of the delay and any relevant conduct  by  the
         Respondent are to be taken into account  in  deciding  whether  "by
         reason of special circumstances it would be unjust  not  to  extend
         time".

41. That general approach is equally applicable to the issue of  timeliness
    under the 2005 Rules in respect of an  application  for  permission  to
    appeal.  In Ogundimu (Article 8 - new rules)  Nigeria  [2013]  UKUT  60
    (IAC), the Upper Tribunal dealt with the extension of time  in  respect
    of a permission application made direct to the Upper Tribunal  at  [16]
    and [20] as follows:

         "16. Factors relevant to the exercise of discretion to extend  time
         under rule 5(3)(a) of the 2008 Rules  will  include,  but  are  not
         limited to: (i) the length of any delay, (ii) the reasons  for  the
         delay, (iii) the merits of  the  appeal  and  (iv)  the  degree  of
         prejudice to the respondent if  the  application  is  granted.  The
         merits of the appeal cannot be decisive (see the reasons  given  in
         Boktor and Wanis [2011] UKUT 442).

         .....

         20. There must always be a reason shown why time  limits  have  not
         been complied with and the longer the period of non-compliance  the
         more powerful those reasons should be. Whilst  each  case  must  be
         determined on its own  facts,  given  the  strict  time  limits  in
         immigration appeals generally and  the  reason  behind  those  time
         limits, the expectation is that it  will  be  an  exceptional  case
         where permission to be appeal should be  granted  where  there  has
         been a significant delay in filing an application;  by  significant
         delay we would certainly include any period more than 28  days  out
         of time."

42. In Mohammed, the Tribunal  correctly,  in  my  view,  considered  these
    observations to be equally applicable to a decision made by the  First-
    tier Tribunal whether to extend time under the 2005  Rules  because  of
    the similarity of the rules in both chambers.  (see [12]).

43. In relation  to  any  explanation  offered  for  delay   in  filing  an
    application,  that  must  be  established  by  evidence  and  not  mere
    assertion.  The Tribunal must consider whether the  explanation  covers
    the whole, or only part of, the period of delay.   Likewise, any  claim
    to rebut the presumption that a determination is deemed to be  received
    two days after it was sent by post must be established by evidence.  In
    Wang and Chin, the Upper Tribunal said (at [16] and [20]):

         "16... the procedure rules provide, at rule 55(5) of the Asylum and
         Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules  2005  (which  still  govern
         proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal), that a  document  sent
         by post from and to places within the United Kingdom is  deemed  to
         be served on the second day after it was sent, "unless the contrary
         is proved".  Proof requires evidence.  There was no evidence of non-
         receipt by the Secretary of State tendered with the application  or
         even referred to in it.  In these circumstances it is difficult  to
         see how the judge could have been satisfied that the  Secretary  of
         State's "explanation" had been made out in the manner required  for
         her to make a decision in the Secretary of State's favour.

         ....

         20.   It is, however, clear that a judge of the First-tier Tribunal
         dealing with a permission application which is out of time needs to
         ensure that he or she has considered all  the  available  material,
         including indications  of  when  the  determination  was  sent  and
         whether  there  is  any  evidence  that  it  was  not  received  in
         accordance with the deemed service  provisions  of  the  Procedural
         Rules.  The judge will also need to  consider  the  extent  of  the
         delay and whether the evidence or explanations provided  cover  the
         whole of that delay.  The decision whether to extend  time  is  the
         exercise of a judicial discretion, and  there  should  normally  be
         reasons, which may well be  very  brief,  supporting  the  decision
         reached.  The same rules apply whether it is the individual or  the
         government that seeks an extension of time."

     The explanation of delay

44. I will consider first  only  the  material  and  explanation  contained
    within the application  for  permission.  No  supporting  material  was
    provided with the application.

45. Looking at the explanation set out in  the  application,  it  does  not
    provide a satisfactory explanation based upon evidence for  the  delay.
    As the case law makes clear, any explanation  must  be  established  by
    evidence.  First, the application form contains merely  assertion  that
    the determination was incorrectly served on the POU Cardiff rather than
    the SAT at Angel Square in London.   There  is  no  evidence  with  the
    application to rebut the presumption of service on the POU Cardiff  two
    days after it was sent.  Secondly, there is no  evidence  when  it  was
    sent to, and received by, the SAT at Angel Square to explain  the  fact
    that the application was not filed until 18 August 2014.  Even  if  the
    assertion in the application is taken at face value that the notice was
    sent to the POU in Cardiff, deemed receipt of that would be on 30  July
    2014.  There is no evidence which explains  the  delay  in  filing  the
    application until 19 days later (12 days out  of  time)  on  18  August
    2014.

46. Taking, therefore, simply the material submitted with the  application,
    there is no adequate explanation for the whole (or even  a  substantial
    part) of the period of 19 days delay (including 12 days out of time) in
    filing the application for  permission  after  deemed  service  of  the
    determination on the POU in Cardiff.

47. Secondly, however, even taking into account all the  new  evidence,  in
    particular that relied upon by the respondent and the witness statement
    of Ms Allaire-Rousse, I am not persuaded that any adequate  explanation
    has been established for the delay.

48. Taking John McGirr's  evidence  at  its  highest,  it  relies  upon  an
    agreement with the Tribunal for the service of non-asylum determination
    when an appeal is allowed to be served on  the  SAT  in  Angel  Square.
    John McGirr has no personal knowledge  of  the  circumstances  of  this
    appeal. Assuming that policy to exist -  and  that  was  not  an  issue
    explored before me - it remains the case that  deemed  receipt  of  the
    determination on the POU Cardiff would be on 30 July 2014.  Thereafter,
    it is not entirely clear what occurred.   Mr  Richards  relied  upon  a
    notice from the Tribunal addressed  to  the  POU  at  Cardiff  said  to
    enclose the Tribunal's determination.  That is dated 28 July  2014  and
    also has a "RECEIVED" stamp dated "14 Aug 2014".  Mr Richards submitted
    that I should accept  this  stamp  as  indicating  the  date  that  the
    determination was received at the SAT from, it is assumed, the  POU  in
    Cardiff.  That is certainly one possible interpretation  of  the  stamp
    and Mr Richards did not suggest that it represented acknowledgement  of
    receipt by the  POU  in  Cardiff.   That  said,  however,  the  witness
    statement of Ms Allaire-Rousse recounts a telephone  conversation  with
    the POU in Cardiff:

         "She had checked the appellant's file and had found nothing  on  it
         and that if the determination  allowed  the  appeal  then  it  went
         directly to Angel Square."

49. As I have said, the ECO's case is that the notice of the  determination
    was sent to the POU in Cardiff and only, subsequently, sent to the  SAT
    in Angel Square.

50. In truth, there is a paucity of evidence concerning receipt by the  POU
    in Cardiff and the  SAT  in  Angel  Square.   There  is  no  supporting
    evidence concerning the provenance of the "14 Aug 2014" date  stamp  on
    the Tribunal's notice of 28 July 2014.  It is not suggested it  relates
    to receipt by the POU in Cardiff.  The evidence relied on  by  the  ECO
    does not, in my judgment, rebut the  presumption  in  rule  55(2)  that
    receipt is deemed to have occurred two days after posting which, in the
    case of this determination based upon the notice  relied  upon  by  the
    ECO, equates to receipt by the POU in Cardiff on 30 July  2014.   There
    is no evidence when the notice was sent to the SAT at Angel  Square  in
    London  Mr Richards relied on the notice as  demonstrating  receipt  by
    the SAT in Angel Square on 14 August 2014.  Even taking it as notice of
    receipt by the SAT, as Mr Richards  invited  me  to  do,  there  is  no
    explanation why it took 15 days to  be  sent  and  received  if  deemed
    receipt in Cardiff was on 30 July 2014.  The  result  is  that  it  was
    received  by  the  SAT  eight  days  after  the  time  for  filing  the
    application expired on 6 August 2014  and  that  delay  is  simply  not
    explained.

51. Ms Allaire-Rousse reports in her witness statement that a  person  (not
    Ms Thomas) to whom she initially spoke in the POU in Cardiff  indicated
    that:

         "If a decision had been sent to the POU Unit in Cardiff it would be
         emailed on the same day to the POU Unit in Angel Square."

52. If the notice (with the determination) was indeed received by  the  SAT
    in Angel Square on 14 August 2014, on the basis  of  that  evidence  it
    would either have been emailed on that date  or,  applying  the  deemed
    receipt rule, would have been sent on 12 August 2014.   Deemed  receipt
    by the POU in Cardiff was 30 July 2014 and there is no explanation  for
    the 15 days' delay in sending the application, six of which were  after
    the last date for appealing, namely 6 August 2014.  Had  it  been  sent
    promptly, it would have  been  received  before  time  for  filing  the
    application expired, perhaps giving as much as 6 days to do  so  if  e-
    mailed on the same day.

53. One final point concerns the additional Tribunal notice dated  28  July
    2014 which was addressed to the SAT at Angel Square in London.  It  was
    neither party's case that the determination had been directly served on
    the SAT, on the basis of deemed  receipt,  that  being  30  July  2014.
    Neither  representative  had  a  copy  of  that  notice.   It  may  be,
    therefore, that it was not in fact sent.  However, if it had been  sent
    accompanied by the determination the ECO case is not assisted one iota.
     A fortiori, there would be no explanation for the delay in not  filing
    the application until 18 August 2014.

54. Consequently, even taking into  account  the  new  material  I  am  not
    satisfied that there is an adequate explanation for the  whole  of  the
    delay.

     The merits

55. In exercising my discretion whether  to  extend  time  for  filing  the
    application for permission, I should also have regard to the merits  of
    the ECO's application.  It is, of course, the law that the merits of an
    application are not a sufficient condition to extend  time  (see  Bokor
    and Wanis; and AK).  A good arguable claim does not necessarily  excuse
    a delay in filing a timely application.  However,  they  can  be  taken
    into account particularly where the merits are strong or  a  matter  of
    particular legal importance arises.

56. In this appeal, the respondent's appeal was allowed under para  297  of
    the Immigration Rules  on  the  basis  that  there  were  "serious  and
    compelling family or other considerations" which made his exclusion, as
    a child "undesirable".  The judge set  out  his  consideration  of  the
    "features" at paras 26-41.  At para 42 he balanced those factors,  some
    of which were adverse  to  the  respondent's  claim,  and  nevertheless
    accepted that it was established that the requirements of para 297 were
    met.

57. The ECO's grounds argued that the matters relied upon by the judge  did
    not  "either  separately  or  cumulatively"  constitute  "serious   and
    compelling considerations".  In particular, the grounds argue that  the
    respondent's disability had been coped with by his carers in  Iraq  for
    ten years since his adoptive parents had come to the UK in  2010.   The
    grounds argue that  the  fact  that  the  respondent  is  disabled,  is
    attached to his UK sponsor, believes they are parents, that  they  have
    visited him and that  his  mother  in  the  UK  is  depressed,  is  not
    sufficient to qualify for leave under para 297 of the Rules.

58. As Mr Hodgetts pointed out  in  his  response  to  the  ECO's  skeleton
    argument, that the grounds do  not  explicitly  rely  upon  a  lack  of
    reasoning or that  the  findings  are  irrational.   The  latter  must,
    however, be the basis upon which the judge's  decision  is  challenged.
    The ECO can only succeed, therefore, if the judge's  decision  was  one
    which no reasonable judge properly directing himself could  reach.   Of
    course, at the permission stage that issue need only  be  shown  to  be
    arguable.  In my judgment, the grounds present a weak  legal  challenge
    to Judge Powell's decision.  The fact  that  the  respondent  had  been
    cared for by his family in Iraq for ten years was,  perhaps,  a  factor
    militating against his claim.  However, the sponsors in the UK were his
    parents, albeit by  adoption.   He  is  financially  supported  by  the
    sponsors from the UK  and  there  was  evidence  that  his  mother  was
    increasingly suffering as a result of separation from  the  respondent.
    Despite the fact that he was cared for by his aunt and uncle  in  Iraq,
    the favourable decision challenged upon the basis of irrationality  is,
    in my judgment, a difficult one to succeed upon.   The  merits  of  the
    ECO's appeal may just be arguable but they are, in my view, not strong.
     They do not sufficient to justify an exercise  of  discretion  in  the
    ECO's favour given the absence of  an  evidenced  explanation  for  the
    delay in filing the application 12 days out of time.

     Other factors

59. Only two other matters were raised by the parties.  Mr Hodgetts rightly
    relied upon the prejudice to the respondent's family and  private  life
    if the First-tier tribunal's decision could be challenged out of  time.
    The appeal proceedings would further  prolong  the  separation  of  the
    family.  Mr Richards relied  on  the  delay  being  the  fault  of  the
    Tribunal in not sending the determination to the SAT.  The  ECO  should
    not be prejudiced by that error.  This point is of limited weight.   As
    I have already indicated, despite  the  error,  there  is  insufficient
    evidence to explain why the application still could not have been filed
    in time if it had been sent only promptly by the POU in Cardiff.

Decision

60. In my view, the ECO has not established  "special  circumstances"  such
    that it would be "unjust not" to extend time.  For the above reasons, I
    do not exercise my discretion to extend time.  I reach that decision on
    the basis of (1) the application and any  material  submitted  with  it
    alone; and also (2) the application  and  all  the  material  submitted
    including that for the oral hearing.

61. For these reasons, by virtue of rule  24(4)(b),  this  application  for
    permission to appeal by the ECO is not admitted.

62. It remains, of course, open to the ECO to  seek  permission  to  appeal
    directly from the Upper Tribunal.


                                                                      Signed




                                                                 UTJ A Grubb
                              (sitting as a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal

