
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/23322/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 16 June 2014                            |On 18 July 2014            |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISTANBUL
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     H A
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:         Ms P Hastings a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:        The sponsor. The Respondent was not legally
represented


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is the Entry Clearance Officer  in  Istanbul  ("the  ECO").
   The respondent is a citizen of Turkey who was born on 3 April 1988  ("the
   claimant"). On 4 March  2014  we  heard  the  ECO's  appeal  against  the
   decision of First-Tier Tribunal Judge Finch ("the  FTTJ")  to  allow,  on
   Article 8 human rights grounds, the claimant's appeal against  the  ECO's
   decision of 10 October 2012 to refuse him entry clearance to the  UK  for
   settlement with his wife and sponsor, S A ("the sponsor").


2. We concluded that the FTTJ had erred in law and set  aside  her  decision
   for the reasons set out in the  Error  of  Law  Decision  and  Directions
   contained in the Appendix to this determination. We  preserved  specified
   findings of fact made by the FTTJ and gave directions.


3. The claimant was legally represented at the hearing before the  FTTJ.  He
   was not represented at the hearing before us on 4 March 2014 although the
   sponsor attended. On  that  occasion  she  explained  that  she  and  the
   claimant could no longer afford to pay the solicitors who had been acting
   for them and did not think that it would be possible to obtain legal aid.
   The sponsor now tells us that whilst she has been to see solicitors legal
   assistance is still unaffordable and she has received what we  regard  as
   questionable advice that the claimant does not need legal  representation
   if she attends the hearing on his behalf.


4.  On  the  morning  of  the  hearing  the  sponsor  gave  us   copies   of
   correspondence passing between her and  her  MP,  Harriet  Harman  MP,  a
   letter to Harriet Harman MP from the Department for Work and Pensions,  a
   notice of appointment in connection with  her  application  for  Personal
   Independence Payment and a hospital appointment letter to her from  Kings
   College Hospital NHS Foundation Trust. Although these had been  submitted
   late, Ms Hastings did not object and we admitted them.


5. We explained the procedure  to  the  sponsor  and  invited  her  to  give
   evidence. She showed considerable spirit in giving  evidence  and  making
   points on behalf of the claimant despite the fact that, whilst we did our
   best to put her at ease, she still found the proceedings intimidating. It
   soon became clear that if we were to draw out her evidence  it  would  be
   necessary to ask her relevant questions.  This  we  did.  She  was  cross
   examined by Ms Hastings and we gave her the opportunity to  add  whatever
   she wished. Her evidence is set out in our record of proceedings.


6. The sponsor had come to the Tribunal with a friend who, at the  sponsor's
   request, remained outside the hearing room. We asked the sponsor  whether
   she wanted the friend to give evidence. The  sponsor  was  uncertain  and
   told us that the friend's first language was Turkish and her English  was
   not good. The friend was invited into the hearing room and  we  spoke  to
   her. It became clear that her English would not be good enough for her to
   give evidence without an interpreter. No interpreter had  been  requested
   in advance. We asked the sponsor what her friend might be able to say and
   it was apparent that she would be able to add  little  to  the  sponsor's
   evidence from her personal knowledge. The sponsor agreed that her  friend
   should not be called to give evidence.


7. Ms Hastings relied on the refusal decision and the  evidence  before  us.
   She noted the findings of fact preserved from the  determination  of  the
   FTTJ. She argued that notwithstanding the  positive  credibility  finding
   the claimant  faced  difficulties  with  his  application.  However,  she
   accepted that the sponsor had done her best without legal representation.
   She argued that this was not a case where it was necessary to  go  beyond
   the Article  8  provisions  in  the  Immigration  Rules.  There  were  no
   "arguably good grounds" for  taking  this  step.  The  claimant  and  the
   sponsor had not seen each other for a long time, including  a  period  of
   two years before the decision. It appeared  that  he  was  likely  to  be
   called up for Turkish military service. She accepted  that  the  relevant
   authority was Gulshan (Article 8 - new rules - correct  approach)  [2013]
   UKUT 00640. There was no evidence from the claimant as to what  he  could
   contribute to family life with the sponsor and her two children.  On  the
   sponsor's evidence he had not had much time to engage with the  children.
   There was an information vacuum. The evidence did not  show  that  family
   life was engaged. It would not be disproportionate to keep  the  claimant
   apart from the sponsor and the children. In reply  to  our  question,  Ms
   Hastings said that the sponsor's credibility was not disputed.


8. The sponsor  explained  her  earlier  statement  that  the  claimant  was
   inarticulate. It was not that he could not express himself, more that  he
   did not talk a lot. Social Services were only involved in helping her and
   the children because of problems which  would  be  much  reduced  if  the
   claimant was able to join her and help with the children. She was  in  no
   doubt that the situation would be  much  improved  if  the  claimant  was
   allowed to join her and the children. She had seen what  his  help  could
   achieve during the four months they had lived with him in Turkey. She had
   been diagnosed as suffering from epilepsy only between 12 and  18  months
   ago. She had agreed with the claimant that they did  not  want  any  more
   children. She was devoted to  the  claimant  and  were  it  not  for  the
   children would go to live with him in Turkey. However, the  children  had
   settled lives here. We were asked to allow the appeal.


9. We reserved our determination.


10. We preserved the findings made by the FTTJ in paragraphs 10  and  16  to
   21 of her determination. She said;


       "10. The sponsor accepted in her  oral  evidence  that  she  was  not
       working at the date of the decision and was not working now and  that
       she continues to be in receipt of welfare benefits. In addition,  her
       benefits were not those  referred  to  in  paragraph  E-ECP.  3.3  of
       Appendix FM and at the time of the decision her  support  worker  had
       not applied for Personal Independence Payment and carer's  allowance.
       (Even now she was not in receipt of these benefits and is waiting for
       an interview to see whether she qualifies for them.) Taking this  and
       the totality of the evidence into account and applying a  balance  of
       probabilities I find that the Appellant was  not  entitled  to  entry
       clearance as the partner of a British citizen under  the  Immigration
       Rules.


       16. When considering proportionality I have taken  into  account  the
       fact that I found the sponsor to be an honest witness and, therefore,
       I accept that she is emotionally dependent  upon  the  Appellant  and
       also believes that he will be able to support her in her care of  her
       son, if he is permitted to join her in the United Kingdom.


       17. I also accept on the basis of her own evidence that she  is  very
       socially isolated and that her own family are not  offering  her  any
       support in caring for her children or ensuring that she can cope with
       her own medical conditions. At most, she appears to have  one  friend
       who lives locally. She attended court with the sponsor and is said to
       offer her some emotional support. However, because of her own  family
       responsibilities she is not able to offer her practical support.


       18. Instead, the sponsor is dependent upon  one  support  worker  who
       helps her  telephone  those  in  authority  and  make  any  necessary
       appointments and another who runs a poverty  focus  group.  But  they
       only see the sponsor once a week.


       19. The rest of the time, she has to cope on her own  even  when  she
       has seizures at night. The medical evidence also indicates that there
       have been ongoing concerns about her mental health. One Support,  the
       group who have been supporting  the  sponsor,  partly  attribute  her
       present difficulties to the absence of the Appellant. There was  also
       evidence to confirm that prior to the refusal the sponsor  was  being
       provided with counselling at the Dun Cow Surgery and  had  also  been
       referred to the Neuroradiology Department at Kings College  Hospital.
       In her oral evidence the sponsor also explained how she suffered from
       depression and panic attacks. This was confirmed in a letter from the
       Aylesbury  Partnership  which  said  that  she  had   suffered   from
       depression and anxiety for a number of years and that  she  may  also
       suffer from fibromyalgia.


       20. The letter from Lister Primary Care  Centre  indicates  that  J's
       school was concerned about his behaviour in 2011 - 2012 and  that  he
       had been referred to the Centre. The letter indicates that J was very
       anxious about the sponsor's physical health.  They  are  was  also  a
       Southwark Common Assessment, dated 19th of January 2012, which  noted
       that CAMHS had been involved with both children in the past and that,
       in  particular,  the  sponsor  was  struggling  to  deal   with   J's
       challenging and disruptive behaviour.


       21. I have also taken into account that the  sponsor  said  that  the
       Appellant was in regular basis (sic) as a builder in Cyprus and  that
       her  brother-in-law  would  employ  him  if  he  was  granted   entry
       clearance."


11. We also find the sponsor to be a credible witness. Ms Hastings  did  not
   dispute her credibility. We accept the truth of her evidence in  relation
   to relevant matters either not covered by the findings of the FTTJ or not
   covered by the findings  which  we  have  specifically  preserved.  These
   findings relate to circumstances appertaining at the time  of  the  ECO's
   decision (DR (ECO: post decision evidence) Morocco [2005]  UKAIT  00038).
   The claimant is Turkish and his first language is  Turkish.  However,  he
   has passed the  City  and  Guilds  Entry  Level  I  Certificate  in  ESOL
   International  (reading  writing  and  listening)  English.  The  sponsor
   describes his English as "quite good". Whilst the sponsor  has  lived  in
   the UK all her life she also speaks Turkish. Both  her  parents  were  of
   Turkish Cypriot origin. Her son J does not know his father and has  never
   seen him. Her daughter S did not see her father for about four years  and
   now sees him only intermittently and reluctantly.  The  sponsor  and  the
   claimant have agreed that they will not have any more  children  and  the
   claimant wishes to adopt J  who,  despite  the  distance  and  length  of
   separation, adores him. Both children got on very well with the  claimant
   during the four-month period  they  spent  with  his  family  in  Turkey,
   particularly J, and the sponsor believes that the claimant  is  the  role
   model J is looking for and needs. At some point it  is  likely  that  the
   claimant will have to do his compulsory  one  year  military  service  in
   Turkey. The sponsor's epilepsy is nocturnal  but  largely  controlled  by
   medication. The claimant is aware of this;  the  sponsor  had  a  seizure
   whilst she was living with his family in Turkey.


12. The sponsor would like to work as  a  teaching  assistant  and  believes
   that she may be able to do so with the help and support of the  claimant.
   The job offer made to the claimant referred to at the hearing before  the
   FTTJ was from the sponsor's brother-in-law. The offer is still  open  and
   the sponsor has had other job offers for him from other  members  of  the
   Turkish speaking community.


13. It is  common  ground  that  the  claimant  is  not  entitled  to  entry
   clearance as the partner of a British citizen under Appendix  FM  of  the
   Immigration Rules.


14. The summary of the effect of Gulshan prepared  by  the  author  of  that
   determination states;


       "On the current state of the authorities:

       a) the maintenance  requirements  of  E-LTRP.3.1-3.2  stand  although
          Blake J in R (on the application of MM)  v Secretary of State for
          the Home Department [2013] EWHC 1900 (Admin) said that they could
          constitute an unjustified and disproportionate  interference  with
          the ability of spouses to live  together;  he  suggested  that  an
          appropriate figure may be  around  �13,400,  and  highlighted  the
          position of young people and low wage earners caught by the higher
          figure in the rules;


       b) after applying the requirements of the Rules, only if there may be
          arguably good grounds for granting leave to remain outside them is
          it necessary for Article 8 purposes to go on to  consider  whether
          there are compelling  circumstances  not  sufficiently  recognised
          under them: R (on the application of) Nagre v Secretary of  State
          for the Home Department [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin);

      (c)    the term "insurmountable obstacles"  in  provisions  such  as
         Section  EX.1  are  not  obstacles   which   are   impossible   to
         surmount: MF (Article 8 - new  rules)  Nigeria [2012]  UKUT  393
         (IAC); Izuazu (Article 8 - new rules) [2013] UKUT 45 (IAC); they
         concern the practical possibilities of relocation. In the  absence
         of such insurmountable obstacles, it is necessary  to  show  other
         non-standard and particular features  demonstrating  that  removal
         will be unjustifiably harsh: Nagre.


      The Secretary of State addressed the Article 8 family aspects of  the
      respondent's position through the Rules, in particular EX1,  and  the
      private life aspects through paragraph 276ADE. The judge should  have
      done likewise, also paying attention to the Guidance. Thus the  judge
      should have considered the Secretary of State's conclusion under EX.1
      that  there  were  no   insurmountable   obstacles   preventing   the
      continuation of the family life outside the UK. Only  if  there  were
      arguably good grounds for granting leave to remain outside the  rules
      was it necessary for him for Article 8 purposes to go on to  consider
      whether  there  were  compelling   circumstances   not   sufficiently
      recognised under the Rules.

15. We find that there are arguably good grounds for granting  the  claimant
   leave to enter and settle outside the provisions of the Immigration Rules
   and that it is necessary for us to go on to consider  whether  there  are
   compelling  circumstances   not   sufficiently   recognised   under   the
   Immigration Rules. Although this is  not  a  case  where  Section  EX  of
   Appendix FM can be applied it is relevant to  our  consideration  of  the
   Article 8 grounds outside the Immigration Rules. It was not addressed  in
   terms by the ECO although the Entry Clearance Manager did  say  that  the
   refusal of the application would not prevent the claimant and the sponsor
   being able to continue to see each other or to reside with each other  in
   the third country.


16. Ms Hastings did not challenge the credibility of the  sponsor's  account
   or evidence, relying upon what she described as an  "evidential  vacuum".
   Although  we  recognise  that  there  is  little   documentary   evidence
   supporting the application by the claimant, we have  taken  very  careful
   note of the sponsor's evidence. This was not merely evidence  as  to  her
   "belief" in their relationship but was evidence as to the concrete nature
   of their relationship, his relationship with the children and  with  her,
   her relationship with his family and the time they  had  spent  together.
   There was no challenge to this evidence by Ms Hastings; it was not put to
   the sponsor that this was no more than misguided belief or that her views
   could not be relied upon as to his intentions.  We  found  no  reason  to
   doubt the sponsor's assessment of their personal relationship  and  their
   family relationship. We find that the claimant and the sponsor are  in  a
   genuine and subsisting relationship. The sponsor  is  a  British  citizen
   settled in the UK. Whilst the sponsor would be prepared to  go  and  live
   with the claimant in Turkey she is not prepared to take her children with
   her or leave them behind and it would not be reasonable to expect her  to
   do so. They are British citizens who have lived  here  all  their  lives.
   Their friends, relatives and connections are here. The sponsor's daughter
   was born in July 1998 and her son in July 2004. They have  been  educated
   here, speak only little Turkish and are being provided  with  appropriate
   help  for  the  difficulties  they  face.  We   find   that   there   are
   insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing outside the UK.


17. This finding is relevant both to the preliminary question of whether  we
   need to consider direct Article 8 grounds "outside" the Immigration Rules
   and, having answered that question in the affirmative, whether there  are
   compelling  circumstances   not   sufficiently   recognised   under   the
   Immigration Rules.


18. In her letter to her  MP  the  sponsor  has  raised  concerns  that  the
   Tribunal might have drawn stereotypical  and  discriminatory  conclusions
   from the difference in ages between her and the claimant (he was born  in
   1988 and she was born in 1966) and that he was using her to come  to  the
   UK and obtain British citizenship. It is an accusation about which she is
   understandably sensitive and she may  have  misunderstood  the  reasoning
   behind questions which needed to be  asked.  We  have  come  to  no  such
   conclusions. On the contrary we find that there  are  strong  indications
   which have led us to the  conclusion  that  they  are  in  a  continuing,
   genuine and subsisting marriage and relationship. Both of them speak  the
   same language and have the same Turkish heritage.  The  sponsor  and  her
   children lived with the claimant and his family in Turkey for  some  four
   months. Their relationship continues notwithstanding the long  separation
   and the delays of the application and appeals process.


19. We find it probable that if the claimant obtains entry clearance and  is
   able to settle here there will be wider benefits  going  beyond  enabling
   him and the sponsor to live together. He was working at the date  of  the
   decision and is working now, as a builder. He has a genuine offer of work
   here and even if that were not to materialise  we  accept  the  sponsor's
   evidence that work can be found  for  him  within  the  Turkish  speaking
   community. Paid employment for the claimant should reduce  the  sponsor's
   need to rely on benefits. The relationship he has  built  up  with  J  in
   Turkey and over the telephone should provide J with a father  figure  and
   assist him with his difficulties. Whilst the claimant and S  are  not  as
   close their relationship is a good one.


20. On all the evidence, including our  findings  and  those  of  the  FTTJ,
   which we have set out, we find that the first four of the five Razgar  (R
   v SSHD ex parte  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27)  tests  are  answered  in  the
   affirmative and that this appeal turns on the last,  proportionality.  We
   of course take into account that the sponsor is currently in  receipt  of
   public funds and that  we  are  to  attach  considerable  weight  to  the
   requirements of the Immigration Rules. We find that to  the  standard  of
   the balance of probabilities the claimant has established that  it  would
   be a disproportionate interference with his right to respect  for  family
   life including the family lives of the sponsor and the two  children  not
   to grant him leave to settle with them in the UK. By the  same  token  we
   find that there are compelling circumstances not sufficiently  recognised
   under the Immigration Rules which would result in  the  denial  of  entry
   clearance infringing the Article 8 human  rights  of  the  claimant,  the
   sponsor and the children. In reaching this conclusion we reflect the fact
   that the interests of the children are  a  primary,  but  not  paramount,
   consideration.


21. The FTTJ made an anonymity direction. That direction continues in  force
   in order to protect the interests of the children. We make an order under
   rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 prohibiting
   the disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead members of the
   public to identify the claimant, the sponsor  or  any  members  of  their
   families.


22. Having set aside the decision of the FTTJ we remake  that  decision  and
   allow the claimant's appeal on Article 8 human rights grounds










   .............................................
            Signed                                             Date 19 June
   2014
   Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden



































                                  APPENDIX

                    ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

   1. The appellant (hereafter the ECO) appeals a decision of the First-tier
      Tribunal which allowed an  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds  by  the
      respondent (hereafter the claimant) against a  decision  of  an  Entry
      Clearance Officer to refuse entry clearance as the spouse of a British
      Citizen present and settled in the UK.


   2. Permission to appeal had been granted on the  basis  it  was  arguable
      that the First-tier Tribunal judge fail to identify the priority given
      to compliance with the requirements of the Immigration Rules so far as
      Article 8 is concerned and did not demonstrate the approach as set out
      in Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin).

   3. The claimant was not legally represented before us; his wife  appeared
      and was accompanied by her daughter and son. His solicitors  submitted
      a Rule 24 response to the grant of permission  to  appeal  and  stated
      that they would not be appearing.

   4. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appeal under Appendix FM on  the
      grounds that the claimant did not meet the criteria for maintenance  -
      the claimant's spouse was publicly funded. The claimant, in  the  Rule
      24 response, does not dispute that finding.

   5.  Having  found  that  the  claimant  did  not  meet  the   maintenance
      requirements  of  the  Rules  the  First-tier  Tribunal   judge   then
      considered the appeal on Article 8  grounds.  Unfortunately,  although
      allowing the appeal there was a lack  of  adequate  reasoning  in  her
      findings:  she  has  speculated  as  to  the  possibility  of   future
      development  of  the  relationship  between  the  claimant   and   the
      sponsor's children and has given  no  reasons  for  finding  that  the
      children will benefit from being brought up by their  mother  and  the
      claimant other than a generalised comment that children  benefit  from
      being brought up by both parents; she makes  no  findings  as  to  the
      intentions or views of the claimant and has failed to balance the lack
      of compliance with the Immigration Rules and the public interest.

   6. For these reasons we are satisfied there is an error  of  law  in  the
      determination such that the decision is set aside to be remade.

   DIRECTIONS


   1. The claimant has leave to file such  further  evidence  as  considered
      relevant, such evidence to be filed and served 7  days  prior  to  the
      resumed hearing.


   2. Resumed hearing to be listed first available date after 4th June 2014.

   3. The findings in paragraphs 10, 16 to 21 inclusive stand.

    Date 11th March 2014
      Judge of the Upper Tribunal Coker

