
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/23747/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke              |     Decision & Reasons           |
|                                           |Promulgated                       |
|On 29th May 2015                           |     On 26th June 2015            |
|                                           |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT

                                   Between

                           BETHELHEM BELETE TEKLU
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Campbell, Counsel instructed by French &
Company
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Background

 1. This appeal comes before the Upper Tribunal for the  second  time.   On
    the first occasion the appeal was heard in the Upper Tribunal  on  14th
    March 2014 following the  grant  of  permission  to  appeal  against  a
    decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal P  J  M  Hollingworth  who
    dismissed the appeal against the decision of an Entry Clearance Officer
    taken on 30th October 2012 to refuse entry clearance as the child of  a
    parent present and settled in the United Kingdom in accordance with the
    provisions of paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules.  Having found  an
    error in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, Deputy Upper Tribunal
    Judge Coates submitted  the  matter  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    hearing afresh.  Judge Coates (sitting as a  Designated  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal) then heard the matter on that basis in the  First-
    tier Tribunal on 16th May 2014.  His decision to dismiss the appeal  on
    immigration and human rights grounds was sent out on 2nd June 2014.

 2. On 1st August 2014 Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal McCarthy
    gave permission to the appellant to  appeal  against  the  decision  of
    Designated Judge Coates and it is on that basis that  the  matter  came
    before me in the Upper Tribunal.

Error on a Point of Law

 3. In granting permission Designated Judge McCarthy found that most of the
    grounds of application did not show an arguable error  on  a  point  of
    law.  However, he thought there was merit  in  the  argument  that  the
    judge had failed to properly assess issues relating to the  appellant's
    wellbeing as a child at the date of decision which  was  the  operative
    date for consideration of Article 8 issues as confirmed by the House of
    Lords in AS (Somalia) [2009] UKHL  32.   That  was  because  the  judge
    appeared to have considered human rights issues at the date of hearing,
    (when she was 17 years) as opposed to the date of decision when she was
    15 years of age.

 4. The respondent  entered  a  response  on  13th  August  2014.   It  was
    submitted that, whilst it may have been an error for the judge to  have
    had regard to the appellant's age at the date of hearing, the judge was
    entitled to find that the Immigration Rules could not  be  met  as  the
    appellant lived with her father  in  Ethiopia  and  that  she  was  not
    experiencing problems with her father on the basis claimed.

 5. At the hearing before me Ms Campbell confirmed that the sole issue  was
    the judge's approach to the Article 8 claim which he had,  she  argued,
    considered at the date of hearing when the appellant was  17  years  of
    age rather than at the date of decision on 30th October 2012  when  she
    was 15 years.  She submitted that, even  if  the  judge's  unfavourable
    findings in relation to alleged abuse by the appellant's father were to
    stand, the judge had not made findings about her family life  generally
    or evaluated the relationship between  mother  and  child  taking  into
    consideration maintenance payments made by the mother for  the  benefit
    of her child.

 6. Mr McVeety  confirmed  that  the  respondent  relied  on  the  Rule  24
    response.  He emphasised that, as it had been  agreed  at  the  hearing
    that the appellant could not benefit from the provisions  of  paragraph
    297 of the Immigration Rules as a dependent child, he could not see how
    she could succeed on an Article 8  claim.   This  was  particularly  so
    since the appellant had not lived with her mother since she was 7 years
    of age.  These were factors which applied whether the judge had  looked
    at human rights issues at the date of decision or hearing.

 7. Ms Campbell emphasised that there had been  financial  support  between
    sponsor and appellant over a number of years with a strong bond between
    the parties despite the fact that they had not seen each  other  for  a
    long time.  She argued that not to allow the appellant to live with her
    mother  in  the  United  Kingdom   made   the   respondent's   decision
    disproportionate and not in the best interests of  the  appellant.   In
    respect of the application  of  that  principle  and  the  respondent's
    obligations  under  Section  55  of  the   Borders,   Citizenship   and
    Immigration Act 2009 she reminded me of  the  decisions  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in MK (Best interests of child) [2011] UKUT 475 (IAC) and  E-A
    (Article 8 - best interests of child) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 315 (IAC).

 8. After hearing submissions I indicated that I would reserve my decision.
     It was also agreed that, if I were to find that there was  a  material
    error in the decision, I could continue to re-make the  decision  based
    upon the submissions made on Article 8 issues set out in the  light  of
    the negative findings of fact of the First-tier Tribunal. However,  for
    the reasons I give below, I am not satisfied that the decision shows an
    arguable error on appoint of law.

Conclusions

 9. It is not in issue that the judge considered Article 8  issues  at  the
    date of hearing when the appellant was 17 years of  age.   This  is  an
    error because the decision of the House of Lords in AS (Somalia) [2009]
    UKHL  32  makes  it  clear  that  Section  85(5)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  prevents  the  admission  of  evidence
    postdating the immigration decision in appeals  against  a  refusal  of
    entry clearance.  However, the issue for me to decide is whether or not
    the error in the decision in that respect is material to the Article  8
    decision made by the Designated Judge.  I am  not  satisfied  that  the
    error is material for the reasons which follow.

10. The judge made sound findings about the credibility of the  appellant's
    claims which are as relevant to the situation at the date  of  decision
    as they would have been at the date of hearing.

11. For cogent reasons the judge found that the appellant's claim  to  have
    been the subject of abusive behaviour by her father from 2012  was  not
    credible.  The judge examines the claims by the sponsor  and  appellant
    in some detail in this respect in paragraphs 26 and 27 of the  decision
    taking into account correspondence which he was entitled  to  find  was
    inconclusive in proving the claim of abusive  behaviour.   The  sponsor
    also confirmed, in evidence, that the appellant  was  living  with  her
    father at the date of her application for  entry  clearance  in  August
    2012.  Thus, it cannot be contended that any human rights  claim  based
    upon events at the date of decision can  be  affected  by  the  claimed
    abusive behaviour of the appellant's father.  Nor can it be  said  that
    the appellant was living independently of her father  at  the  date  of
    application.  There is nothing to suggest that the  situation  was  any
    different at the date of decision two  months  later  on  30th  October
    2012.

12. It is, no  doubt,  for  the  preceding  reasons  that  the  appellant's
    representative at the First-tier hearing conceded  that  the  appellant
    could not satisfy the requirements of paragraph 297 of the  Immigration
    Rules.  Sub-paragraphs (e) and (f) are relevant in that respect  as  it
    was being conceded that the parent in the United Kingdom did  not  have
    sole responsibility for  the  appellant's  upbringing  nor  were  there
    serious and  compelling  family  or  other  considerations  which  made
    exclusion of the appellant undesirable.  As seen against the background
    of the judge's conclusion that the appellant had not  suffered  abusive
    behaviour at the hands of her father even from a time before  the  date
    of decision, the concession was an important  factor  in  enabling  the
    judge to reach his conclusions on Article 8 issues.  Additionally,  the
    judge noted that the sponsor and appellant had not met since  1998  and
    no earlier application for entry clearance had been made nor had  there
    been any attempt by the  sponsor  to  visit  the  appellant  either  in
    Ethiopia or a third country in the intervening years.  These  were  all
    matters which would have applied equally at the date of decision.

13. Although the experienced judge does not specifically refer to the  five
    stage Razgar process in dismissing the human rights appeal, it is quite
    evident that he had identified factors which could  not  possibly  have
    allowed a favourable Article 8 decision, even based upon evidence as it
    was found to be at the  date  of  decision.   There  was  clearly  only
    limited family life between the appellant and her mother  even  if  the
    financial contributions for the  appellant's  upkeep  were  taken  into
    consideration.  At the relevant time the appellant was also living with
    her father with whom she had lived since her mother came to the  United
    Kingdom in 2004.  The judge also correctly pointed out in paragraph  19
    of the decision that the respondent's obligations under Section  55  of
    the 2009 Act had no application.  As the Court of Appeal made clear  in
    SS (Congo) and Ors [2015] EWCA Civ 387 the requirements upon the  state
    under Article 8 are less stringent in the leave to enter context rather
    than in that of leave to remain.  Against that, the judge's failure  to
    follow a Razgar five stage process can hardly be considered significant
    when he had already identified factors which could only  point  to  the
    respondent's refusal decision being proportionate.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not show a material error on  a
point of law and shall stand.

Anonymity

Anonymity was  not  requested  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  nor  do  I
consider it appropriate in this entry clearance case.








Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt


