
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/23078/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Decision and Reasons       |
|On 28th  October 2014                           |Promulgated On 31st October|
|                                                |2014                       |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                          the hon. mr justice davis
                       upper tribunal judge GOLDSTEIN

                                   Between

                         THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                        QURAT-UL-AIN NADEEM SIDDIQUE
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss N Braganza, Counsel, instructed by Stevens
Machi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr R Hopkin, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1.  On  2nd  July  2014  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   Khawar   issued   a
    determination in relation to an appeal by Mrs Nadeem  Siddique  against
    the decision of an Entry Clearance Officer who refused her  application
    for entry clearance to the United  Kingdom  as  a  returning  resident.
    That decision was made on 9th October 2012.  First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Khawar found that the decision was in breach of the  Immigration  Rules
    and that it breached the appellant's  right  under  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.  Therefore, Mrs Siddique's  appeal
    was allowed and the decision was overturned.

 2. The Entry Clearance Officer appeals against that decision.   There  are
    written grounds of appeal relating to alleged  misconstruction  of  the
    Immigration Directorate Instructions  and  references  to  the  judge's
    decision in terms of it being in conflict with Zambrano.  But,  as  has
    transpired in the course of the hearing before us, this  case  in  fact
    turns on the First-tier Tribunal's approach to what  was  and  was  not
    known by the Entry Clearance Officer at the time of  the  decision  and
    the Tribunal's approach thereafter to the validity of that decision.

 3. The judge properly referred to the  guidance  in  DR  (Morocco)  [2005]
    UKAIT 00038 which indicated that evidence  arising  subsequent  to  the
    decision of an Entry Clearance Officer can be considered by a  Tribunal
    provided that such  evidence  is  relevant  to  an  assessment  of  the
    circumstances which appertained at the date of decision.   As  is  very
    properly conceded by Mr Hopkin on behalf of the Entry Clearance Officer
    that means that the Tribunal could admit evidence  of  facts  that  did
    exist at the time of the decision.  Equally, they cannot and should not
    admit evidence of circumstances which simply were not in existence.

 4. The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  in  considering  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer's decision said this at paragraph 23:

         "It is plain  to  see  from  the  refusal  notice  that  the  Entry
         Clearance Officer only considered the first two factors.  [That  is
         as reference to the list of factors in the Immigration  Directorate
         Instructions]. He did not consider factors (iii) to  (vi)   However
         the Entry  Clearance  Officer  cannot  be  blamed  for  not  having
         considered the latter because there is no evidence   before  me  to
         establish  that he  was made aware of such additional  material  as
         has been presented in this appeal.  The Entry Clearance Officer was
         not aware of the reasons why the appellant had remained in Pakistan
         for an extended  period  of  time.  In  addition  since  the  Entry
         Clearance Officer's decision was made on 9th October 2012, he could
         not possibly have been aware of the  fact  that  in  April/May  the
         appellant's son returned to the United Kingdom and has been settled
         here with his father since that date."

 5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge went on to speculate that had there  been
    a review by an Entry Clearance Manager of the case  then  the  decision
    "would  potentially  have  been  very  different".   We  use  the  word
    "speculate" advisedly. There was no evidence at all as to what an Entry
    Clearance Manager would or would not have done and no evidence  at  all
    as to with what material he would or would not have been  provided.

 6. The Tribunal judge went on then to consider the very factors which  the
    Entry Clearance Officer did not.  He did so  in  paragraph  25  of  his
    determination by reference to the evidence that was before  him.   Most
    particularly and potentially crucially, he noted that Mrs Siddique  had
    a home in the United Kingdom and, if admitted, would  resume  residence
    In the United Kingdom with her husband and son (now aged 10).   Yet  at
    the time that the Entry Clearance Officer was  considering  the  matter
    the son of the respondent to this appeal was with her in Pakistan.

 7. It follows that the First-tier Tribunal Judge took into account matters
    that could not possibly have been before the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    because they were not  circumstances  appertaining  at  the  time.   Mr
    Hopkin on behalf of the Entry Clearance Officer goes on to point to the
    fact that the First-tier Tribunal Judge in his concluding remarks  said
    this:

         "Accordingly on the totality of the evidence of the evidence before
         me, I am satisfied that the appellant is entitled to succeed  under
         paragraph 19 of the Immigration Rules."

 8. It is argued, and it seems to us argued  with  some  force,  that  that
    amounted to the First-tier Tribunal Judge remaking the  decision.   The
    First-tier Tribunal Judge not only remade the decision by reference  to
    material that could not in any circumstances have been before the Entry
    Clearance Officer but he did on the basis of his own view of the facts.
     It may be that the judge meant to say that  on  the  totality  of  the
    evidence of the evidence he was  satisfied  that  no  reasonable  Entry
    Clearance Officer could have refused entry to the person concerned  but
    that is not what he actually said.

 9. Finally this, the First-tier Tribunal Judge found  that  the  appellant
    was entitled to succeed under Article  8  of  the  Convention.   It  is
    agreed on all sides that any Article 8 claim must be based on the facts
    that were in existence at the time of the relevant  decision,  i.e.  in
    October 2012.  It is perfectly plain that a highly material  factor  in
    any Article 8 decision was the presence of the respondent's son in  the
    United Kingdom.  That was not a circumstance that obtained  in  October
    2012.

10. It follows that we agree that this decision is subject  to  significant
    and material errors of law.  We have not set out the  detailed  factual
    findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge because  that  has  not  been
    necessary for our decision.  It is equally not necessary for us  to  do
    so in order to give any guidance as to  what  should  happen  hereafter
    because the order we make is that the matter should be remitted to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.   It  will  be  for  the  First-tier
    Tribunal at that stage to hear  whatever  evidence  is  thought  to  be
    appropriate and to make whatever decision is thought to be  appropriate
    given the findings of fact that that Tribunal makes.  It follows it  is
    not for us to set out the facts as they appear to us to be.

11. Whether that process in fact will take place must be a matter  for  the
    parties. As Mr Hopkin on behalf of the Entry Clearance Officer sensibly
    pointed out, were an Entry Clearance Officer to  be  asked  to  make  a
    decision today on the facts as now obtain, there is every prospect that
    the decision would be different. Mr Hopkin is not seeking to nor  could
    he  bind  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer.   It  is  merely  a  sensible
    observation of fact.  However that is a matter for the parties.  All we
    can do is quash the decision made by the First-tier Tribunal, allow the
    appeal and remit it for rehearing on the first convenient date.

                  Signed                                  Date 30 October
                      2014
                                              The Honourable Mr Justice
Davis
                                             (Sitting as a Judge of the
Upper Tribunal)
