

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/23235/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 27th November 2013                         |On 6th  January 2014         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

            PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL Mr JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                         VICE PRESIDENT ARFON-JONES
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                             Goma Kumari Gurung
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Blundell, counsel, instructed by South West
London Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant (hereafter the ECO)  appeals  a  decision  by  First-tier
    Tribunal judge Cope who allowed an appeal by Ms Gurung  (hereafter  the
    claimant), who is a citizen of Nepal born 30th November 1976, against a
    decision dated 14th November 2011 to refuse her entry  clearance  as  a
    partner on the grounds that she did not meet the financial criteria  as
    set out in paragraph E-ECP.3.3.

 2. Judge Cope determined the appeal on the papers,  as  requested  by  the
    respondent (hereafter the claimant). He found that the decision of  the
    ECO was not in accordance with the Immigration Rules  or  the  law  and
    that the application remained before the ECO for a lawful decision;  he
    allowed the appeal. He made no findings on whether the claimant met the
    financial requirements of the Rules.

 3. Permission to appeal the decision was granted by Designated  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Murray on 12th September 2013 on the grounds that it was
    arguable that although the ECO accepts that there were  factual  errors
    in the decision to refuse entry clearance,  the  financial  calculation
    when properly conducted on the basis of the  documentation  before  the
    ECO would in any event result in the claimant being unable to meet  the
    criteria and that "evidential flexibility"  was  not  relevant  to  the
    case.

 4. It was agreed by the parties before us  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    judge had erred in law in failing to take a decision on  the  basis  of
    the documents before him which were adequate to enable a decision to be
    reached, despite the errors on the face of the ECO's decision.  It  was
    agreed that the error was such that the decision be  set  aside  to  be
    remade. We discussed with the parties the possibility of remitting  the
    decision to the First-tier Tribunal in the light of the  total  failure
    of the judge to reach a decision but Mr Blundell and Ms Everett, having
    discussed the issue between them, submitted that it was appropriate for
    us to reach a decision on the evidence before us, such evidence  having
    been before the ECO at the date of decision. Accordingly we  agreed  to
    consider the documents and their submissions.

 5. Mr Blundell took us carefully through  the  financial  documents  which
    confirmed that the claimant  met  the  financial  requirements  of  the
    Rules. Ms Everett, quite properly in  the  light  of  that  documentary
    evidence, concurred.

 6. Accordingly we allowed the appeal and directed that entry clearance  be
    issued.

DECISION

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

We set aside the decision

We re-make the decision in the appeal  by  allowing  the  appeal  under  the
Immigration Rules

Consequential Directions

Forthwith on receipt of this decision  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  shall
issue entry clearance  provided the Entry  Clearance  Officer  is  satisfied
there are no circumstances arising after the  decision  under  appeal  which
make it necessary to refuse to do so



Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of our decision to  re-make  the  decision  in  the  appeal  by
allowing it, we have considered whether  to  make  a  fee  award  (rule  23A
(costs) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)  Rules  2005  and
section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007).

We have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

We make a whole fee award.

Reasons:
The appeal has been allowed




Signed:  [pic]
         President,
         Upper Tribunal,
         Immigration and Asylum Chamber



Dated:   20 December 2013

