
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/23921/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7th March 2014                             |On 31st March 2014           |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                          mr rasagopal thambimuthu

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Muquit, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 25th  March  1972.   He
    made an application for entry clearance as a spouse.  This was  refused
    by the Entry Clearance Officer on 16th October 2012 for the reasons  as
    contained in the notice of refusal.
2.   Essentially it was said that the appellant had previously  submitted  a
    false marriage certificate.  In relation to the current  application  a
    false refugee identity  document  was  also  submitted.   It  was  also
    contended that the marriage certificate submitted  in  support  of  the
    current application did  not  match  that  which  had  previously  been
    submitted and it was contended that that  also  was  false.   Thus  the
    Entry Clearance Officer was not satisfied that the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor had contracted a valid marriage.

3.   The  matter  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Barker  on  6th
    December  2013.   On  that  occasion  the  sponsor  attended  and  gave
    evidence.

4.   In  relation  to  the  false  marriage  certificate  submitted  on  the
    previous occasion ,it  was  her  evidence  that  she  relied  upon  the
    assistance of others and had no  knowledge  that  it  was  false.   She
    stressed the difficulty of getting  documents  in  the  situation  that
    existed in Sri Lanka.  As to the identity card,  her evidence was  that
    she had obtained it and had no knowledge that it was  false.   Reliance
    is placed by the respondent upon the document verification report which
    was issued on 23rd July 2013.

5.   The sponsor did not accept, however, that a false marriage  certificate
    had been issued in the current situation.

6.   The Entry Clearance Officer, in the  refusal  of  entry  clearance  had
    noted that only a translation of  the  marriage  certificate  had  been
    provided.  Enquiries had  produced  the  response  that  that  was  not
    capable of being verified  without  the  original  or  a  copy  of  the
    original being available.

7.   The Judge doubted the credibility  of  the  sponsor  for  a  number  of
    reasons as set out in the determination but in particular at  paragraph
    29 of the determination stated that there has  been  nothing  from  the
    appellant to verify the information directly and  no  certificates  had
    been produced to the Tribunal and no documents verifying the  marriage.
    He said it was a duty upon  the  appellant  to  ensure  that  necessary
    documents were put before the Tribunal.   In  those  circumstances  the
    judge was not satisfied that the appellant and sponsor were married.

8.   Grounds of appeal were submitted against that  decision.   A  complaint
    was made that it was unfair  of  the  Judge  to  take  the  absence  of
    documentation against the appellant, particularly when the respondent's
    bundle had not been  presented  and  the  ECO  had  not  complied  with
    directions to produce the bundle to the First-tier Tribunal.

9.   Permission to appeal  was  granted  on  the  basis  that  the  marriage
    certificate which had been produced to the ECO, had not been challenged
    as to its authenticity and had not been produced by the  ECO.   It  was
    argued that  the  appellant  should  not  be  penalised  for  the  non-
    availability of a document that had been produced to the ECO.

10.  Mr Muquit, who represents the appellant, submitted  that  the  original
    of the marriage certificate had indeed been sent to  the  ECO  and  was
    therefore capable of verification.  He did not accept that the ECO only
    received a translation of that document.  In support of that contention
    he invites my attention to two documents.   The  first  document  is  a
    letter from the solicitors to the Entry Clearance  Officer  dated  14th
    June 2012.  This was the  letter  sending  the  relevant  documents  in
    support of the application and the  letter  makes  it  clear  that  the
    original of the marriage certificate together with a  translation  have
    been sent.

11.  Further  support  for  that  matter  is  his  contention  that,  having
    received the  respondent's  bundle  of  documents  shortly  before  the
    hearing, it is apparent that the Entry Clearance  Officer  did  receive
    the certificate because there is contained within the bundle a copy  of
    the marriage certificate itself.

12.  Mr Avery, on behalf of the respondent, indicated that he had  no  prior
    knowledge of this document in his file and was proceeding or  intending
    to proceed on the basis that there was no such document in existence.

13.  Whether or not the original was sent or whether  a  copy  was  sent  is
    perhaps to be considered at some stage.  The copy in the  bundle  bears
    the certificate number and seems to be  a scanned copy  of  a  marriage
    register filed in the  office  and  dated  24th  April  2012.   Whether
    therefore the original was sent or whether a scanned certified copy was
    sent is not entirely clear.

14.  However, what seems  to  be  clear  is  that  within  the  respondent's
    bundle, and I have no reason to doubt what Counsel says to me  on  that
    matter, there is a copy of the marriage certificate.

15.  That serves to throw  into  sharp  relief  the  comments  made  by  the
    Tribunal Judge in paragraph 29  and  the  rejection  of  the  sponsor's
    evidence in part because of the absence of that document.

16.  In fairness to the respondent it is to be noted  that  the  Immigration
    Judge makes other criticisms of the appellant and sponsor in  terms  of
    the evidence which has been produced to support the marriage.  However,
    the marriage  certificate  clearly  is  a  central  document  in  these
    proceedings and its absence at a crucial juncture  raises  starkly  the
    issue of fairness, whether real or perceived.

17.  Now that the document has come to light it seems to me only  fair  that
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside to  be  remade  so
    that the fullest consideration can be given to  all  the  documentation
    that has been presented.  Although it is  entirely  understandable  why
    the Judge came to the findings that he did, it is clear that there  was
    a mistake of fact as set out in the principles of  E  and  R  and  that
    there was indeed within the papers a  marriage  certificate.   As  that
    mistaken fact may have a material influence upon the overall outcome of
    the appeal it seems to me that there is a material error  of  law  such
    that the decision should be set aside and remade.
18.  I indicated to Mr Muquit, however, that merely producing a copy of  the
    marriage certificate without more may not be sufficient to outweigh the
    other documents that had been  presented  which  were  accepted  to  be
    false.  It would  be  open  to  the  Judge  to  consider  applying  the
    principles of Tanveer Ahmed.

19.  I suggested to Mr Muquit that in the  absence  of  the  original  being
    found there should be  direct  communication  with  the  registrar  who
    issued the document sending the copy of the original  to  the  registry
    with the request that it verify whether that  was  indeed  an  accurate
    document which it had issued and further whether it can   confirm  that
    it is a genuine document reflective of its records.   Though  I  cannot
    compel the appellant's solicitors to make such enquiries, I stress that
    it might be very prudent for them to be made in all the  circumstances.



Directions

    (1)  The decision of Judge Baker shall be set aside to be remade.


    (2)   Having  regard  to  the  Senior  President's  Practice  Direction
         particularly paragraph 7 thereof I conclude that there should be  a
         full rehearing before the First-tier Tribunal.


    (3)  I would expect to be further enquiries made by or on behalf of the
         appellant concerning the marriage certificate itself.  The  results
         of any such enquiries to be notified to  the  respondent  no  later
         than seven days prior to the hearing.  As to any further directions
         they will be a matter for the First-tier and not for me.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD


