
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/23307/2012
     OA/23311/2012
     OA/23312/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Sheldon Court               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 14th August 2014                             |On 9th September 2014      |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                            (1) Mrs Aysha Khatun
                         (2) Miss bushra akter bibi
                       (3) master mahmud sultan tariq
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (DHAKA)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr N Ahmed (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Broe, promulgated on 26th March  2014,  following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham Sheldon Court on 26th February 2014.  In the  determination,
    the judge allowed the appeal of Mrs Aysha  Khatun,  Miss  Bushra  Akter
    Bibi, and Master Mahmud Sultan Tariq.  The Respondent  Entry  Clearance
    Officer, applied for, and was granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellants

 2. The Appellants are all citizens of Bangladesh.   They  consist  of  the
    principal Appellant, who is the wife of Mr S Uddin,  a  person  present
    and settled in the UK, and his two children.  The  principal  Appellant
    was born on 16th June 1968 and the children were  born  on  15th  April
    1995 and 20th March  1997  respectively.   They  appealed  against  the
    decision of the Entry Clearance Officer dated  15th  October  2012,  to
    refuse their application to join their sponsoring  husband  and  father
    respectively in order to  live  with  him  permanently  as  his  family
    members in the UK under paragraphs 281 and 301 of HC 395 respectively.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge heard the account  on  behalf  of  the  Appellants  that  the
    principal Appellant had met the sponsoring Mr Uddin in Sylhet  in  1986
    and the relationship began in that year, but she last saw him  on  31st
    May 2011 and they kept in contact  by  telephone,  but  they  had  four
    children, and they planned to live with the Sponsor at his rented  home
    on Worcester, where the Sponsor worked at a restaurant.  The judge  had
    regard to additional documentation,  including  DNA  reports,  and  age
    assessments, with respect to the children of the Sponsor.

 4. The Sponsor had originally applied for asylum in the UK, and when  that
    was refused he did not return back to Bangladesh after 2006,  but  only
    went back in 2011 for some three months after  he  had  got  indefinite
    leave to remain in the UK.  The judge stated that the issues before him
    were the subsistence of the marriage, the intentions of  the  Appellant
    and the Sponsor, and the maintenance and  ages  of  the  children  (see
    paragraph 17).

 5. He held that there was no dispute  that  the  principal  Appellant  was
    married to the Sponsor  and  that  the  remaining  Appellants  are  the
    children of the Sponsor (see paragraph 18).  However,  the  judge  then
    went on to express himself in terms that, "I am not  however  persuaded
    that the marriage is not subsisting" (paragraph 18)  before  concluding
    that the relationship was as maintained and  the  parties  intended  to
    live together in the way  that  they  contended  (paragraph  18).   The
    appeal was allowed.

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application are wide ranging and allege that  the  judge
    failed to provide adequate reasons for his findings.

 7. On 10th April 2014, permission to appeal was granted, but only  on  the
    basis that the judge appeared  to  have  expressed  himself  through  a
    double negative at paragraph 18 when  he  stated,  "I  am  not  however
    persuaded that the marriage is not subsisting" which demonstrates  that
    the judge had reversed the correct burden of proof and  looked  to  the
    Respondent Entry Clearance Officer to show that the  marriage  was  not
    genuine and  subsisting,  whereas  this  burden  merely  lay  upon  the
    Appellant.  Aside from this, the judge granting  permission  held  that
    the application "is cast  in  terms  that  look  suspiciously  like  an
    attempt to re-argue the Respondent's case".

Submissions

 8. At the hearing before me on 14th August 2014, Mr Richards, appearing as
    a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer on behalf  of  the  Respondent,
    relied upon the Grounds of Appeal.  He said that the judge's core  task
    was to assess whether the marriage was a subsisting one, given that the
    parties had voluntarily separated for a period of time.  In  expressing
    himself in the way that he did, he had plainly reversed the  burden  of
    proof and for this reason alone, the decision had to be set  aside  and
    remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. For his part, Mr Ahmed submitted that whatever error lay in the judge's
    determination, was not a material error.  This is because the judge had
    already apprised himself of the true nature  of  where  the  burden  of
    proof rested.  He had said both at paragraph 5 and at paragraph 21 that
    the burden of proof lay with the Appellant.  In any event,  there  were
    also four children of the  marriage.   Just  because  the  parties  had
    separated did not mean that the marriage was not a subsisting one.

10. Given that the standard of proof was on a balance of probabilities,  it
    was more likely than  not  that  the  marriage  continued  to  subsist.
    Indeed, the Sponsor retained contact with  his  family  and  even  sent
    money back to his family.  This was clear proof that the  marriage  was
    subsisting and the family remained his own.  Further  while  there  was
    cross-examination of the Sponsor and the judge  was  satisfied  on  the
    evidence that the marriage was subsisting.

11. There was also documentary evidence.  It is true that the  Sponsor  did
    not return to Bangladesh, but the fact that he did so as soon as he got
    indefinite leave to remain, was indicative of the fact that  he  wished
    to be reunited with his family on the basis that  the  marriage  was  a
    subsisting one.

12. In reply, Mr Richards submitted that there may well have been  evidence
    before the judge to conclude as he did but he had reversed  the  burden
    of proof and that was a material error.

No Error of Law

13. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error of law such that the decision should  be
    set aside under Section 12(1) of TCEA 2007 as a matter of law.  This is
    because, whereas it is the case that the judge  has  expressed  himself
    rather inelegantly at paragraph 18, it is clear, on a broad and overall
    reading of the determination, that the judge was  in  no  doubt  as  to
    where the burden of proof lay.

14. He stated at the outset (at paragraph 5) that "The burden of  proof  is
    on the Appellant and the standard of proof required  is  a  balance  of
    probabilities".  When he ended his determination he again in  his  last
    paragraph stated that, "Therefore  on  the  totality  of  the  evidence
    before me, I find that the Appellants have  discharged  the  burden  of
    proof ..." (paragraph 21).

15. It is true that the judge expressed himself in the manner that  he  did
    at paragraph 18, but when this is considered  in  the  context  of  the
    determination as a whole, it is clear that whatever error there  is  in
    this expression, is not a material error of law.

16. The evidence consisted not just of what the Appellant and  the  Sponsor
    stated.  The evidence also consisted of the fact  that  there  was  DNA
    evidence, and contact between the parties, together with remittances of
    money to the family in Bangladesh.  Moreover, the Sponsor  returned  to
    Bangladesh to live with his family for three months.

17. The burden of proof is on a balance of probabilities,  and  it  is  not
    beyond  all  reasonable  doubt,  and  on  a  proper  reading   of   the
    determination, it is clear that the judge was entirely aware  of  where
    the burden of proof lay.  There is no error in the determination.

Decision

18. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  judge's  decision.   The
    determination shall stand.

19. No anonymity order is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 8th September 2014


