
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/23530/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 29th November 2013                           |On 13th December 2013      |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                        Miss selina ewura adjoa jones
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           entry clearance officer

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Saffer
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 3rd September 2013.



Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Ghana born  on  23rd  August  1998.   She
    applied for leave to enter as the dependant of a British national,  her
    father, John Jones.

 3. She  was  refused  entry  clearance  on  the  grounds  that  there  was
    insufficient evidence that her father had sole responsibility  for  her
    as she lived with her mother  Grace  and  there  were  no  serious  and
    compelling family or other  considerations  which  made  her  exclusion
    undesirable.

 4. The judge recorded the Appellant's case which was that the Sponsor  had
    taken  full  responsibility  for  her  education,  health  and   living
    arrangements, had visited her for four to six weeks each year  and  was
    now living with his father because her mother has vanished.

 5. The judge said that in 1999 the Sponsor made a decision  to  leave  the
    child in Grace's care and although he had  contributed  financially  he
    had failed to establish that he was the sole financial provider.  There
    was evidence that Grace worked and that his  father  also  stepped  in.
    The holidays which they had spent together amounted to only 10% of  the
    time, a total of ten weeks in the previous eight  years.   He  was  not
    satisfied that the Sponsor made all day to day decisions regarding  the
    child's care given his limited direct involvement over many years.   He
    was satisfied that Grace was her primary carer and had  been  so  since
    1999.

 6. Neither was he satisfied that there were serious and compelling  family
    or other considerations which made her exclusion undesirable.   He  did
    not accept that it was established that Grace had abandoned  the  child
    and concluded that the witnesses had said so merely in order to bolster
    the claim.  He dismissed the appeal.

The Grounds of Application

 7. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had failed to follow the guidance set out in the case of TD  (paragraph
    297(i)(e) "sole responsibility") Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049.   There  was
    no requirement that the Sponsor be the sole  financial  provider.   The
    judge's decision was irrational.  The  judge  had  concluded  that  the
    Sponsor's absence was tantamount to failure to show that  he  had  made
    major decisions in his daughter's life which went against paragraph  49
    of TD which states that -

         "The fact that the remaining active parent is in the  UK  makes  no
         difference to this.  Of course the geographical separation  of  the
         parent from the child means that the day to day care of  the  child
         will necessarily be undertaken by others  -  relatives  or  friends
         abroad - who look after  the  child.   Here  the  issue  under  the
         Immigration Rules is whether the UK based parent  has  in  practice
         allowed the parental responsibility for the child to be shared with
         the carer abroad."

 8. In summary, the judge's decision  was  inadequately  reasoned  and  had
    failed to take into account the best interests of the child.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted for the reasons stated in the  grounds
    by Judge Pullig on 30th October 2013.

The hearing

10. Prior to the hearing the Tribunal received notice  that  the  Sponsor's
    representatives were no longer acting for him.  There was also a letter
    from the Sponsor which  stated  that  his  representatives  were  still
    dealing with the matter but did not have  the  documentation  available
    and he requested a postponement of the hearing until 19th  December  by
    which time all the documents would be with him.

11. The Sponsor did not appear at the  hearing.   The  application  for  an
    adjournment was received on 25th November 2013 by  the  Arnhem  Support
    Centre and had not been seen by a judge.  The Sponsor could have had no
    expectation that the adjournment had been granted.

12. In any event, more importantly, the decision today is whether the judge
    erred in law.  The judge could only decide the appeal on the  basis  of
    the  evidence  as  it  was  before  him  on  that  date   and   further
    documentation from Ghana could have no bearing on whether there was  an
    error in this determination.

13. Accordingly, I decided that an adjournment could not be  justified  and
    proceeded to determine this appeal.

14. Mr Diwnycz submitted that this was a sustainable decision.

Findings and Conclusions

15. With respect to Ground 1 and the applicability of TD, this was cited in
    the judge's determination and there is no  evidence  that  he  did  not
    properly apply it.  The question of sole responsibility is  a  question
    of fact.  The judge made clear findings.  Financial  contributions  are
    indicative of sole responsibility but not conclusive.   The  judge  was
    satisfied that  the  Sponsor  had  made  some  financial  contributions
    towards his daughter's care but was entitled  to  decide  that  it  was
    shared with the child's mother and with his own father.  He  took  into
    account the amount of contact which the Sponsor had had with his  child
    over the years and  that  was  the  basis  of  his  decision  that  the
    Appellant's mother, the primary carer, had made the important decisions
    in her life.

16. He heard oral evidence from  the  Sponsor  which  he  set  out  in  the
    determination. It was open to him to conclude  that  it  was  not  true
    that, post decision, the Appellant's mother had disappeared.

17. The Section 55 duty does not directly impact on the  Appellant  because
    she is out of country but in any event was considered in the Article  8
    analysis.  The judge recorded that the Appellant is living in a country
    where she speaks the first language and  forms  part  of  the  majority
    culture and has close family support.  It was in her best interests  to
    remain with that support which has been felt to be suitable ever  since
    1999 and to stay with her mother.

18. The judge's conclusions were open to him for the reasons which he gave.

Decision

19. The grounds do not establish any error of law.   The  judge's  decision
    stands.  The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.



Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

