
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/23797/2012



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9 June 2014                                |On 10 June 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISLAMABAD

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                ZAEGHAM ABBAS


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Hibbs, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms Kullar of counsel


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
The Appeal

 1. This is an appeal against the determination dated 8  November  2013  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford which allowed appellant's appeal against
    the respondent's decision to refuse entry clearance as a spouse.

 2. For the purposes of this appeal I refer to the Entry Clearance  Officer
    as the respondent and to Mr Abbas as the  appellant,  reflecting  their
    positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The respondent maintains that Judge Ford erred at [30] in finding  that
    the provisions of paragraph 281 (i) (b) (iii) of the Immigration  Rules
    were not in force at the date of  the  decision  and  that  the  appeal
    should  have  been  refused  as  the  appellant  could  not  meet  this
    requirement of the Rules.

 4. Paragraph 281 (i) (b) (iii)  states:

         (b)(iii)  the  applicant  does  not  have  one  or   more   unspent
         convictions within the meaning of the Rehabilitation  of  Offenders
         Act 1974

 5. It is not disputed that the  appellant  has  unspent  convictions  that
    would mean that he could not meet paragraph 281 (i) (b) (iii)  were  it
    applicable to his appeal.

 6. It is also not disputed that the First-tier Tribunal was  in  error  in
    finding that the provisions of paragraph 281 (i) (b) (iii) were not  in
    force as of the date of the decision.

 7. The sole issue before me was whether the appellant's  application  fell
    to be considered under paragraph 281 (i) (a) of the  Immigration  Rules
    or paragraph 281 (i) (b) and so whether paragraph 281 (i) (b) (iii) was
    applicable at all, even where it was conceded for the appellant that it
    was in force at the relevant time.

 8. Paragraph 281 (i) (a) (i) and paragraph 281 (i) (b)  (i)  set  out  two
    different sets of circumstances in which someone can  apply  for  entry
    clearance as a spouse.

 9. They are as follows:

         281. The requirements to be met by a person seeking leave to  enter
        the United Kingdom with a view to settlement as the spouse or civil
        partner of a person present and settled in the  United  Kingdom  or
        who is on the same occasion being admitted for settlement are that:



        (i) (a)(i) the applicant is married to or the civil partner of a
        person present and settled in the United Kingdom or who is on the
        same occasion being admitted for settlement ...

        __(b)(i) the applicant is married to or the civil partner of a
        person who has a right of abode in the United Kingdom or indefinite
        leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom and is on the same
        occasion seeking admission to the United Kingdom for the purposes
        of settlement and the parties were married or formed a civil
        partnership at least 4 years ago, since which time they have been
        living together outside the United Kingdom


10. Before me the respondent maintained that the sponsor had right of abode
    so the application was to be considered under  paragraph  281  (i)  (b)
    (i). In turn, this meant  that  281  (i)  (b)  (iii)  concerning  spent
    convictions was engaged.

11. I did not agree with the respondent. The sponsor is present and settled
    in the UK. Paragraph 281 (i) (a) (i) is the appropriate paragraph where
    that is so. It is not relevant that she is a British national and  also
    has right of abode. The couple are clearly not applying in a  situation
    where the sponsor is living abroad with the appellant and coming to the
    UK to seek settlement as in 281 (i) (b) (i).

12. The appellant was therefore entitled to have his application considered
    under 281 (i) (a) (i) and no issue arose as to any unspent convictions.
    Judge Ford found that he met all of the provisions of paragraph 281 (i)
    (a) (i) and there is no other challenge before me.  No  material  error
    arises, therefore.

Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error on a
    point of law such that it should  be  set  aside  and  therefore  shall
    stand.

Signed:[pic]                                 Date: 9 June 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

