
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/23670/2012



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport, Wales                       |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24th March 2014                            |On 4th April 2014            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

              The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey and
                         Vice President Arfon-Jones

                                   Between

                                     HBS
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                        ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, AMMAN
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Glenn Hodgetts (of Counsel), instructed  by  South
                  West Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Hibbs,  Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal has its origins in a decision made by the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer,  (hereinafter  the  "ECO")  for  Amman,  Iraq,   whereby   the
    Appellant's application for entry clearance to  settle  in  the  United
    Kingdom in the capacity of child or other dependant of a settled person
    was refused.  By its determination promulgated on 28th August 2013, the
    First-Tier Tribunal ("the FtT") dismissed the Appellant's appeal.   The
    Appellant now appeals with permission to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The grant of permission to appeal to this  Tribunal  was  based  on  an
    assessment that the FtT had arguably  erred  in  law  by  treating  the
    sponsor's disability living allowance as public, rather than  personal,
    funds. The other grounds  of  appeal  were  also  considered  arguable.
    These formulate a total of four challenges to the decision of the FtT:

    (a)  (As noted above) the FtT erred in law  in  its  treatment  of  the
         public funds issue, having regard to the decision in KA and  Others
         (adequacy of maintenance) Pakistan [2006] UK AIT00065.

    (b)   The  FtT's  adverse  credibility   findings   are   vitiated   by
         irrationality and/or a failure to take all material  evidence  into
         account.

    (c)  The FtT erred in law by  failing  to  make  any  decision  on  the
         Appellant's  entitlement   under   paragraph   297(1)(f)   of   the
         Immigration  Rules,  given  the  family  relationship  between  the
         Appellant and the sponsor.

    (d)  The FtT's conclusion that there was no  evidence  of  serious  and
         compelling family or other considerations rendering  the  exclusion
         of the Appellant undesirable was irrational,  being  confounded  by
         evidence precisely to this effect.  Furthermore, this breached  the
         Appellant's rights under Article 8 ECHR.

 3. The relevant factual matrix,  in  brief  compass,  is  that  there  are
    effectively  two  sponsors,  who  are  husband  and  wife,  both  Iraqi
    nationals.  The husband entered the United  Kingdom  in  2001  and  his
    spouse  did  likewise  in  2003.   The  Appellant's   entry   clearance
    settlement application was made in July 2012.  In the  application,  it
    was stated that he was born on 1st July 1995 in Sulaymaniyah, Iraq  and
    was seeking a settlement visa for  a  purpose  described  as  "to  join
    parents" in the United Kingdom.  It is common case  that  the  sponsors
    are said to be the Appellant's adoptive, rather than blood, parents.

 4. In his application, the Appellant provided the first and  family  names
    of his mother and  his  mother's  date  of  birth,  together  with  his
    father's name.  He described the main sponsor as  his  "uncle/de  facto
    father".  He stated that he lived with his  sister  and  they  received
    money monthly from the sponsors. The application  further  stated  that
    the main sponsor, his adoptive father, had secured British  citizenship
    with effect from 1st January 2011.  He had  visited  the  Appellant  in
    Iraq in 2011 and 2012.  Contact between them  had  been  maintained  in
    this way and by telephone.  The application described the Appellant  as
    deaf and dumb.  The application, in conjunction with  the  accompanying
    solicitor's letter, specified that the Appellant was applying  qua  the
    child of the sponsors or, alternatively, their nephew.


 5. In refusing the application, the ECO, firstly, found that the Appellant
    is not the child of the sponsors, referring to paragraph  301(1)(a)  of
    the Rules.  He gave no consideration to the alternative  basis  of  the
    application.  Secondly, the ECO concluded that the  Appellant  was  not
    living  in  serious  and  compelling  family  or  other   circumstances
    rendering his  exclusion  from  the  United  Kingdom  undesirable:  see
    paragraph 301(i)(c) of the Rules.  Thirdly, given the  absence  of  any
    written authority from the Council landlord permitting him to reside in
    the relevant property, the ECO pronounced himself  not  satisfied  that
    there would  be  adequate  accommodation  for  all,  having  regard  to
    paragraph 301(iv) of the Rules. Fourthly and finally, the ECO noted the
    public benefits of which the sponsors were  in  receipt  and  concluded
    that  there  was  insufficient  evidence  that  they  could  adequately
    maintain  the  Appellant  in  the  United  Kingdom  without  additional
    recourse to public funds: paragraph 301(iv)(a) of the Rules.  The ECO's
    decision was upheld on appeal by the ECO manager, in June 2013.

 6.  The  FtT  made  a  specific  finding,  in  paragraph   [19]   of   its
    determination, that there was no explanation why the sponsors  had  not
    made  the  Appellant's  entry  clearance   application   sooner.    The
    difficulty with this finding is that in their letter  dated  19th  June
    2012, which  accompanied  the  application,  the  sponsors  provided  a
    lengthy explanation of this very issue.  Our analysis is that the Judge
    simply overlooked this.  In doing so, a  material  piece  of  evidence,
    which confounds this finding, was disregarded.  While mindful that  the
    threshold to be overcome in an error of law appeal is irrationality, we
    consider this finding unsustainable.

 7. In the next  succeeding  paragraph,  [20],  the  Judge  made  no  clear
    findings about the claim that  the  sponsors  had  been  sending  money
    periodically for the upkeep and support of the Appellant and his sister
    in Iraq.  It was incumbent on the Judge to either accept or reject  the
    various elements of this claim, in whole or in part, giving appropriate
    reasons.  There was a failure to do so.

 8. In paragraphs [21] and [23] of the determination, the  Judge  purported
    to consider the test, enshrined in the Rules,  of  whether  there  were
    serious and compelling family or  other  considerations  rendering  the
    exclusion of the Appellant from the  United  Kingdom  undesirable.  The
    evidence bearing on this issue included a  letter  purporting  to  have
    been written by the Appellant's sister.  While  the  Judge  hints  that
    this is not an authentic document, there is a failure to make  a  clear
    finding about it.  The same applies to  the  Judge's  consideration  of
    other letters.  Furthermore, the Judge made no enquiry relating to  the
    first names used.  We consider that, fundamentally, there is an absence
    of clear and properly reasoned findings in these passages.

 9. In paragraph  [24]  of  the  determination,  the  Judge  gave  separate
    consideration to those parts of the application in which the  Appellant
    had purported to provide particulars of his mother's name and  date  of
    birth.  This is another troubling passage, in which the  Judge  appears
    to cast doubt on the Appellant's credibility, without making any  clear
    and properly reasoned findings in relation to this discrete issue.
10. In paragraphs [26] and [27] of the determination, the Judge  considered
    the question of whether, as  claimed,  the  Appellant  is  disabled  by
    virtue of being deaf and dumb.  Again, there is a failure to  make  any
    clear and properly reasoned finding about this  discrete  issue,  which
    was one of unmistakable importance.

11. Finally, it is beyond dispute that the focus of the Judge was  confined
    to paragraph 301 of the Immigration Rules.  The Judge, in  common  with
    the ECO, failed to consider the alternative basis  of  the  Appellant's
    application under paragraph 297(i)f.  We consider that it was incumbent
    on the Judge to do so and  a  clear  error  of  law  was  committed  in
    consequence.

12. It was also submitted to this Tribunal, without challenge, that some of
    the adverse credibility findings enshrined in the Judge's determination
    - specifically those relating to the  particulars  of  the  Appellant's
    deceased mother in the application and the authenticity and reliability
    of several letters - were not reflected in the letter of decision, were
    not advanced on behalf of the Respondent at the hearing  and  were  not
    ventilated by the Judge in the presence of the  parties.   We  consider
    that the hearing was procedurally unfair in consequence.

13. We decline to deal with  the  issue  concerning  the  sponsor's  weekly
    income  and  outgoings,  including  the  specific  issue  of  how   the
    disability living allowance should be reckoned  in  the  light  of  the
    decision in MK, given that, for reasons which we accept,  the  sponsors
    had  not  been  able  to  comply  satisfactorily  with  the  evidential
    direction contained in the grant of permission to appeal.

DECISION

14. For the reasons elaborated above, we conclude that the decision of  the
    FtT was infected by several material errors of law.  We  set  it  aside
    accordingly.  Given the  current  state  of  the  evidence  highlighted
    immediately  above,  we  remit  the  case  for  fresh  decision  by   a
    differently constituted panel of the FtT.



                                    Signed:
                                             [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                      Date:   31  March 2014
