
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/24125/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9 June 2014                                |On 3 July 2014               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY

                                   Between

                               mrs Nazma Begum

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Miah of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Laurence Tarlow, a Home Office Presenting Officer



       DETERMINATION AND REASONS FOR FINDING NO MATERIAL ERROR OF LAW
Introduction

1.   The appellant is a Bangladeshi national  who  was  born  on  1  January
    1987.

2.   The appellant applied for  entry  clearance  to  the  UK  to  join  her
    husband, a British citizen, on 8 July 2012.   That  was  refused  on  8
    November 2012 for reasons given by the ECO.  The appellant appealed  to
    the First-tier Tribunal and that matter came before Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Beg (the Immigration Judge)  on  28  October  2013.   Her
    determination was promulgated on 6 November 2013.

3.   The appellant appeals to the Upper  Tribunal  with  the  permission  of
    Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman given on 24 April  2014.   That  was  the
    second application for permission, the first being unsuccessful  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Colyer.  Judge Macleman  thought  it  was  at
    least arguable that  the  Immigration  Judge  had  failed  to  consider
    evidence in relation to the English language test certificate which  he
    could have considered and also had not fully explained  his  conclusion
    in paragraph 6 that the marriage between the appellant and the  sponsor
    was not "genuine and subsisting".

The Hearing

4.   At the hearing I heard submissions by both  representatives.   Mr  Miah
    submitted that the ECO had been wrong not to consider evidence  in  the
    form of a certificate (at page  50  of  the  bundle  submitted  by  the
    appellant's representatives on 11 October 2013).  He pointed out  that
    Section  85(2),  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    permitted the ECO to consider circumstances appertaining to the date of
    the decision.  His second criticism of the decision of the ECO  related
    to his failure to properly  consider  the  evidence.   This,  he  said,
    supported  the  conclusion  that  his  client  was  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with the sponsor, who was 60 years her  senior.
    The Immigration Judge had applied the "primary  purpose  Rule,"  rather
    than the test which was espoused in the  case  of  Goudie  [2012]  UKUT
    00041 (IAC).

5.   In addition, I was referred to a  number  of  transfer  receipts  which
    were before the First-tier Tribunal which tended to indicate  a  degree
    of support for the appellant.

6.   In response Mr Tarlow submitted that the  ECO  had  only  received  the
    English  language  certificate  shortly  before   he   determined   the
    application.  He doubted that the marriage was genuine and  subsisting.
    The  ECO  was  entitled  to  take  into  account  the  substantial  age
    difference between the appellant and the  sponsor.   His  decision  was
    sustainable before the First-tier Tribunal and  the  Immigration  Judge
    had not erred in law in finding that the appellant was in  fact  coming
    to the UK to care for the sponsor in old age.

7.   By reply Mr Miah submitted that the sponsor did not need  care  at  the
    present time and that a reasonable judge applying the correct  criteria
    to the case would have reached the view that this marriage was  genuine
    and subsisting in July 2012 when  the  application  was  made.   I was
    invited to find no material error of law in the circumstances.

8.   Both sides appeared to agree that in the event I did  find  a  material
    error of law I would be able to remake the decision without  the  need
    for a fresh hearing.

9.   At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision as  to  whether  there
    was a material error of law.


Discussion

10.  The appellant is a Bangladeshi national, born on 1 January  1987.   She
    wishes to come to the UK to join  her  sponsor,  Mohammed  Jabd  Ali  a
    British citizen born on 3 February 1927.

11.  The two principal reasons for refusing entry clearance were:

    (1)  that the appellant did not meet the  requirement  for  an  English
         language test;


    (2)  the marriage between the appellant and the sponsor was not genuine
         and  subsisting. In particular, it was not credible  having  regard
         to the age difference between them and the purposes for  which  the
         sponsor had stated he required the appellant to enter the UK.

12.  When the appellant completed her notice of appeal against the  decision
    of the ECO she requested an oral  hearing  but  I  see  that  this  was
    subsequently changed by a  letter  dated  3  September  2013  from  her
    solicitors, Kingdom.  That letter appears to suggest  that  she  wished
    for the appeal to be determined on  the  papers,  although  it  is  not
    clear.  That is the manner in which the  Immigration  Judge  ultimately
    decided the appeal.

13.  The first set of grounds of  appeal  against  the  Immigration  Judge's
    decision did not find favour in First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Colyer  but
    Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman considered it at least arguable that  the
    Immigration Judge's reasoning  in  relation  to  the  English  language
    qualification and in relation to the genuine and subsisting  nature  of
    the relationship between the appellant and the sponsor was  inadequate.
    The Upper Tribunal Judge refers  to  the  fact  that  the  refusal  was
    incomplete in the copy supplied but that he had seen a complete copy in
    the appellant's bundle.

14.  The ECO was entitled to strictly apply the requirements of  the  Rules.
    Thus, the failure  to  meet  the  English  language  test  requirement,
    although  apparently  trivial,  is  nevertheless  a  proper  basis  for
    refusal.

15.   Following  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Colyer's  refusal   to   grant
    permission the appellant prepared expanded grounds of  appeal  dated  7
    April 2014.  These state:

    (1)  That the Immigration Judge was entitled to look  at  any  evidence
         appertaining to the date of the decision and  was  not  limited  to
         evidence that was only available  at  the  date  of  that  decision
         following the case of DR Morocco [2005]  UKIAT  00038.   Therefore,
         the  Immigration  Judge  was  entitled  to  take  into  account   a
         certificate dated 5 September 2012 which showed that the  appellant
         had the necessary English language skill.


    (2)  The Immigration Judge had accepted that the marriage  between  the
         appellant and the sponsor was valid under the laws  of  Bangladesh.
         In the circumstances there was "a presumption  of  marriage"  which
         was supported  by  case  law.   Unless  there  are  "countervailing
         factors" which generate suspicion the Immigration  Judge  ought  to
         have  accepted  the  relationship  was  genuine   and   subsisting,
         particularly, having regard to the fact  that  the  ordinary  civil
         standard of proof applied.


    (3)  Further, or alternatively, the Immigration  Judge  had  failed  to
         consider whether an Article 8 based  claim  could  succeed  if  the
         situation was not adequately catered for by the Immigration  Rules.



16.  In relation to these grounds, the  Immigration  Judge  copied  out  the
    entire refusal of entry clearance by the ECO which included  a  recital
    of the  relevant  Rule  (paragraph  281(i)(a)(ii)  of  HC  395).   That
    requires the appellant  to  show  she  had  an  English  language  test
    certificate in speaking and listening skills from an  approved  English
    language test provider.  Secondly, she had to show  that  the  marriage
    between herself and the sponsor was a genuine and subsisting one of man
    and wife.

17.  The ECO noted that the  letter  from  AES  Institute  stated  that  the
    appellant "would submit" a City and  Guilds  certificate  but  no  such
    certificate was produced at the date of the application (7 July  2012).
    In the circumstances she did not meet the necessary requirement.

18.  Secondly, the  marriage  certificate  showed  that  the  appellant  was
    married to the sponsor on 26 September 2010.  Although some photographs
    have been produced it was  not  clear  that  a  marriage  ceremony  had
    actually taken place.  The marriage, which was an arranged one, did not
    appear credible given the age difference.  Furthermore,  the  appellant
    had produced a  letter  from  the  sponsor's  doctor  stating  that  he
    intended to go to Bangladesh to seek out a person to  "look  after  him
    after his wife's death in December 2009".  There was  no  provision  in
    the Immigration Rules to admit a relative or friend to the UK  for  the
    purposes of caring for the sponsor in old age.  A  letter  from  Chrisp
    Street Health Centre suggested that  the  sponsor  required  increasing
    levels of medical care and this was the true reason for the appellant's
    application.  Additionally, there were no insurmountable  obstacles  to
    continuing such family life as had been formed  between  the  appellant
    and the sponsor abroad.

19.  The criticisms identified by Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman  go  to  the
    reasoning, rather than the substance  of  the  decision  taken  by  the
    Immigration Judge.  As I understand the appellant's evidence before the
    First-tier Tribunal, she admitted that she did not have the  "listening
    part" of the English language test that was required (see  paragraph  9
    of her skeleton argument before that Tribunal).   Additionally,  it  is
    not only the problem that the certificate postdated the decision of the
    ECO, but also the fact, based on the Immigration  Judge's  findings  at
    paragraph 3, that the appellant had not in fact completed  the  reading
    and writing elements of the test.  Therefore, the certificate  produced
    was not a relevant one for the purposes of the  Immigration  Rules.  It
    appears she did not satisfy this requirement.

20.  More  significantly,  the  Immigration  Judge  clearly  found  the  age
    difference between the appellant and the sponsor was such  as  to  make
    the subsisting nature of the marriage between  the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor questionable. She also found that there were other  factors  in
    the  case  which  undermined   the   contention   that   this   was   a
    straightforward relationship between husband and wife.  There was clear
    evidence in the form of the GP's letters describing the sponsor's state
    of health, especially the letter dated 7 July 2012, to the effect  that
    the sponsor suffered from a number of health  problems,  some  of  them
    serious.  He required a helper.  The Immigration Judge was entitled  to
    conclude that the reason given by the sponsor  for  the  need  for  the
    appellant to come to the UK (to help him in his  old  age)  was  not  a
    reason covered by the Immigration Rules.

21.  Therefore, this was not a case like Goudie [2012] UKUT 00041  in  which
    there were "no  countervailing  factors".   There  were  countervailing
    factors here because the appellant's own evidence  suggested  that  she
    was not coming to the UK for the purpose of living with the sponsor  in
    an intimate relationship of marriage.  Rather, she was coming to the UK
    for the purposes of caring for him in old age.

22.  Some of the criticisms of the Immigration Judge appear, at first  sight
    at least, to have been justified.  For example, the  Immigration  Judge
    did not refer  to any  visits  by  the  sponsor  to  the  appellant  in
    Bangladesh.  However, given the flawed nature of  the  application  for
    entry clearance I am satisfied that were this  evidence  to  have  been
    considered it would not  have  made  any  material  difference  to  the
    outcome.  The Immigration Judge was entitled to conclude that this  was
    not a genuine application based  on the  appellant's  marriage  to  the
    sponsor.

23.  In the circumstances,  given  the  Immigration  Judge  had  found  that
    limited contact between the appellant and sponsor in a relationship  of
    convenience for the purposes of caring for the sponsor in his old  age,
    clearly the appellant had not established any private or family life of
    such quality that the respondent's decision would  amount  to  unlawful
    interference contrary to the ECHR.  In the circumstances, the  ECO  was
    entitled to deal with the  Article  8  application  cursorily  and  the
    Immigration Judge was not bound to give it substantial consideration in
    her determination.

Decision

24.  For these reasons I find that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    does not contain any material error of law.  Accordingly, that decision
    stands.

25.  No anonymity direction and no fee  award  was  made  and  there  is  no
    appeal against those decisions.

Signed                                  Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury


