

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/24436/2012


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 10th January 2014                          |on 14th January 2014         |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (ISTANBUL)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 NUSRET BORA
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Nath - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent: Mrs Bora assisted by a McKenzie friend.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge Foulkes-Jones promulgated on the  papers  on  11th  September
        2013 in which the Judge allowed the appeal against the  refusal  of
        an Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) to grant leave to enter the UK  as
        a partner of his sponsor.


     2. The appeal was allowed on Article 8 ECHR grounds.  The  ECO  sought
        permission to  appeal,  which  was  granted,  on  the  basis  of  a
        conviction for murder of which it is said the ECO  and  the  First-
        tier Tribunal were unaware, but which was known to the sponsor  but
        not declared in the application form.


     3. This is a relevant issue when assessing the application  under  the
        Rules and Article 8 ECHR.  Following discussion the following order
        was agreed between the parties  that  the  determination  of  Judge
        Foulkes-Jones shall be set aside BY CONSENT  on  the  basis  of  an
        error of law that arose through no  fault of the Judge.  The  facts
        on which the determination was reached are incomplete as there  was
        a failure by both parties to disclose material evidence leading  to
        unfairness in the decision making process.


     4. The appeal shall be remitted to Taylor House to be heard by Judge F
        C Lindsley sitting as a judge of that Tribunal on Friday 21st March
        2014 @ 10.00am. Time estimate 3 hours.


Decision

     5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. We set aside
        the decision of the original Judge. We remit the appeal to the
        First-tier Tribunal for further hearing.


   Anonymity.


     6. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


          We make no such order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal
   Procedure (Upper        Tribunal) Rules 2008) as a result of the
   extensive press coverage of this matter in         which the identity of
   Mr Bora and the salient facts of the case have already          been
   published. No application for anonymity was made.





Signed.......................................................
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Dated the 10th January 2014






