

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

      Appeal Nos: OA/24731/2012
      OA/24734/2012
      OA/24737/2012
      OA/24740/2012
      OA/24744/2012
      OA/24747/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination promulgated    |
|on 18 March 2014                              |on 24 March 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before
                          THE HON Mr JUSTICE BAKER
                       & UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, Islamabad
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              GUL BIBI KHAN + 5
                                                                 Respondents

No anonymity order requested or made

For the Appellant:     Mrs J Heybroek, Counsel, instructed by Kothala & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss J Isherwood,  Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. This determination refers to parties as they were in the  First-tier
       Tribunal.


    2.  The  appellants  are  a  wife  and  five  children,   citizens   of
       Afghanistan.  They sought entry clearance to settle in the UK as the
       family members of Aqab Khan,  an  Afghan  citizen  recognised  as  a
       refugee.  The ECO refused their applications by notices of  decision
       dated 7 November 2012.

    3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Nicholls allowed the  appellants'  appeals
       by determination promulgated on 12 December 2013.  The  judge  found
       that the ECO  was  justified  in  refusing  the  applications  under
       paragraph 320 (7A) of the Rules for reliance on a false  certificate
       of marriage  between  the  first  appellant  and  the  sponsor,  and
       dismissed the appeals under the Rules.  However, the  judge  thought
       at paragraph 21 that the ECO might have assessed the applications on
       the basis of unmarried partners, and went on at paragraph 22:

              ... the best interests of the  children  indicate  that  they
              should be  brought  up  by  both  parents,  one  of  whom  is
              recognised as a refugee in the UK ...  the  balance...  under
              Article 8 falls in favour of the appellants ...  despite  the
              provision of a false document, their exclusion ... amounts to
              an unjustified and  disproportionate  interference  with  the
              right to respect for private and family life and  is  not  in
              the best interests of the children.

    4. The SSHD's grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal are as follows:

            ... the tribunal has failed to provide adequate reasons  why  it
              is  disproportionate  to  refuse  entry  ...  the  appellants
              submitted false representations  to  mislead  the  ECO  about
              their circumstances ... the tribunal found ... that the  main
              appellant may  have  qualified  for  leave  as  an  unmarried
              partner ... it is proportionate for them to reapply  on  this
              basis ... any delay they suffer has been of their own  making
              ...  they  can  maintain  contact  via  modern   methods   of
              communication and via visits to a third country as they  have
              been able to do thus far.

            ... had the tribunal taken these issues into consideration  they
              would have found the decisions proportionate.

    5. On their face, those grounds make a good point.   Article  8  cannot
       result in a right to demand  entry  without  making  an  application
       required by the Rules.   However,  in  course  of  submissions  Miss
       Isherwood fairly conceded the point made by Mrs  Heybroek  that  any
       further applications would fall to be refused  under  the  mandatory
       provisions for previous use of false  documents.   The  grounds  are
       thus misleading in suggesting that the interference with  Article  8
       rights would be short term only.  Miss Isherwood accepted  that  any
       future decisions would have to consider Article 8  as  well  as  the
       Rules.   She  submitted  that  such  an  exercise  might   be   more
       appropriately made by the decision maker abroad.

    6. The Article 8 question here was properly identified  by  the  judge,
       but is obscured by  the  grounds.   It  is  whether  the  long  term
       exclusion of the appellants can be justified by the use of the false
       document.   The grounds do not contend that such  exclusion  can  be
       justified.  There may be cases where conduct of  that  nature  could
       have such drastic consequences,  but  even  if  the  respondent  had
       sought so to argue, we do not think this could be one of them.   The
       situation of the family is plain, and  the  balancing  exercise  may
       appropriately be carried out by a decision maker in the UK.



    7. The grounds of appeal are framed on a false premise.   They  do  not
       disclose any error of law in the conclusion reached  by  the  First-
       tier Tribunal.

    8. The ECO's appeal is dismissed.  The determination of the  First-tier
       Tribunal shall stand.



                               [pic]
                                18 March 2014
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal


