
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA 24441 2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 30 May 2014                                |On 2 June 2014               |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                      entry clearance officer islamabad
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               ZILFQAR ALKOZY
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
8 April 2014
For the Appellant:     Mr G Saunders, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Miss S Qureshi (Wife and Sponsor)
30 May 2014
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Saini, Solicitor, Justmount & Co Solicitors
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

  1. This appeal came before me and Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer,  on
     8 April 2014.  It is as an appeal  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer,
     Islamabad, against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing an
     appeal by a citizen of Afghanistan against a  decision  of  the  Entry
     Clearance Officer refusing him entry clearance to join  his  wife  and
     child in the United Kingdom.  We were satisfied  that  the  First-tier
     Tribunal erred in law and gave our reasons.

  2. We set aside the decision and gave directions for the progress of  the
     case.  We incorporate here the reasons given on 9 April to explain our
     decision. Subject to some minor grammatical corrections these are  the
     reasons that have already been  disclosed  to  the  parties  with  the
     directions.
                       REASON FOR FINDING ERROR OF LAW

      1. The  respondent,  hereinafter  "the  claimant",  is  a  citizen  of
         Afghanistan who appealed successfully to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         against the decision  of  the  respondent,  hereinafter  the  Entry
         Clearance Officer, refusing  him  entry  clearance  to  the  United
         Kingdom as the wife of his sponsor.

      2. Before us he was represented  by  his  wife  and  sponsor  who  was
         assisted by an official interpreter. The appeal had been listed  as
         an expedited hearing at the request of the claimant's solicitors so
         we were a little surprised that they did not attend.

      3. Essentially the Entry Clearance Officer did  not  accept  that  the
         claimant's marriage was subsisting or that he and his wife intended
         to live together permanently in the United  Kingdom,  or  that  the
         claimant had shown in the required way that sufficient  funds  were
         available or that  his  competence  in  the  English  language  was
         sufficient. The Entry Clearance  Officer  decided  the  application
         with regard to the rules in force on 9 July 2012.

      4.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  found  that  the  marriage   was
         subsisting and that the parties to the marriage  intended  to  live
         together   permanently.   The   First-tier   Tribunal   Judge   was
         particularly assisted by evidence that the parties to the  marriage
         had a child, a boy, born on 7 May 2008.

      5. These findings have not been  challenged  by  the  Entry  Clearance
         Officer.

      6.  He  further  found  that  the  appellant  satisfied  all  of   the
         requirements of the rules relevant to an application make before  9
         July 2012 and allowed the appeal. The finding that the  application
         was made before 9 July 2012 is challenged by  the  Entry  Clearance
         Officer. The finding that the application should have been  allowed
         if the pre 9 July rules applied was  not  challenged.  The  finding
         that those rules did apply is challenged  by  the  Entry  Clearance
         Officer.

      7. The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  considered  the  position  if  the
         application should have been decided under the rules that came into
         force on 9 July 2012 and said that he allowed the appeal under  the
         "new" rules if they applied. This decision was  challenged  by  the
         Entry Clearance Officer.

      8. We have no hesitation in allowing  the  Entry  Clearance  Officers'
         appeal in as much as it relates to that part of  the  determination
         that purported to allow the application under the new rules.

      9. Firstly, the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  was  quite  wrong  in  his
         consideration of the production  of  proof  of  competence  in  the
         English language.  It is a clear requirement of the Rules that  the
         proof accompanied  the  application.   It  did  not  accompany  the
         application and the failure to provide it with the application  was
         fatal to the application and there is no need to say any more.

     10. We do, however, say that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was  also
         wrong in his decision to allow the appeal under the  new  Rules  on
         financial grounds.  We are  well  aware  of  the  decision  of  the
         Administrative Court in MM v SSHD [2013] EWHC 1900 (Admin).  It  is
         a controversial decision that is subject to appeal to the Court  of
         Appeal but it would be very difficult  to  say  that  a  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge who had followed that  decision  had  erred  in  law
         unless and until the Court of Appeal  says  that  the  decision  is
         wrong. However this First-tier Tribunal  Judge  did  not  apply  MM
         properly.  He referred to the Administrative Court finding that the
         requirement to demonstrate an income of  �18,600  was  held  to  be
         "disproportionate and unlawful" whereas in fact that is what  Blake
         J. was very careful not to do.

     11. The decision that the pre 9 July rules applied is more troublesome.

     12. Although it was plain from the Grounds of Appeal and terms  of  the
         decision  that  the  date  of  the  application  being   made   was
         controversial neither party has  done  very  much  to  resolve  the
         controversy.  The Entry Clearance Manager was first  aware  of  the
         difficulty on receipt of the Grounds of  Appeal  but  responded  by
         assuring us in the most general terms that the application was made
         on 9 July because  that  is  what  the  records  show.   The  Entry
         Clearance Manager provided no copy of  the  record  or  explanation
         about how the record was compiled or any reason to explain why  the
         record was likely to be right. For example we do not know if it was
         made  contemporaneously,  or  if  the  person  making  the   record
         appreciated the importance of recording the correct  date,  if  the
         change in rules had coincided with a big increase in work.  We  did
         not have a statement from the person who made the record. It is not
         a question of what the Entry Clearance Manager believes,  but  what
         in fact has actually happened. The Manager's assurance that  he  is
         right is not evidence that he is right. To illustrate  the  poverty
         of this kind of evidence we point out that it is  analogous  to   a
         police officer inspector saying that a defendant  in  the  criminal
         courts must be guilty because he had seen a report saying that that
         the accused was guilty.  This really will not do.

     13. Regrettably the  claimant  did  not  do  any  better.   Indeed  the
         claimant's case is obscure.

     14. The grounds of appeal  supporting  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal include the following paragraphs:

         "4. It is submitted that  the  [claimant]  had  attended  the  Visa
         Office in Pakistan for submitting the application on  5  July  2012
         and had paid the application fees on 5 September 2012.  However, is
         [sic] application was not accepted on the same day given the  large
         number of applicants.   The  [claimant]  gain  [sic]  attended  the
         office on 6 July 2012 and at the close of the day was  informed  to
         come on 9 July 2012.  He was further given to understand  that  the
         application submitted on 9 July 2012 in respect of  the  applicants
         having paid their visa fees before 9 July 2012 will be  treated  as
         having been submitted before 9 July 2012 and  will  accordingly  be
         considered under the Rules applicable before 9 July 2012.

         5.  The [claimant] contends that having paid the fees 5 July  2012,
         the  [claimant]  was  prevented  from  submitting  the  application
         because of the paucity of resources at the end  of  the  respondent
         and therefore fell to be considered  under  the  Immigration  Rules
         application [sic] before 9 July 2012.  The [claimant] contends that
         the ECO has failed to make any disclosure  regarding  the  date  of
         payment of fees."

     15. Setting aside the somewhat idiosyncratic English, these grounds set
         up the possibility of an interesting trial concerning what  exactly
         happened when the claimant tried to present his application and the
         legal consequences, if any, of  the  claimant  not  being  able  to
         present the application because the staff were too busy to  receive
         it, whether or not they said it would be treated as if it had  been
         submitted  before  9  July.  However  no  evidence  whatsoever  was
         produced before the First-tier Tribunal to substantiate this claim.
          There was no witness statement from  the  claimant.  There  was  a
         witness statement from the sponsor signed and dated 8 October  2013
         in which she  said  that  she  understood  that  the  claimant  had
         attended the Visa Office in Pakistan. She  then  said  things  that
         supported the grounds of appeal but she gave no indication  of  why
         she had that understanding.  It was hearsay. Before us the  sponsor
         denied any knowledge of what had happened  when  the  claimant  had
         made his application.  We do not criticise her for this.  It  would
         have been highly unlikely that she had been  present  and  able  to
         give evidence but for whatever reason she did not repeat before  us
         the points made her statement.

     16. We have a letter from London Consultancy Immigration  Services  and
         Solicitor Advisory dated 24 September 2013 addressed to the  First-
         tier Tribunal identifying the claimant and saying that he

             "has submitted his online visa application form and  visa  fee
          on 15 July 2012 but his complete Case is  submitted  at  UK  Visa
          Application Centre, Islamabad, Pakistan  on  9  July  2012  under
          reference number (number given) before the implementation of UKBA
          new rules".

     17. This serves more to draw attention to the confusion than it does to
         illuminate the situation.  Certainly that letter made it plain that
         the claimant wanted the case dealt with under the Rules  applicable
         before 9 July and referred to an online Visa Application  Form  and
         fee of 5 July but also his "complete case"  being  submitted  on  9
         July 2012.   The  Visa  Application  Form  is  said  to  have  been
         presented on 4 July but is also dated 6 July.

     18. We understand that practices vary between visa  posts.   There  are
         some places where an application can only be made online and  where
         payment can only be made or is normally made  on  line.  There  are
         other places where an application is made online but payment has to
         be made separately. However this understanding is from our  general
         knowledge. No-one has given us any evidence about the procedures in
         operation at Islamabad at the necessary time and we are not in  any
         position to make  any  rational  assumptions  about  which  systems
         operated there.

     19. Certainly the claimant's own case set out in his letter from London
         Consultancy suggests strongly that he expected payment to  be  made
         after the application was submitted.  The  contentious  points  are
         when the sum was actually paid and why it was not paid earlier.

     20. There was some reference to this at the hearing before  the  First-
         tier Tribunal because  there  was  a  point  where  the  claimant's
         representative asked for an  adjournment  to  get  a  copy  of  the
         bankers draft used to pay the fee.   This  caused  her  to  comment
         somewhat sharply that "it must have been self-evident to  Mr  Saini
         that any objective evidence relating to the payment the  fee  would
         be, to put it at its lowest, most helpful". In that respect she was
         right.

     21. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  allowed  the  appeal.   He  said  at
         paragraph 7:

          "I note the application is dated 6 July 2012. The front  page  of
          that application, however, indicates that it was submitted online
          on 4 July 2012.  There are no documents  before  me  to  indicate
          that the application was rejected by the respondent for  want  of
          the appropriate fee and I would reasonably have expected that the
          appellant, naturally wishing his  application  to  succeed  would
          have paid the fee, promptly. On the balance  of  probabilities  I
          accept that the application was properly made and  the  fee  paid
          before the change to the Immigration  Rules.   That  being  so  I
          address, in the first instance, the application  under  paragraph
          281."

     22. We have reflected very carefully on this  paragraph.   Although  we
         have every sympathy for the claimant's wife we  cannot  follow  the
         logic of this paragraph.   We see no reason  whatsoever  to  assume
         that the fee was paid with the application.  There is  no  evidence
         that it was paid with the application.  As indicated above, all the
         evidence points to it being  paid  after  the  date  shown  on  the
         application but when? We can find no logical basis for her  finding
         and we have to conclude, albeit without any  enthusiasm,  that  the
         judge's reasoning is not sound and we set aside her determination.

     23. We must remake the decision.

     24. If we find that the complete application was  made  before  9  July
         2012 we are likely to allow the claimant's appeal. If we find  that
         it was made on 9 July 2012 we are likely to dismiss the appeal.  It
         is quite clear to us that the claimant's wife  will  find  it  very
         difficult  to  earn  sufficient  money  to  maintain  him  to   the
         requirements of  the  new  Rules.    Ironically  it  is  more  than
         ordinarily desirable that her husband joins her.  We have  evidence
         from the Birmingham  Children's  Hospital  showing  us  that,  very
         sadly,  their  child  is  suffering   from   cancer   and,   wholly
         unremarkably, his mother is suffering from a degree  of  depression
         as a result.  It is not suggested that  she  is  suffering  from  a
         severe  form  of  clinical  depression  but   that   the   combined
         responsibilities of nursing  her  child  and  holding  down  a  job
         without the support of her husband are making  life  difficult  for
         her although she is being supported by her family.

     25. It is a measure of her concern about this case  that  although  the
         claimant's solicitors did not attend before us the claimant's  wife
         had travelled from Birmingham even though he son  was  in  hospital
         receiving  some  cancer  treatment  that  she   described   as   an
         "operation" today and was supported by her sister.

     26. Although she did her best to help us we  understand  that  she  may
         well have been a little preoccupied and we encouraged her to return
         to Birmingham safely to see her child.

     27. We have pored through the papers very carefully after the  hearing,
         together, to see if we could find any evidence that would enable us
         to support a conclusion about when  the  application  was  actually
         made, but we can find none of any use. For example, although  there
         are several bank statements which may have shown when  payment  was
         made, they are not for the relevant period.  There  is  no  bankers
         draft from the appellant's solicitors even though  one  was  talked
         about at the First-tier Tribunal.  Nothing was produced in response
         to the grounds.  The Entry Clearance Officer has wholly  failed  to
         appreciate that his assertions might be in any way deficient.

     28. We therefore find an error of  law  and  set  aside  the  essential
         decision of the Tribunal.  We will decide how to proceed with  this
         case best  after  there  has  been  a  response  to  the  following
         directions. We wish to emphasise that we will not necessarily order
         a further hearing. We may make a decision on the papers before us.

     29. According  to  paragraph  6  of  the  Determination,  Mr  Saini,  a
         solicitor then acting for the appellant said that "the fee had been
         paid by bankers' draft" but that he would need time  to  produce  a
         copy of that draft.  It would be very helpful if that can done.

     30. We are aware from experience that Entry  Clearance  Officers  often
         find it hard to respond to directions. We remind the  parties  that
         it is always open to them to apply for directions  to  be  amended,
         particularly to be given more time to respond. However we are  very
         concerned about the claimant's wife and we are not going  to  allow
         this appeal to drift.   There is a direction dealing with the  need
         for a prompt response and  a  warning  of  the  consequences  of  a
         failure to respond.  This must be heeded by the parties because  it
         will not be forgotten by the Tribunal.

                                 DIRECTIONS
    (1)      No later than 28 days after the  date  on  this  decision  the
         parties shall serve on the Tribunal and on each other copies of any
         further evidence on which they wish to rely going to the  issue  of
         the date on which the application was made and the date  for  which
         payment was made, including any signed witness statement  drawn  to
         stand as evidence in chief without the need for further questions.
    (2)  At a time convenient to the Tribunal after 28  days  the  Tribunal
         will review the evidence and either determine the  appeal  or  give
         further directions and when reviewing the  evidence  the  party  is
         likely to find that any party  that  has  not  responded  to  these
         Directions is no longer interest in pursuing the appeal.
     (3)     The Tribunal will consider the state of the evidence after  28
         days and in the event of a party not responding to these directions
         the Tribunal may take the view that the  party  in  default  is  no
         longer interested in pursuing the appeal.
    (4)   The  parties  are  reminded  that  they  can  apply  for  further
         directions including variation of the timescale.



  3. The directions required things to be done within 28  days.  The  Entry
     Clearance Officer did nothing. Mr Tarlow made  a  formal  request  for
     more time but given the clarity of  the  directions  and  the  express
     reminder therein that the parties could ask for more  time  I  saw  no
     reason to further adjourn the hearing.

  4. The  claimant,  through  his  solicitors,  did  provide  some  further
     information.  However that further information is not enough  to  show
     when the application for entry clearance to  the  United  Kingdom  was
     made.  All it shows is that a cheque in the form of  a  bankers  draft
     was raised on 5 July.  It does not show when that  was  presented  and
     that is the crucial gap in the evidence.

  5. Notwithstanding our expressed preference for  determining  the  appeal
     without a further hearing I did not consider it appropriate to make  a
     decision on human rights grounds  without  giving  both  parties,  the
     chance of making further submission, particularly given  our  comments
     in paragraph 24 of the Reasons. As it was not desirable  to  determine
     the case on the papers without a further hearing I  arranged  for  the
     case to be listed as soon as possible and  it  was  listed  before  me
     only, Deputy Judge Mailer not being available on 30 May  or  any  time
     near to that date. Principal Resident Judge Latter made an appropriate
     transfer order on 22 May 2014.

  6. I asked Mr Saini, for the claimant, if there was anything he wanted to
     say concerning the evidence about when the application was  made.   He
     submitted that it was for the Entry Clearance Officer to show when the
     application was made but I reject that submission.  It is the claimant
     who has to prove his case and if it is his case that  the  application
     was made before 9 July then he should have produced evidence  to  show
     that.

  7. The directions were deliberately wide  and  produced  nothing  of  any
     value.

  8. There is nothing to support a finding that the  application  was  made
     before 9 July and I rule that it was not.  I find  that  it  was  made
     after that date which is what the Entry Clearance  Officer  maintains.
     It follows therefore that the claimant does not meet the  requirements
     of the Immigration Rules and the case has to be  dismissed  under  the
     Rules.

  9. The grounds of appeal clearly raised the European Convention on  Human
     Rights.  I am aware that there  has  been  an  attempt  to  codify  or
     identify in the Rules the circumstances where an appeal or application
     should succeed under Article 8 and this claimant does not come  within
     those circumstances.  Nevertheless it is my decision that this  is  an
     appeal that ought to be  allowed  under  Article  8  of  the  European
     Convention on Human Rights and I allow it on those grounds. My reasons
     for this decision (which, for the avoidance  of  doubt,  I  considered
     before making the decision) are set out below.

 10. The European Convention on Human Rights embodies a positive obligation
     on the United Kingdom to promote person's private and family  life  in
     its policies and decisions.  Unlike the Immigration  Rules  which  are
     subject only to a weak form of scrutiny, the  European  Convention  on
     Human Rights is incorporated into domestic law by statute and  so  the
     obligation to follow the convention is a high one that I must  and  do
     respect (see Izuazu (Article 8 - new rules) [2013] UKUT 00045 (IAC).

 11. It is established law that where  a  child  or  spouse  is  a  British
     citizen, and therefore a citizen of the European Union, as a matter of
     EU law it is not possible to require the family as a unit to  relocate
     outside of the European Union or for the Secretary of State to  submit
     that it would be reasonable for them  to  do  so  (Zambrano  v  Office
     national de l'emploi (ONEm) C-34/09). In any event the claimant's  son
     is a British national benefitting, as  he  is  entitled  to  do,  from
     National Health Service treatment for leukemia. He cannot be  expected
     to leave that to join his father in Afghanistan and Mr Tarlow did  not
     suggest that he should.

 12. Clearly, keeping apart a husband from his wife and a father  from  his
     young son is an interference what the private and family lives of  the
     people concerned. The Entry  Clearance  Officer  must  show  that  the
     interference is justified and proportionate.

 13. Mr Tarlow, as he was required to do, reminded me of  the  decision  of
     this Tribunal in Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules  -  correct  approach)
     [2013]  UKUT  00640  (IAC).  He  submitted  that  there  was   nothing
     exceptional or compelling in the Gulshan sense  about  this  case  and
     that I should dismiss the appeal.

 14. I do not agree.

 15. Following Gulshan I must first ask myself if there are  here  arguably
     good grounds for granting leave outside the rules. The  obligation  to
     promote private and family life is heightened  here  by  the  (in  the
     circumstances) unremarkable evidence that the  claimant's  wife  wants
     his support in the United Kingdom and that the claimant's child cannot
     travel to see him (see the report from the CLIC  Sargent  Social  Work
     Team dated 17 March 2014).

 16. I find that this is precisely the kind of case where there  are  there
     are arguably good grounds for granting leave outside the rules and  it
     is necessary, again following Gulshan, to consider whether  there  are
     sufficiently compelling circumstances not sufficiently  recognised  by
     the rules.

 17. In my judgement there are. Article 8 operates (inter alia) to underpin
     all immigration decision making and an attempt to codify the operation
     of the Convention cannot possibly be done in a way  that  is  succinct
     enough to be useful unless it includes some elements that  are  highly
     generalised. It is inconceivable (I  think),  for  example,  that  the
     rules would identify  different  degrees  of  illness  and  grades  of
     severity of those illnesses in order to prescribe when the illness  of
     a relative might impact on an article 8 decision. I  regard  the  need
     for  family  unity  in  the  case  of  a  seriously  ill  child  as  a
     "sufficiently compelling circumstance not sufficiently  recognised  by
     the rules."

 18. In order to follow Gulshan properly I must, in this case, look  beyond
     the rules. I do not  allow  the  claimant's  appeal  on  human  rights
     grounds because the claimant's child is ill. Rather it is the  child's
     illness and the associated compassionate factors,  that  cause  me  to
     look beyond the rules.

 19. I have reminded myself of the  five  stage  test  identified  by  Lord
     Bingham in R v. SSHD ex parte Razgar [2004] UKHL 27. I see no need  to
     set it out. In this case the contested issue is proportionality.

 20. Public policy, as embodied  in  the  rules,  requires  the  claimant's
     exclusion until he can satisfy the rules. If this is not the case then
     the rule of law in the matter of immigration control gives way to  the
     decision maker's whim.

 21. The claimant cannot show that his  wife  earns  the  required  sum  to
     maintain him and he did not produce a certificate of competence in the
     English language at the required time. I recognise the  public  policy
     imperatives of declining to admit people who cannot achieve a  certain
     level of income or who are not  inclined  to  integrate  into  British
     society. The claimant has addressed these concerns by evidence that he
     will be maintained without recourse to public funds, albeit not at the
     higher level required by the rules, and he has proved  his  competence
     in the English language.

 22. I also recognise the legitimacy of a policy that requires an applicant
     to order his case before making his application rather than  later  on
     appeal. Such  a  policy  discourages  wasteful  appeals  by  requiring
     applications to be prepared carefully and properly.  However  in  this
     case the applicant prepared his application before the rules  changed.
     That being so, his failure to produce his  evidence  at  the  required
     time is less important than it might otherwise have been.

 23. In my judgement these are an example of the sort of circumstance which
     cannot be exhaustively defined but which can be recognised  where  the
     Convention operates to allow somebody  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom
     outside the Rules.

 24. It is for the Secretary of State  (because  she  made  the  rules)  to
     justify the interference in the private and family lives of the people
     concerned consequent on excluding the claimant. I find nothing  before
     me that justifies separating a man from his  family  in  circumstances
     such as these. It is wholly unreasonable to contemplate  the  idea  of
     the wife and child moving from  the  United  Kingdom  where  they  are
     citizens and benefit from  the  health  service  to  go  and  live  in
     Afghanistan. I do not see  how  it  is  proportionate  to  the  proper
     purpose of enforcing immigration control  to  exclude  a  husband  who
     wants  to  be  with  his  family  in  these  compelling  compassionate
     circumstances where he can be maintained without  recourse  to  public
     funds and where he has prepared  himself  for  living  in  the  United
     Kingdom by proving that he uses the English language competently.  Set
     against the importance of promoting  a  person's  private  and  family
     life, and particularly promoting the private and family  life  between
     husband and wife and father and minor child, I do not find the  public
     policy imperatives of a high level of maintenance, and pre-application
     disclosure of all the evidence particularly weighty. The balance is in
     favour of allowing the appeal on human rights grounds, which I do.

 25. I make no direction about what sort of leave the claimant should have.
     That is something for the Secretary of State to sort out  in  all  the
     circumstances of the case but in order for the  human  rights  of  the
     claimant and his family members to be respected  he  should  be  given
     leave that allows him to enter the  United  Kingdom  to  be  with  his
     family for a significant period of time and permits him to work.

 26. I therefore set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
     substitute a decision allow the  claimant's  appeal  on  human  rights
     grounds.

 27. It seems to me highly desirable that the claimant is allowed to  enter
     the United Kingdom without delay  and  I  have  decided  to  take  the
     unusual step of directing that  suitable  leave  be  endorsed  in  his
     passport as a matter or urgency.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 2 June 2014                    |



