
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: oa/24636/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 13th May, 2014                             |                             |
|Signed 20th May, 2014                         |On 23rd May 2014             |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                      Entry Clearance Officer - MANILA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MRS TERESITA PIDGEON
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     The Sponsor Mr A Pidgeon was in attendance
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The Entry Clearance Officer, Manila, is the appellant in  this  appeal,
    but to avoid confusion I shall refer to the Entry Clearance Officer  as
    "the claimant" and to Mrs Teresita Pidgeon as the  "appellant"  as  she
    was before the First-tier Tribunal.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of the Philippines, where she  was  born  on
    16th May, 1978.  She is the wife  of  Mr  Anthony  Pidgeon,  a  British
    citizen settled in the United Kingdom to whom I  shall  refer  as  "the
    sponsor".  The appellant made an online application submitted  on  16th
    August, 2012 for settlement to the UK to join her spouse.

3.   The appellant's application was refused by the Entry Clearance  Officer
    on 16th November, 2012.  In refusing the  appellant's  application  the
    Entry Clearance Officer said this:-

         "You have applied to join your spouse Mr Anthony Pidgeon, a British
         citizen.  It is a requirement  under  the  Immigration  Rules  when
         settling in the United Kingdom as a partner that an applicant shows
         evidence  of  their  English  language  ability  in  listening  and
         speaking to a minimum level of A1.  In order to show that you  meet
         this requirement you submitted an  IELTS  certificate.   From  this
         document I note that you achieved a score of 3.5 in  the  listening
         component and a score of 5.0 in the speaking component.  However, I
         have noted that only of [an] IELTS score of 4.0 can  be  considered
         as evidence of listening ability.  Given your  overall  band  score
         and your application as a whole, you were contacted by this  office
         on 23rd October 2012 and requested to submit additional evidence of
         your English language ability and also provided the following link:
         [link  omitted]  which  detailed  the  list  of  approved   English
         providers.   On  26th  October  2012  additional  information   was
         received in support of your application.   This  included  a  TOEFL
         equivalency table and an email dated 10th February  2011  detailing
         that an IELTS score of 3.5 was equivalent to  level  B1   Whilst  I
         noted that the TOEFL equivalency table only  information  from  the
         approved list can be consider and furthermore, since  the  date  of
         the email new requirements have been introduced, with  the  current
         list of approved English providers being introduced on 24th January
         2012.  However, given the information you provided you  were  again
         contacted by this office on 6th  November  2012  and  requested  to
         submit evidence of your English language ability.  On 14th and 15th
         November 2012 additional information was  received  in  support  of
         your application.  However,  no  new  English  test  was  provided.
         Instead reference has been made to a Caregiver qualification and  a
         Diploma in Fishery Technology.  However, whilst I have noted these,
         they do not confirm that you have achieved the  required  level  of
         English.  Furthermore, you have submitted no  evidence  that  these
         courses were taught  in  English  and  that  the  qualification  is
         recognised by UK NARIC to be equivalent to a UK  Bachelor's  degree
         or above.


         Given the above, I am not  satisfied  that  you  meet  the  English
         language requirements of paragraph E-ECP.4.1.


         I  have  therefore  refused  your  application  because  I  am  not
         satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, that you  meet  of  the
         requirements (sic) of the relevant Paragraph of the UK  Immigration
         Rules".

4.   I should point out at this stage that Mr Pidgeon,  and  the  appellant,
    feel extremely aggrieved because,  before  submitting  the  application
    online, the appellant relied on information published on the UK  Border
    Agency website which indicated at the time that a score  equivalent  to
    level B1 would be accepted. That information was, it transpired, out of
    date.

5.   Had the UK Border Agency website been up-to-date, the  appellant  would
    not have made her application and would not be frustrated and upset  by
    the delay she has experienced in pursuit of this appeal.

6.   On receipt of the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's  refusal  the  appellant
    appealed and her appeal was heard at Taylor House on 23rd January, 2014
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Del Fabbro.  He found at paragraph  16  of
    his determination that the appellant had not demonstrated that she  met
    the listening score in English having  obtained  a  score  of  3.5,  as
    opposed to a score of 4.0 or higher, in the IELTS test results.

7.   The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  very  clearly  felt  a  great  deal  of
    sympathy for the appellant.  He went on  to  consider  the  application
    under Article 8 and purported to allow the appellant's appeal on  human
    rights grounds.

8.   The claimant challenged the decision and at the hearing  before  me  Mr
    Bramble relied on the determination in Sabir (Appendix FM  -  EX.1  not
    free standing) [2014] UKUT 00063 (IAC) and on the decision of the Court
    of Appeal in Bibi and Another the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2013]  EWCA  Civ  322.   He  pointed  out  that  since  the
    appellant could not satisfy the English language test  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules the judge had been wrong to allow the  appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds.

9.   I explained the purpose of the hearing  to  Mr  Pidgeon  and  indicated
    that I could not interfere with  the  judge's  decision  unless  I  was
    satisfied that an error of law had been made.  I explained to  him  the
    significance of the decision of the Court of Appeal in Bibi and Another
     and Mr Bramble's submission and indicated that it  did  appear  to  me
    that the determination contained an error of law.

10.  The sponsor told me that he had prepared a written  statement  that  he
    wished to read.  I permitted him to read it.  Having read the statement
    the sponsor handed me a copy of the  written  statement  which  I  have
    reproduced in the Appendix to this determination.  I wish to assure him
    and the appellant that I have very carefully considered that statement.



11.  I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did  err  in  law  in
    what he said at paragraph 20.  He said:-

         "The  English  language  requirements  are   in   E-LTRP.4.1.    If
         applicants do not satisfy the financial requirements and/or English
         language requirement in E-LTRP.3.4, they may qualify under  Section
         EX:Exception.  EX.1 applies where an applicant has  a  genuine  and
         subsisting relationship with a partner who is in the UK  and  is  a
         British citizen and there are insurmountable  obstacles  to  family
         life with that partner continuing outside the UK.  Section  FM  1.0
         of the October 2013 Immigration Directorate Instructions  ('Partner
         and ECHR Article 8 guidance')  is  about  family  members  applying
         after 9 July 2012 under Chapter 8 Appendix FM  of  the  Immigration
         Rules.  It sets out the guidance for caseworkers in their  approach
         to decision-making under the new rules.  ..."

12.  The judge went on at paragraph 21 to say:-

         "On the evidence before me I find that the appellant does meet  the
         relationship requirement of Appendix FM.   I  find  that  there  is
         family  life  within  the  meaning  of  Article  8(1)  between  the
         appellant and her spouse.  They have been married for some time and
         have demonstrated a commitment to  live  together  as  husband  and
         wife.  I accept the sponsors evidence that he would not be able  to
         settle with his wife in the Philippines.  I  find  that  there  are
         serious practical possibilities  of  relocation  for  the  sponsor.
         Having heard the sponsor give evidence before me I  found  that  he
         was credible as a witness and in  particular  with  regard  to  his
         commitment to his wife but the reality of living  together  outside
         the UK was not practically possible.  He had no  means  of  finding
         employment there, did not speak the language and there was no other
         source of financial support available to the couple.  The Appellant
         had made repeated applications to join her husband in  the  UK  and
         the couple have never abandoned their intentions to  live  together
         as husband and wife with  a  family  of  their  own.   In  all  the
         circumstances I do find that on the proper application of the Rules
         there would be a disproportionate interference with the  rights  of
         the Appellant and the sponsor to lead a married  life  together  in
         the UK.  Plus I allow this appeal."

13.  The case of Sabir makes it clear that EX.1 was not  intended  to  be  a
    freestanding element.  The Tribunal said at paragraphs 14, 15 and  16:-
    [Chalkley cut and paste].

14.  I find that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in  finding  that  EX.1
    was freestanding and in allowing the appeal as he did.  The judge  also
    failed to have regard to the fact that  having  failed  to  demonstrate
    that she meets the English language test requirements  that  the  judge
    purported to allow the appellant's Article 8 appeal notwithstanding the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in Bibi and Another.

15.  Like the First-tier Tribunal Judge, I have considerable sympathies  for
    the appellant and the sponsor.

16.  The sponsor told me that despite his love and  feelings  for  his  wife
    their separation is placing enormous strains on their  relationship  to
    the extent that he is now extremely concerned  that  the  marriage  can
    survive the continual setbacks in obtaining  entry  clearance  for  his
    wife.

17.   In  making  the  application  the  appellant  relies  on   information
    published on the UK Borders Agency website.  That information,  it  now
    transpires, was incorrect and out of date.

18.  I hope that in  considering  any  new  application  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant the respondent will bear these comments in  mind  and  ensure
    that any application is dealt with promptly to avoid further delays.

19.  For all the reasons I have given above I find that  I  must  set  aside
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Del  Fabbro.   It  contains
    errors  on  points  of  law.   I  remake  the  decision  myself.    The
    appellant's appeal is dismissed both  on  immigration  grounds  and  on
    human rights grounds.

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
































The Appendix above referred to
[pic]

[pic]
[pic]
[pic]
                                      .


