
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/24826/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28 July 2014                               |On 21 August 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISLAMABAD

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Mrs Saliha Nasim

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms E King, of Counsel instructed by Messrs Lawrence
                    Lupin Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State appeals, with permission, against a decision  of
    Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Thanki  who  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 15 May 2014 allowed the appeal of Mrs  Saliha  Nasim  on
    human rights grounds against a decision of the Entry Clearance  Officer
    to refuse her leave to enter as the dependant  of  her  son  who  is  a
    refugee in Britain.

2.   Although the Entry Clearance Officer is the appellant before me I  will
    for ease of reference refer to him as the  respondent  as  he  was  the
    respondent before the First-tier Tribunal.  Similarly I will  refer  to
    Mrs Saliha Nasim as the appellant as she was the appellant in the First-
    tier.

3.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan  born  on  1  April  1944.   She
    applied on 24 July 2012 for entry clearance for  settlement  under  the
    family reunion  policy  as  a  dependent  relative  of  her  son.   The
    application was considered under Appendix FM  Section  EC-DR.1.1(d)  on
    the basis that she had not produced evidence to show that she  was  the
    mother of the refugee sponsor son in Britain and that in any event  she
    had other relatives who could care for her in  Pakistan  and  the  care
    costs could be met by the financial help from the sponsor in Britain.

4.   The judge heard evidence  from  the  sponsor  and  noted  that  it  was
    conceded that the appellant could not meet the requirements of Appendix
    FM.  She noted that the only arguments being put forward were that  the
    appellant's rights under Article 8 of the ECHR would  be  infringed  by
    removal.

5.   In paragraphs 26 onwards the judge set out  her  findings.   She  noted
    that the appellant lived in Rabwah which she referred to as "a town  of
    sanctuary for those practising the Ahmadi faith".  Until  recently  the
    appellant had lived with her daughter-in-law, the  sponsor's  wife  and
    her grandchildren but was now living alone in  a  house  owned  by  the
    sponsor son.  She was a widow, her husband having died in 2003.

6.   The judge noted that the appellant  had  three  sons  who  had  claimed
    asylum and who lived in Britain but also had a  fourth  son  who  moved
    from place to place in Pakistan. It  was  claimed  that  that  son  was
    unable to look  after  his  mother.   Moreover,  the  appellant  had  a
    daughter and the judge stated that culturally the appellant's  daughter
    would not be able to look after her.  She  went  on  to  say  that  the
    appellant could not live in a care home because  of  her  Ahmadi  faith
    and, having briefly referred to the determination of  the  Tribunal  in
    Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules -  correct  approach)  [2013]  UKUT  640
    (IAC), she stated that it was only if there were arguably good  grounds
    for granting leave to remain outside the Rules was it necessary  to  go
    on to consider whether or not there were compelling  circumstances  not
    sufficiently recognised  under  the  Rules.   She  indicated  that  she
    considered that that was the ratio of the Court of Appeal  judgment  in
    MF (Nigeria).  She  commented  that  Appendix  FM  did  not  cater  for
    compassionate circumstances under the family reunion policy  under  the
    Refugee Convention and said that she found that there were  exceptional
    circumstances which required  consideration  under  Article  8  of  the
    Convention.

7.   She concluded that there was family life with the sponsor,  that  there
    was an infringement of that family life by the decision and went on  to
    conclude that the infringement was disproportionate.  Having noted that
    the sponsor would not be able to support his mother she stated that she
    had been told that he had completed a security  guard  course  and  was
    confident of getting a job so that he could financially look after  his
    family.  She noted the determination of the judge  who  had  heard  the
    appeal of the sponsor and found that he would be at risk on return.  As
    the appellant had been an integral part of the sponsor's family  before
    he fled Pakistan she concluded that the refusal was a  disproportionate
    interference with the appellant's Article 8 rights.

8.   The Entry Clearance Officer appealed stating that  the  fact  that  the
    appellant had been an integral part of the sponsor's  family  prior  to
    him leaving Pakistan was hardly exceptional circumstances and there was
    no reason why the appellant should remain such an integral part of  the
    family.  The grounds refer to the appellant's fourth son in Pakistan as
    well as the fact that the appellant would be supported  by  remittances
    from Britain.  There was  nothing  exceptional  or  compelling  in  her
    circumstances.

9.   Mr Tufan relied on the grounds of appeal.  He stated that there was  no
    evidence of what compelling circumstances there might be.

10.  Ms King stated that it was not incumbent on the judge  to  set  out  in
    particular detail all relevant  factors  taken  into  account  but  the
    reality was that the judge had taken into account relevant factors  and
    reached conclusions which were fully open to her on the evidence and it
    was not for the appellate court, unless a decision was perverse, to set
    aside a decision by one judge and substitute their  own  decision  when
    there was nothing irrational or perverse in the first Judges' decision.
     She argued that the grounds of appeal merely quibbled on the  findings
    of fact and that the  judge  was  correct  to  place  weight  on  clear
    compassionate reasons.  The fact was that the sponsor had no choice but
    to leave Pakistan and that had broken up the family unit.

11.  She accepted that the appellant would be reliant on  public  funds  but
    stated that the sponsor hoped to find work.  She  argued  that  in  any
    event the reality was that the decision of the judge that  the  refusal
    of the application was disproportionate was clearly open to her.

Discussion

12.  I consider that there are material errors of law in  the  determination
    of the Immigration Judge.  I consider that she has not  identified  any
    compelling factors which should mean that she could  have  allowed  the
    appeal on Article 8 grounds.  She should  have  used  as  her  starting
    point the fact that the appellant could not meet  the  requirements  of
    the Rules and directed herself that that did  not  mean  that  she  had
    merely had to conduct a separate exercise under the Convention but  had
    to go on to consider whether or not there were compelling factors which
    meant that this should be one of those exceptional cases where it would
    be  appropriate  to  allow  the  appeal   on   human   rights   grounds
    notwithstanding that the appellant could not succeed under the Rules.

13.  If that were her conclusion then I  consider  that  she  did  not  give
    sufficient reasons for so finding.  In fact she did  not  give  reasons
    for her conclusions that the appellant's son in Pakistan could not help
    his mother given that he considered that the appellant lived in  Rabwah
    which was "a sanctuary  for  Ahmadis".   Moreover,  she  did  not  give
    reasons why the appellant's daughter could not assist or indeed why the
    sponsor here could not provide funds to ensure that his mother received
    the domestic support she required.  There was nothing to indicate  that
    the appellant herself was in any danger  in  Pakistan  nor  indeed  was
    there any indication of how she would be able to integrate into Britain
    let alone the fact that it was accepted that she would become a  charge
    on public funds here.

14.  All these factors are relevant in a proportionality  assessment  and  I
    consider that the judge erred by ignoring these factors and  concluding
    that it was appropriate that the appellant's appeal should  be  allowed
    under Article 8 of the ECHR.

15.  I therefore set aside the decision of the First-tier Judge  and  direct
    that this appeal proceed to a hearing afresh.  The appeal has been  set
    down for a hearing at Hatton Cross on 12 February  2015  with  an  Urdu
    interpreter as I consider that the requirements of the Senior President
    of Tribunals' practice note paragraph 7 are met.

Decision

16.  The appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed to the  limited  extent
    that the appeal is remitted to be heard in the First-tier Tribunal in a
    hearing afresh, the date of hearing being 12 February 2015.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

