
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: oa/25012/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3 April 2014                               |On 22 April 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 VELAT TURAN

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Wray, Counsel instructed by Kings Court Chambers


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


1.   The claimant is a citizen of Turkey.  On 31 August 2012 he applied  for
    entry clearance with a view to settlement in the  United  Kingdom  with
    his wife and sponsor,  Miss  Emma  Jones,  who  is  a  British  citizen
    residing in Dudley.

2.   The application was considered under  the  Immigration  Rules  but  was
    refused on 7 November 2012 because the financial  requirement  was  not
    met.

3.   The claimant sought to appeal against that decision, which appeal  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Holmes on 25 October 2013.

4.   Having heard the sponsor  and  her  sisters  give  evidence  the  Judge
    allowed the appeal under the provisions of Article 8 of the ECHR.

5.   The Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department  sought  to  appeal
    against the decision on  the  basis  that  the  Judge  had  adopted  an
    incorrect approach to Article 8 of the ECHR, particularly in the  light
    of recent jurisprudence, and had failed to apply the  appropriate  test
    to the evidence.

6.   Leave to appeal was  granted  on  the  basis  that  it  was  of  public
    importance  that  the  proper  considerations  be   applied   and   the
    proportionality balance be properly considered.

7.   Thus, the matter comes before me in pursuance of that grant.

8.    Mr  Mills,  who  represents  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department, said that as the claimant failed to  meet  the  Immigration
    Rules it was necessary to consider Article 8 within  the  framework  of
    the jurisprudence, particularly that set out  in  Shahzad  (Article  8:
    legitimate aim) [2014] UKUT 00085 (IAC) and also set out in the case of
    Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach)  [2013]  UKUT  00064
    (IAC).

9.   Although the Judge cited MF (Nigeria) at  paragraph  16  and  found  no
    rational basis and no authority that all the  stages  of  the  exercise
    could be conducted within the scope of the Immigration Rules.  She went
    on to indicate:

         "What is important  is  the  substance  of  the  exercise,  firstly
         considering whether an applicant's family and private life are such
         as to satisfy Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of the Rules, and if
         not, secondly conducting an assessment of Article  8  applying  the
         criteria established by law under the Human Rights Act 1998.


    The Judge then moved on to consider Article 8 in  accordance  with  the
    established jurisprudence.  In paragraph  20  the  Judge  commented  as
    follows:-

         "On the evidence  to  which  I  have  referred,  I  find  that  the
         respondent's decision fails to  respect  established  family  life,
         bearing in mind that, as stated  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  AG
         (Eritrea) [2007] EWCA Civ 801 and in other cases, the threshold  of
         engagement of Article 8 is not specifically high."


10.  The Judge makes further considerations of Article 8  in  paragraph  21.
    Mr Mills submits  that  that  is  to  fundamentally  misunderstand  the
    importance which is now to be given to the public interest as enshrined
    in the Immigration Rules.  It will  only  be  in  the  most  compelling
    circumstances falling  outside  the  Rules  that  Article  8  would  be
    engaged.  Far from being a low threshold Article 8 is only  now  to  be
    engaged when there are compelling circumstances for it to do so.

11.  He submitted, therefore, that the  approach  taken  by  the  Judge  was
    fundamentally flawed and invited me to set aside the decision to be re-
    made.

12.  Mr Wray, who represents the claimant, invited me to find that  whatever
    might have been the approach taken by the Judge it  was  irrelevant  in
    the face of the factual findings that were made.

13.  It is difficult to imagine, he submitted,  that  the  circumstances  as
    set out in paragraph 19 of the determination were not  otherwise  of  a
    compelling nature.  The sponsor had low self-esteem and relied upon the
    support of her husband.  She missed him very much as a result of  which
    she was suffering anxiety and depression, not only on that account  but
    also because she had lost her mother shortly before  the  marriage  and
    was still coming to terms with that.  She was  also  having  difficulty
    controlling her diabetes.  She relied heavily upon her two sisters  for
    support.

14.  My attention was drawn to paragraph 22 of the  determination  in  which
    the Judge concludes that it would  not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
    sponsor to go to Turkey to  be  with  her  husband.   Therefore  it  is
    entirely understandable, given the compelling circumstances,  that  the
    appeal was allowed.

15.  I consider in particular the case of  Gulshan  and  what  was  said  in
    paragraph 27 thereof as follows:-

         "The Judge then embarked on a  free-wheeling  Article  8  analysis,
         unencumbered by the Rules.  That is not the correct approach.   The
         Secretary of State had addressed the Article 8  family  aspects  of
         the respondent's position through the Rules,  in  particular  EX.1,
         and the private life aspect through paragraph  276ADE.   The  Judge
         should have done likewise, also paying attention to  the  guidance.
         Thus the Judge should have  considered  the  Secretary  of  State's
         conclusion under EX.1 that there were no  insurmountable  obstacles
         preventing the continuation  of  family  life  outside  the  United
         Kingdom.  Only if there were arguably  good  grounds  for  granting
         leave to remain outside the Rules was  it  necessary  for  him  for
         Article 8  purposes  to  go  on  to  consider  whether  there  were
         compelling circumstances  not  sufficiently  recognised  under  the
         Rules."


16.  The position as advanced on behalf of the Entry Clearance  Officer  had
    been that the appellant failed to meet  the  Rules  but  there  was  no
    reason at all why family life could not be continued in Turkey.
17.  I find to some extent that the argument, as set out  by  the  Judge  in
    paragraph 22 on the issue of return to Turkey, to be somewhat circular.
     In general terms it was the  evidence  that  the  sponsor  misses  the
    support of her husband in the United Kingdom.  She suffers from  stress
    and depression and a number of matters not all related to  the  absence
    from him but largely so.  It is understandable in the  separation  that
    she relies upon her sister.  It is entirely apparent from the  evidence
    that some of those difficulties, if not most of them, would be resolved
    were the sponsor to be reunited with her husband.  If that was so  then
    clearly there would be no necessity for her sisters to accompany her to
    Turkey.

18.  The Judge  comments  that  the  sponsor  has  no  pre-existing  family,
    cultural or social links with Turkey except as  a  place  to  visit  on
    holiday.  That ignores the fact however that  she  has  now  married  a
    Turkish citizen who lives in Turkey.  There is no detail whatsoever  in
    any of the papers as to what the appellant does for a  living,  whether
    he works or what his lifestyle is and whether  he  has  any  family  in
    Turkey.  There is no indication one way or the other as to the  ability
    of the sponsor to live with him in Turkey with his family.

19.  It seems to me that the precise difficulty in this  case  is  that  the
    Judge has not followed the guidance that has been set out in the recent
    authorities.

20.  The  first  question  that  falls  to  be  considered  is  whether  the
    appellant meets the Immigration Rules.  Clearly the answer  is  no  and
    that was noted by the Judge.  That being said,  the  second  issue  was
    whether there were the compelling circumstances outside the Immigration
    Rules which called into operation Article 8.

21.  Part of  the  analysis  of  the  situation  will  be  to  consider  the
    situation of the appellant in Turkey and that of  the  sponsor  in  the
    United Kingdom.  Was it not reasonable for the sponsor to live with her
    husband in Turkey? If the answer is that it was unreasonable or  unduly
    harsh to expect her to do so, then that would bring into sharper relief
    what factors were compelling such that he should join her.

22.  As I indicated to the sponsor and to her representative,  it  was  very
    unfortunate that so much time has elapsed for the  resolution  of  this
    particular application.  Clearly the sponsor is very upset  and  indeed
    was distressed at the  hearing  as  to  the  continuing  separation  of
    herself from her husband.  The issue  which  seems  not  to  have  been
    explored in any detail or at all is why she cannot join him in  Turkey.
    Sadly both her parents are dead.  Currently she lives with her  sisters
    who provide her with support.  Equally no doubt  she  would  prefer  to
    live with her husband and have his support.

23.  It seems to me, however, that  the  Judge  has  erred  in  law  in  the
    approach to be taken to Article 8 and that it is in the interest of all
    parties and in the interest of  fairness  that  a  proper  approach  is
    adopted to the facts that are found.  Thus, with some reluctance, I set
    aside the decision.
24.  I say with some reluctance because  there  is  little  doubt  that  the
    matters set out in paragraph 19 would, within their proper context,  be
    matters that could support the view that the situation was a compelling
    one.

25.  What is absent, however, is any analysis of the  proposition  that  the
    sponsor can live with the appellant in Turkey.

26.  I canvassed with the representatives whether it was appropriate for  me
    to re-hear the case,  taking  evidence  from  the  sponsor  as  to  the
    circumstances of her husband in Turkey, in  order  perhaps  to  resolve
    that particular issue.  It was felt, however, particularly by Mr  Wray,
    that it would be a fairer course to have a full re-hearing  before  the
    First-tier  Tribunal,  giving  the  appellant  time  to   provide   the
    appropriate evidence that is at present lacking.

27.  In the circumstances therefore the decision is set aside to be  re-made
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  I indicate that it would  be  fair  to
    all parties concerned that that date is not prolonged into the  future.
    I understand from Mr Mills that there is to be an expedited hearing the
    case of MM by the Court of Appeal.  It seems to me, however,  that  the
    justice of this situation does require a finding one way or  the  other
    in what has been a protracted appeal.  The appellant  and  sponsor  are
    entitled to know at an early stage the outcome of the appeal and to  be
    reunited if that be the outcome that is decided upon.

28.  I indicated that at the renewed hearing it  would  be  the  expectation
    that there would be evidence, particularly from the  appellant,  as  to
    his situation and circumstances in Turkey and details of his family and
    relatives.  There is a need to set out why  it  is  that  he  does  not
    consider it possible that he and the sponsor can have a married life in
    Turkey.

29.  Similarly, I understand that the financial  situation  of  the  sponsor
    has improved to some extent since the application was made and that she
    has  further  employment.   That  may  or  may  not   be   a   relevant
    consideration in the overall assessment as to  proportionality  but  no
    doubt evidence as to her currently situation and  circumstances  should
    be obtained.

30.  I indicated to the parties that the evidence and the  findings  of  the
    Judge in relation to paragraph 19 should stand.  There is no suggestion
    whatsoever of any lack of credibility on the part of the sponsor or her
    witnesses and that is a matter which  in  fairness  to  her  should  be
    preserved.

31.  The real issue, as I have indicated, is to  determine  whether  or  not
    there are insurmountable obstacles preventing family life being enjoyed
    with the appellant in Turkey or whether to expect the sponsor to do  so
    would be unreasonable or unduly harsh in all the circumstances.  If the
    answer to that question is yes then it is necessary to consider whether
    there are factors so compelling outside of the Immigration  Rules  that
    would lead to  Article  8  being  applied.   Such  evidence  should  be
    presented not later than seven days before the hearing.

32.  I would simply add, without prejudice to the final  outcome  that  this
    would seem to be a case that has considerable merit to it and that  the
    continuation of the case is causing great distress both to the  sponsor
    and to her family.  I would in those circumstances invite the Secretary
    of State for the Home Department to look again at the features of  this
    case, particularly those set out in paragraph 19 of  the  determination
    to see whether or not there is a necessity for a  final  litigation  of
    this matter at the hearing or whether as a matter  of  compassion  this
    issue can be resolved earlier than that.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

