

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/26465/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5th July 2013                              |On 16th August 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      Mr C M G Ockelton, Vice President
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Martin


                                   Between

                           FATAH NAWSHIRWAN AHMED

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                        ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, AMMAN

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondents:   Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a national of Iraq, appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal
    against the decision of the respondent on 18 August 2011  refusing  him
    Entry Clearance as  a  spouse.   Judge  Higgins  dismissed  the  appeal
    because in his judgment the appellant failed to meet  the  requirements
    of the Rules in two respects:  he  did  not  produce  an  English  Test
    Certificate from a provider approved by the Secretary of State; and  he
    failed to show that on arrival he would be adequately maintained.

 2. Grounds of appeal were submitted,  challenging  the  decision  on  both
    grounds. Permission was refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Judge
    Saffer remarked that the challenges to the decision about  the  English
    test had no  merit,  but  was  more  circumspect  in  relation  to  the
    maintenance point.  Because the appeal could not  succeed,  he  refused
    permission.  The application was renewed to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   In
    relation to the English test there was reference,  as  there  had  been
    previously, to the "flexibility policy".  Further, for the  first  time
    we think, it was suggested  that  the  judge  should  have  taken  into
    account the difficulties the appellant might have in taking the test in
    Iraq.  The grounds on maintenance were  more  lengthy.   Judge  Freeman
    granted permission.  He made no mention of the appellant's difficulties
    in relation to the English test but said  that  he  thought  it  was  a
    suitable case for the resolution of potential conflict  of  authorities
    on maintenance.

 3. There was no appearance on behalf of  the  appellant  before  us.   His
    solicitors  indicated  that  it  had  not  been  possible   to   obtain
    instructions, although they had previously sought  an  adjournment  and
    transfer of venue.  The notice of hearing had been properly served  and
    there was no adequate explanation of the absence of any representative.
     The appellant himself is outside the United Kingdom.  This appeared to
    be an appropriate case to proceed in his absence and we did so.

 4. The appellant's principal problem is in relation to the  English  test.
    The test result  submitted  with  his  application  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of the rules because it was  not  from  an  approved  test
    provider.  Before the First-tier Tribunal there was  a  letter,  adding
    nothing to the matter, and an IELTS certificate derived from a test  on
    29 October 2011.  The certificate itself is dated 10 November 2011.  It
    shows an overall score of 4.0 including speaking at 6.0  but  listening
    only at 2.0.

 5. The judge noted that he was concerned with the position at the date  of
    the decision, 18 August 2011.  He said that  he  could  not  take  into
    account the IELTS certificate, dated months later, and that if he could
    take it into account he would have had doubts, from the 2.0  score  for
    listening, whether it demonstrated the necessary competence.

 6. It is true, as the grounds point out, that it is  (for  some  purposes)
    the overall score that counts, but the judge was, or would  have  been,
    being asked to derive from this  certificate  a  conclusion  about  the
    appellant's ability to obtain such a certificate at  the  date  of  the
    decision.  He was right to be very cautious about doing so; and in  any
    event  it  is  difficult  to  see  how  the  evidence  could  fill  the
    requirement to have a certificate at the relevant date.

 7. There is no perceptible merit in the  invocation  of  the  'flexibility
    policy'.  There is not, and has never been said  to  be,  any  document
    that was in existence and would have enabled the appellant to meet  the
    requirements of the rules if only  the  respondent  had  asked  for  it
    shortly after the application on 10 June 2011.  Nor, indeed,  is  there
    anything in that application that ought to have caused  the  respondent
    to make any such request.

 8. We do not know on what basis it is said now that  the  judge  ought  to
    have enquired into the difficulty for the appellant in taking the test.
    No such difficulty appears to have been suggested  to  the  judge,  and
    there is no mention  of  any  difficulty  in  the  appellant's  witness
    statement or even any subsequent evidence of difficulty.  The  fact  is
    that the appellant did take a  test  on  29  October  2011,  apparently
    having no difficulty in doing so.

 9. The judge was entirely right in his conclusion that the  appellant  did
    not meet the requirements of the Rules  relating  to  an  English  test
    certificate, and his judgement shows no error of law.

10. Irrespective of any arguments as to  maintenance,  this  appeal  cannot
    therefore succeed, and we dismiss it.









                                                              C M G OCKELTON

VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                         Date: 6 August 2013
