

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/28410/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11 March 2014                              |On 01st April 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                NATASHA GWARA

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - PRETORIA

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Ottilia Mugadzu, Sponsor
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe who was born on  9  June  2004.
      On 6 October 2011, the appellant applied  for  entry  clearance  under
      para 319X of the Immigration Rules (HC 395 as  amended  )to  join  her
      aunt, Ms Otillia Mugadzu in the UK.  On 17  October  2011,  the  Entry
      Clearance Officer (ECO) refused the appellant's  application.   First,
      the ECO was not satisfied that the appellant and sponsor were  related
      as claimed (para 319X(i)).  Secondly, the ECO was not  satisfied  that
      there were "serious and  compelling  family  or  other  considerations
      which make exclusion  of  the  [appellant]  undesirable  and  suitable
      arrangements  had  been  made  for  the  [appellant's]  care."   (para
      319X(ii)).

   2. On 20 February 2012, the Entry Clearance Manager  (ECM)  reviewed  the
      ECO's decision.  On the basis of the documents submitted to  the  ECM,
      he was satisfied that  the  appellant  and  sponsor  were  related  as
      claimed, namely niece and aunt respectively and that,  therefore,  the
      requirement in para 319X(i) was met.  Nevertheless, the ECM upheld the
      refusal under para 319X(ii).

   3. The appellant appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   She  did  not
      request an oral hearing.  In a determination promulgated  on  18  June
      2012, Judge Devlin dismissed the appellant's appeal.   First,  he  was
      not satisfied on the evidence before him that the requirement in  para
      319X(ii) of the Rules was met.  Further,  the  Judge  found  that  the
      refusal of entry clearance was not a breach of Article 8 of the  ECHR.



   4. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.   On
      22 October 2013, the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Keane)  granted  the
      appellant permission to appeal on the basis that the Judge had made an
      error in stating the appellant's age and that this was relevant to his
      assessment of proportionality under Article 8.   Thus, the appeal came
      before me.

   5. At the hearing, the appellant was  not  legally  represented  but  the
      sponsor, the appellant's aunt,  attended  the  hearing  and  spoke  on
      behalf of the appellant.

   6. In his submissions, Mr Richards, on behalf of the  ECO  accepted  that
      the Judge had misstated the appellant's age as being 14 (see paras 144
      and 152 of the determination).  In fact, at the date of decision on 17
      October 2011 the appellant was 7 years of age having been  born  on  9
      June 2004.  Nevertheless, Mr Richards submitted  that,  although  that
      error was unfortunate, it was immaterial.  He submitted that given the
      Judge's findings in paragraph 121 of his determination, in  particular
      that the appellant had not broken all ties with her parents, the Judge
      could not have reached any other decision even  if  he  had  correctly
      identified the appellant's age as 7.  Indeed,  Mr  Richards  submitted
      that at this younger age, it was even more likely that the Judge would
      have found, as he did, namely that it  was  in  the  appellant's  best
      interests to remain with her parents  in  Zimbabwe.   He  invited  me,
      therefore, to dismiss the appeal.

   7. Ms Mugadzu relied on the fact that the appellant's father had died  on
      4 October 2012 and she drew my attention  to  his  death  certificate.
      She also relied on the fact that her mother was 62 years of  age;  she
      was getting old; and she had problems with her health which meant that
      sometimes it was difficult for her to look after the  appellant.   The
      sponsor also referred me to the fact that the appellant had been raped
      on the way from school in November 2013 and, again, she referred me to
      supporting documentation in the file.

   8. The appellant's case before the First-tier Tribunal was  that  she  no
      longer had any ties with her parents in  Zimbabwe  and  that  she  was
      wholly dependent upon the sponsor who had sole responsibility for her.
       So far as relevant, para 319(ii) provides as follows:

           "319  The requirements to be met by a person  seeking  leave  to
                 enter or remain in the United Kingdom as  the  child  of  a
                 relative with limited leave  to  remain  as  a  refugee  or
                 beneficiary  of  humanitarian  protection  in  the   United
                 Kingdom are that:


                 ....(ii)    The relative has limited leave  in  the  United
                       Kingdom as a refugee or beneficiary  of  humanitarian
                       protection  and  there  are  serious  and  compelling
                       family or other considerations which  make  exclusion
                       of the child undesirable  and  suitable  arrangements
                       have been made for the child's care..."

   9. In his  determination,  the  Judge  carefully  set  out  the  evidence
      relevant to his decision in relation to para 319X(ii).  At  para  121,
      the Judge made a number of findings on the evidence which, as  I  have
      already noted, did not include any oral evidence from the  sponsor  as
      no oral hearing was requested.  Those findings were as follows:

           "121. Looking at all the documentary evidence in  the  round,  I
                 find that I cannot be satisfied that, as at the date of the
                 Respondent's decision:


                    i) the Appellant's parents had broken all ties with her;


                   ii)  the  Appellant's  father  did   not   have   settled
                       accommodation;


                  iii) her mother's whereabouts were unknown;


                   iv)  the  Appellant's  parents  lived  at   a   different
                       residential address from the Appellant;


                    v)  they  had  abdicated  all  responsibility  for   the
                       Appellant and had taken no  part  in  her  upbringing
                       since 2007;


                   vi)  the  sponsor  had  sole   responsibility   for   the
                       Appellant;


                  vii) the Appellant was looked after by Mrs Mugadzu  alone,
                       or that Mrs Mugadzu was no longer able to look  after
                       her; or,


                 viii) there was no one other than Mrs Mugadzu to  care  for
                       the Appellant."


  10. Those findings led Judge Devlin to make the following finding at  para
      122:

           "122. It follows that I cannot be satisfied that, as at the date
                 of the Respondent's decision, there were  any  serious  and
                 compelling family or other considerations which would  have
                 made  exclusion  of  the  Appellant  undesirable  or   that
                 suitable arrangements have been made for her care."

  11. Those findings  are  not  challenged  in  this  appeal  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal.  Having carefully considered the determination, there is  no
      conceivable basis upon which it can be said that  the  Judge  was  not
      entitled to make the findings that he did.

  12. In the light of those findings, the Judge then  went  on  to  consider
      whether the refusal of entry clearance breached Article 8 of the ECHR.
       In doing so, both at para 144 and 152,  the  Judge  referred  to  the
      appellant as being 14 years of age.  That was clearly a mistake.   The
      appellant was seven years of age (and not four as the  Judge  granting
      permission to appeal appears to have thought) at the date of the ECO's
      decision.   Having  noted  that  it  was  not  established  that   the
      "appellant's parents had  abdicated  their  role  in  the  appellant's
      upbringing" (see para 147), the Judge went on to consider  whether  it
      would be in the best interests of the appellant to be  separated  from
      her family (her parents and grandmother) in Zimbabwe and to  come  and
      live in the UK with her aunt.  At para 152, the Judge  noted  that  it
      is:

           "almost inevitable that [the appellant] will  have  formed  some
           bonds with those responsible for her day  to  day  care.   These
           bonds too may well be significant."

  13. At para 153, the Judge concluded:

           "Consequently, I cannot be satisfied that  separation  from  the
           Appellant's  family  in  Zimbabwe  is  preferable  to  continued
           separation from the sponsor."

  14. Whilst the Judge made that finding, on the basis that he thought  that
      the appellant was 14 years old, it is inconceivable that he would have
      made a different decision if he had correctly directed himself to  the
      fact that she was seven years old.  Likewise, his finding that it  was
      not established that it was in the  appellant's  "best  interests"  to
      settle in the UK (see para 157 of his  determination)  was  inevitable
      given his earlier findings when rejecting the appellant's claim  under
      the Immigration Rules.  The appellant had simply failed  to  establish
      that her parents no longer had any ties with  her  in  Zimbabwe;  that
      they were not living at  the  same  address  as  her;  that  they  had
      abdicated all responsibility for her upbringing since 2007;  and  that
      if the appellant's grandmother was unwell there  was  no-one  else  to
      care for the appellant.  It is difficult  to  conceive  of  any  other
      finding in those circumstances, other than that the best interests  of
      the appellant were to remain in Zimbabwe with her  family  with  which
      she was currently living.

  15. As I explained to the sponsor at the hearing, the evidence  which  she
      drew to my attention, namely that the appellant's father had died  and
      that the appellant had been raped in November 2013, was  not  evidence
      before  the  Judge:  the  latter  related  to  something   which,   if
      established, occurred after his decision was made.   The  Judge  could
      not, therefore, be criticised for  failing  to  have  regard  to  this
      evidence.  In any event, the evidence relates to  circumstances  which
      post-date the ECO's decision and was not relevant to  the  appellant's
      circumstances at the date  of  decision  (see,  ss.85(5)  and  85A(2),
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002).  At best, the  evidence
      could form the basis of a new application and a claim by the appellant
      that in her new circumstances she should be granted entry clearance.

  16. For the reasons I have given, the First-tier Tribunal did not  err  in
      law in dismissing the appellant's appeal both  under  the  Immigration
      Rules and under Article 8 of the ECHR.

  17. The First-tier Tribunal's  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal  on  all
      grounds stands.

  18. The appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is, therefore, dismissed.











                               Signed






                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:




















