
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/29295/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 16 October 2013                              |On 31 October 2013         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                         PARASTOO AHMADPOURTORKAMANI
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer - ABU DHABI


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Cole, Parker Rhodes Hickmotts
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Parastoo Ahmadpourtorkamani, was born on 16  March  1988
    and is a female citizen of Iran.  The appellant had applied  for  entry
    clearance for settlement in the United Kingdom with her  father,  Abbas
    Ahmadpoor Torkamany  (hereafter  referred  to  as  the  sponsor).   The
    sponsor is a recognised refugee in the United Kingdom.  The appellant's
    application was refused on 20 October 2011.  She  appealed to the First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Saffer) which, in a determination  promulgated  on
    22 May 2012, dismissed the appeal.

 2. At the Upper Tribunal hearing at Bradford on 16 October 2013, Mr  Cole,
    for the appellant, acknowledged (as had the grounds of appeal) that the
    appellant could not succeed under the Immigration Rules; the  appellant
    is now 25 years old.  Mr Cole also accepted that he could not  maintain
    the submission made in the grounds at [2] that the appellant should  be
    admitted to the United Kingdom under a family  reunion  policy  of  the
    respondent.  Such provisions as previously existed in the  respondent's
    policy have now been incorporated into the Immigration Rules.  Mr  Cole
    submitted that the appeal fell to be considered under  Article  8  ECHR
    only.

 3. Mr Cole's main submission in respect of Article  8  ECHR  focused  upon
    what the judge had said in his determination at [16]:

         "I do not accept that [the  appellant's]  health  problems  are  as
         severe as claimed.  That  is  because  of  discrepancy  within  her
         mother's evidence as to whether she has attempted to commit suicide
         once or twice and whether she  was  in  Iran  on  the  most  recent
         attempt or whether the last occasion  was  before  she  visited  in
         March 2012.  I accordingly place no weight on the medical  evidence
         and  am  satisfied  that  this  has  been  fabricated   given   the
         significant discrepancies in the mother's evidence".

 4. The judge had before  him  three  very  short  medical  reports  dating
    between June 2011 and May 2012.  Those reports were written by  one  Dr
    Yousefi, a psychiatrist at the ETKA Specialty Polyclinic.   It  is  not
    clear exactly where the polyclinic is situated in  Iran.   The  reports
    discuss the appellant's "depression and anxiety"and later  her  "severe
    depression".  In  the  last  report,  the  doctor  certified  that  the
    appellant "is suffering from major depression due to  being  away  from
    her family and loneliness and has committed suicide (sic) once by using
    a lot of sedatives".

 5. It is certainly arguable that Judge Saffer has taken too harsh  a  view
    of this evidence.  The  "significant  discrepancies"  in  the  mother's
    evidence  have  been  addressed  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  and   an
    explanation provided; it is not clear whether the point  was  taken  in
    oral evidence before the judge and whether any explanation was provided
    then.  In any event, it is arguable that the discrepancy would have  to
    be significant before no weight is placed upon evidence.

 6. However, I am not satisfied that, even if the  judge  did  err  in  his
    assessment of the medical evidence, that a more measured approach would
    have led to a different outcome.   The  medical  reports  contain  only
    scanty details relating to diagnosis, treatment and  prognosis  to  say
    the very least.  Possible causes for the appellant's illness other than
    her separation from her family are not discussed at all and I find that
    the evidence is strongly indicative of special pleading on behalf of an
    appellant unable to satisfy the provisions for entry clearance.  Whilst
    Judge Saffer may have been too harsh in  attaching  no  weight  to  the
    reports, it is difficult to see how any judge would attach a very  much
    deal of weight to this evidence in the Article 8  ECHR  proportionality
    exercise.  To allow the appeal would, in effect, allow  this  appellant
    to override the provisions of the Immigration Rules on the basis  of  a
    bare assertion by an Iranian doctor that the  illness  from  which  she
    claims to suffer may only be treated by the appellant being allowed  to
    enter the United Kingdom to be with her family.  Frankly,  and  in  the
    absence of any other evidence weighing in favour of the appellant, I do
    not believe any Judge of the First-tier Tribunal could  properly  allow
    an out of country Article 8 ECHR  appeal  on  that  basis.   There  are
    further problems for the appellant.  The evidence  indicates  that  she
    has been offered accommodation by her uncle but she has refused it.   I
    consider that Judge Saffer's  observation  at  [15]  that  her  refusal
    "shows she is independent and capable of  living  on  her  own  as  she
    wishes" is entirely valid. That evidence  reduces  the  weight  of  the
    medical evidence which suggests that the appellant may need the support
    of others.

 7. In conclusion, I find that, whilst Judge Saffer may have erred  in  law
    in his assessment of the evidence, any error does not  require  setting
    aside of his determination, the outcome of which is legally sound.

DECISION

 8. This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 30 October 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

