
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/30475/2011
     OA/30480/2011

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 6 January 2013                             |On 14 January 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                  GANGA PUN
                             PRADIP BAHADUR PUN
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER-NEW DELHI

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants: Mr R. Jesurum, Counsel instructed by Howe & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr C. Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. These appellants are brother and sister and are citizens  of  Nepal.
       They  were  born  on  27  September  1986  and  22  February   1989,
       respectively. Their appeals against refusals of entry clearance come
       back before the Upper Tribunal following the order of the  Court  of
       Appeal dated 21 November 2013.  The  Court  of  Appeal  allowed  the
       appellants' appeals against the decision of  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
       Judge ("DUTJ") McWilliam  who, in a determination promulgated on  27
       November 2012, found an error of law in the decision of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal (First-tier judge Hanratty), set aside  his  decision,
       and re-made the decisions, dismissing the appeals.

    2. The appellants had applied for entry clearance for the  purposes  of
       settlement in 2007 and 2008, those applications being  refused.  The
       sponsor, their father Janga Bahadur Pun, had been granted settlement
       in  2005.  Their  mother's  (Bishnu  Kumari  Pun)  application   for
       settlement was granted in 2008.

    3. The appellants' applications for entry clearance, on the basis  that
       they were adult dependants of a former  Gurkha  who  was  discharged
       before 1997, and which are the subject of this appeal were  made  in
       March 2010. Following the refusal of the applications on 8  December
       2010, they appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  Immigration  Judge
       Rimington found that there was family life  between  the  appellants
       and their father. She allowed the appeals to the limited extent that
       the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's  ("ECO's")  decision  was  not   in
       accordance with the law and the matter was remitted to the ECO for a
       decision to be made in accordance with the appropriate policy.

    4.  Following  Judge  Rimington's  determination,  the  ECO  made   new
       decisions on 19 December 2011, again  dismissing  the  applications,
       with reference to the policies in relation to  adult  dependants  of
       former Gurkha soldiers. It is those decisions which are the  subject
       of the appeals before me and which came first before Judge  Hanratty
       and then before DUTJ McWilliam, following  which  the  appeals  were
       remitted by the Court of Appeal.

    5. The Court of Appeal ordered that DUTJ McWilliam's  determination  be
       set aside except  that  the  finding  of  family  life  between  the
       appellants  and  their  parents   is   preserved,   but   that   the
       proportionality  assessment  should  be  made  in  line   with   the
       principles in Gurung [2013] EWCA  Civ  8.  The  purely  factual,  as
       distinct from the legal, basis  of  the  proportionality  assessment
       does not appear to be in dispute.

    6. The appeals before me proceeded on the basis of  Article  8  of  the
       ECHR only. I have applied the structured approach set out in  Razgar
       [2004] UKHL 27. For reasons that are apparent from the remainder  of
       this determination, it is not necessary to embark  on  a  full-scale
       examination of the relevant policies applicable to  'Gurkha'  cases,
       to review all the authorities relied on by  the  appellants,  or  to
       undertake  a  detailed  examination  of  these  appellants'  factual
       circumstances as they stood at the relevant date, namely the date of
       the latest decision to refuse entry clearance. The following summary
       of the relevant legal principles  and  the  further  relevant  facts
       suffices.

    7. In Gurung it was decided that the Upper Tribunal in Ghising  (family
       life-adults-Gurkha policy) [2012] UKUT  00160  (IAC)  was  wrong  to
       conclude that the "historic injustice" suffered by former members of
       the brigade of Gurkhas was not as severe as that suffered by British
       Overseas Citizens  and  that  the  weight  to  be  attached  to  the
       injustice was "substantially less" in the Gurkha cases.

    8. At [42] in Gurung the court said that

              "If a Gurkha can show that, but for the  historic  injustice,
              he would have settled in the UK at a time when his  dependant
              (now) adult child would have been able to accompany him as  a
              dependant child under the age of 18, that is a strong  reason
              for holding that it is  proportionate  to  permit  the  adult
              child to join his family now. To that extent, the Gurkha  and
              BOC cases are similar. That is why we cannot agree that, as a
              general rule, the weight accorded to the injustice should  be
              substantially different in the two cases."

    9. The appeals remitted to the Upper Tribunal by the Court of Appeal in
       Gurung resulted in the  reported  decision  of  Ghising  and  others
       (Gurkhas/BOCs: historic wrong;  weight)  [2013]  UKUT  00567  (IAC),
       which I shall refer to as Ghising No.2. It is instructive  to  quote
       [59]-[60] of that decision where the Upper Tribunal said that:

          "59. ...we accept Mr Jacobs' submission that where  Article  8  is
             held to be engaged and the fact that but for the historic wrong
             the Appellant would have been settled in the  UK  long  ago  is
             established, this will ordinarily determine the outcome of  the
             proportionality assessment; and determine it in an  Appellant's
             favour. The explanation for this is to be  found,  not  in  any
             concept of new or additional  "burdens"  but,  rather,  in  the
             weight to be afforded to the historic wrong/settlement issue in
             a proportionality balancing exercise. That, we consider, is the
             proper interpretation of what the Court of Appeal  were  saying
             when they referred to the historic injustice as being  such  an
             important factor to be taken  into  account  in  the  balancing
             exercise. What was crucial, the Court said, was the consequence
             of the historic injustice, which was that Gurkhas and BOCs:

                 "were prevented from settling in the U.K. That is  why  the
                 historic injustice is such an important factor to be  taken
                 into  account  in  the  balancing  exercise  and  why   the
                 applicant dependent child of a Gurkha who is settled in the
                 UK has such a strong claim to have his article  8(1)  right
                 vindicated,   notwithstanding   the    potency    of    the
                 countervailing public interest in  maintaining  of  a  firm
                 immigration policy". [41]

              In other  words,  the  historic  injustice  issue  will  carry
             significant weight, on the Appellant's side of the balance, and
             is likely to outweigh the matters relied on by the  Respondent,
             where  these  consist  solely  of  the  public  interest   just
             described.

          60. Once this point is grasped, it can immediately be  appreciated
             that there may be cases where Appellants in Gurkha  cases  will
             not succeed, even though their family life engages Article 8(1)
             and the evidence shows they  would  have  come  to  the  United
             Kingdom with their father, but for the injustice that prevented
             the latter from settling here on  completion  of  his  military
             service.  If the Respondent can point to matters over and above
             the "public interest  in  maintaining  of  a  firm  immigration
             policy", which argue in favour of removal  or  the  refusal  of
             leave to enter, these must be given appropriate weight  in  the
             balance in the Respondent's favour.  Thus,  a  bad  immigration
             history and/or criminal behaviour may still  be  sufficient  to
             outweigh the powerful factors bearing on the Appellant's  side.
             Being an adult child of a UK settled Gurkha  ex-serviceman  is,
             therefore, not a "trump card", in  the  sense  that  not  every
             application by such a person will inevitably succeed.   But, if
             the  Respondent  is  relying  only  upon  the  public  interest
             described by the Court of Appeal at  paragraph  41  of  Gurung,
             then the weight to be given  to  the  historic  injustice  will
             normally require a decision in the Appellant's favour."

   10. As is pointed out in the  skeleton  argument  in  the  case  of  the
       appellants before me, the uncontested evidence of  the  sponsor  was
       that if he had been able to apply on discharge from the  brigade  of
       Gurkhas he would have applied for settlement for all his family.  He
       was discharged in 1994 at a time when the appellants were  under  18
       years of age. Judge Rimington found the sponsor to be  credible  and
       her finding  in  that  regard  survived  the  appeals  before  Judge
       Hanratty and  DUTJ  McWilliam.  The  appellants'  skeleton  argument
       states at [19] that  at  the  time  that  the  sponsor  was  granted
       settlement in 2005 the appellants were under the age of 18.  It  was
       conceded before me that that is not in fact correct in  relation  to
       the first appellant, but in the circumstances of this appeal that is
       not material.

   11. Mr Avery accepted that he could not point to anything on  the  facts
       of these appeals which would mean the appeals should not be allowed,
       having regard to the decision in  Ghising  No.2.  He  accepted  that
       there was nothing in terms of their immigration history  or  in  the
       nature of any criminality, as referred to  in  Ghising  No.2,  which
       weighs against the appellants in proportionality terms.

   12. There is nothing to indicate that the respondent relies on  anything
       other than the  interests  of  immigration  control  on  the  public
       interest side of the proportionality balancing  exercise.  In  those
       circumstances, having regard to the  authorities  to  which  I  have
       referred, I am satisfied that the decision of the respondent amounts
       to a disproportionate interference, or more accurately in  an  entry
       clearance case, lack of respect for, the appellants' right to family
       life.

   13. Accordingly, the appeal of each appellant succeeds under  Article  8
       of the ECHR.

Decision

   14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  an
       error on a point of law. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is
       set aside and the decision  re-made  allowing  the  appeal  of  each
       appellant under Article 8 of the ECHR.






Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek
                                                 6/01/14
