
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/30881/2011
                                                               OA/30884/2011
                                                               OA/30886/2011

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 19 April 2013                              |On 23 August 2013            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                             Mr Kusal Sing Limbu
                               Ms Laxmi Limbu
                               Ms Femee Limbu

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr R Jesurum, Counsel, instructed by Howe & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This matter came before me on  7  September  2012,  following  which  I
    prepared a Note of Hearing.  I set out below  the  chronology  of  this
    appeal, which repeats in substance what is contained within  that  Note
    of Hearing.

 2. The appellants are all nationals of Nepal, and were  born  respectively
    on 5 May 1984, 19 February 1988  and  23  September  1989.   They  each
    applied for settlement in the  UK  as  the  dependent  child  of  their
    father,  who  is  a  retired  Ghurkha  soldier  who  had  been  granted
    settlement in the UK in 2009.  The applications were originally refused
    by the respondent on 4 August 2010, but on  appeal,  Immigration  Judge
    Scott Baker found (on 15 August 2011) that  the  respondent's  decision
    had not been in accordance with the law as she had failed  to  consider
    the correct  policy  in  relation  to  the  applications,  and  so  the
    respondent reconsidered these applications.

 3. Having reconsidered the applications, the respondent refused them again
    on 21 November 2011, having considered policy SET12, relating to family
    of former members of HM Forces.  The refusal letters are dated the same
    date.

 4. The appellants appealed against these decisions and their appeals  were
    heard before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Katharine  Gordon,  sitting  at
    Hatton Cross on 27 April 2012.

 5. In a determination promulgated on 4 May 2012,  Judge  Gordon  dismissed
    the appeals.

 6. The appellants have appealed against this  decision  and  were  granted
    permission to appeal by Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Garratt on
    18 June 2012.

 7. At the hearing before me last September, I heard argument as to whether
    or not the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  had  contained  a
    material error of law.  Mr Avery, on behalf of the  respondent,  relied
    heavily on the recently reported decision of this Tribunal  in  Ghising
    (Family life - adults - Ghurkha policy) [2012] UKUT 00160; on behalf of
    the appellants, Mr Jesurum argued  forcefully  that  Ghising  had  been
    wrongly decided and was in conflict with higher authority.

 8. Mr Jesurum informed the court that Ghising was under appeal,  and  also
    that permission to appeal had been granted in another case,  where  the
    point at issue was similar.  I reserved my decision.

 9. Before reaching a final decision, I made enquiries and ascertained that
    permission to appeal had been granted  in  Ghising  and  that  judgment
    would  be  given  without  there  being  a  lengthy  delay.   In  those
    circumstances, I considered that I should await  that  judgment  before
    giving a final decision in this appeal.

10. Judgment having been  given  in  Ghising  and  other  associated  cases
    (reported as  Gurung  and  Others,  R(on  the  application  of)  v  The
    Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  8),  I
    considered that the  parties  ought  to  be  allowed  to  make  further
    submissions in light of this judgment, and I accordingly directed  that
    this appeal be listed before me for further  submissions  in  light  of
    this decision, which it eventually was, on 19 April 2013.





The Hearing

11. I first heard submissions as to whether there had been an error of  law
    in Judge Gordon's determination, following which  I  found  that  there
    had, for reasons which will appear below.  Having deciding that I would
    have re-make the decision, I then heard evidence from  the  appellants'
    father, who is the sponsor, who gave  evidence  in  Nepalese  with  the
    assistance of an interpreter.  The sponsor was cross-examined and  then
    re-examined, during which he gave some  of  his  evidence  in  English.
    Although the appellants' mother had left the  hearing  because  it  was
    anticipated she might give oral evidence,  at  the  conclusion  of  the
    sponsor's evidence, Mr Jarvis indicated that he did not wish to ask her
    any questions and so  I  then  heard  submissions  on  behalf  of  both
    parties.

12. I recorded all the  evidence,  and  the  submissions  which  were  made
    contemporaneously, and as these are  contained  within  the  Record  of
    Proceedings, I shall refer below only  to  such  of  the  evidence  and
    submissions as is necessary for the purposes of this determination.   I
    have, however, taken account of everything which was said to me  during
    the course of the hearing, and have also considered all  the  documents
    contained  within  the  file,  including  in  particular  the   witness
    statements of the appellants' parents,  whether  or  not  I  have  made
    specific reference to any individual document below.



Submissions as to Error of Law

13. At the outset, I expressed my provisional view that following the Court
    of Appeal decision in Gurung, it would need to be established on behalf
    of these appellants (and others in a similar position) first that there
    was still a family life and secondly that, but for what is referred  to
    in the judgment as the  "historic  injustice",  they  would  have  been
    settled in the UK while they were still minors.  If  this  was  so,  it
    would be a weighty factor in the appellants'  favour  when  I  came  to
    consider whether the decision was proportionate.

14. On behalf of the appellants, Mr Jesurum  agreed  that  it  was  a  pre-
    condition to this appeal that the appellants would  have  to  establish
    that there was still family life, in light of Sedley LJ's  judgment  in
    Patel and Others v Entry Clearance Officer (Mumbai) [2010] EWCA Civ 17,
    which was a BOC case.  At paragraphs 14 and  15  of  Patel,  Sedley  LJ
    stated as follows:
         "14. You can set out to compensate for a historical wrong, but  you
             cannot reverse the passage of time.  Many  of  these  children
             have now grown up and embarked on lives of  their  own.  Where
             this has happened, the bonds which constitute family life will
             no longer be there, and art. 8 will have no purchase. But what
             may constitute an extant family life falls well short of  what
             constitutes dependency, and  a  good  many  adult  children  -
             including children on whom  the  parents  themselves  are  now
             reliant - may still have a family life with  parents  who  are
             now settled here not by leave or by force of circumstance  but
             by long-delayed right. That is what gives the historical wrong
             a potential relevance to art. 8 claims such as these. It  does
             not make the Convention a  mechanism  for  turning  the  clock
             back, but it does make  both  the  history  and  its  admitted
             injustices potentially relevant to  the  application  of  art.
             8(2).
         15.  As the individual cases to which I now  turn  illustrate,  the
             effect of this is to reverse  the  usual  balance  of  art.  8
             issues. By the time they come to seek entry  clearance,  adult
             children may well no longer be part  of  the  family  life  of
             British overseas citizens who  have  finally  secured  British
             citizenship. If so, the threshold of art. 8(1) will  not  have
             been crossed and the proportionality of  excluding  them  will
             not be an issue. If, however, they come within the  protection
             of   art.   8(1),   the   balance   of   factors   determining
             proportionality  for  the  purposes  of  art.  8(2)  will   be
             influenced, perhaps decisively, by the fact (if it is a  fact)
             that, but for the history recounted in NH (India), the  family
             would or might have settled here long ago."

15.  Tribunals should now focus on the causation and consequence,  and  the
    rectification of consequence, rather  than  weighing  up  the  relative
    egregiousness of the respondent.  Article 8 was not  just  a  stick  to
    beat the respondent with.

16. With regard to the evidential point, which was  the  second  factor  to
    which the Tribunal had referred, the  undisputed  evidence  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, was that contained  in  the  sponsor's  statement,
    which is at page 3 of the appellants' bundle, where, at paragraph 14 he
    said as follows:

         "If I had had the opportunity to apply for  settlement  immediately
         after my discharge then I  would  have  applied  together  with  my
         family.  Both of my children would have been under 18 at  the  time
         of my discharge."

17. The sponsor had been discharged from the army on 6 August 1987, and the
    reference to "both" was an error.  At that time he only had one  child;
    the other two were born later.  However, as a matter of law,  the  fact
    that children were born after the date of  service  was  not  relevant.
    Had he applied for settlement shortly after his discharge, as he should
    have then been allowed, his existing children would have come with him,
    and any subsequently born children would also now be  settled  in  this
    country.

18. What the Court of Appeal had accepted in Gurung, is that the  BOC  line
    of authority was binding.  The differences were dealt with at paragraph
    40 of Gurung.  What the Court of Appeal said in Gurung, which  disposes
    of the position as previously understood in Ghising, is that while  the
    position of BOCs and Ghurkhas are not identical, unless there is either
    a suggestion that the  settlement  granted  to  the  sponsor  might  be
    revoked, or there is serious adverse information, such as  criminality,
    in respect of a relevant  application,  the  difference  between  these
    categories carries "little weight".  In this case,  there  is  no  such
    difference.  There is no suggestion of criminality or  that  settlement
    would be revoked.  Accordingly, the authorities relating to BOC  family
    members should be applied in full.

19. With regard to the children who had been born  after  the  sponsor  had
    been discharged from the army, it was clear from paragraph 13 of Patel,
    that it was immaterial whether the children would have come with  their
    father, or been born here after their father  had  been  settled.   Any
    children he had would have been entitled to  remain  in  this  country.
    The approach in Patel is a compensatory one, which was clear  from  the
    heading above paragraph 11, which was "righting the wrong", the use  of
    the word "compensate" at the start of paragraph 14 and the adoption  of
    a "but for" test.

20. The issue here was whether or not the family came within the protection
    of Article 8(1).  If they did not, then it was accepted  that  the  BOC
    line of authority was clear and they would  have  no  protection  under
    Gurung.

21. It was accepted that the Tribunal would have to find an error of law in
    the finding of the First-tier Tribunal that there was  no  family  life
    between the appellants and the sponsor, but with regard to  whether  or
    not, but for the historic injustice,  these  appellants  would  now  be
    settled here, the Tribunal had to accept the unchallenged  evidence  of
    the sponsor.  In this regard the appellants relied on the  decision  of
    the Court of Appeal in MS (Sri Lanka) [2012] EWCA Civ 1548,  where,  at
    paragraph 14, Maurice Kaye LJ had stated that where a witness  had  not
    been cross-examined, the respondent should be taken either to accept or
    not dispute the evidence which had been given.

22. With regard to the issue of whether or not there had been  family  life
    between the appellants and their father at the  date  of  decision,  on
    behalf of the respondent, Mr Jarvis very fairly accepted that there had
    been errors in the judge's approach to this issue, especially as to the
    student status of one of the appellants, such that the finding  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal that there was no family  life  was  unsustainable,
    although Mr Jarvis made it absolutely clear that  he  did  not  concede
    that there had been family life.  However, he accepted that this aspect
    of the decision would now have to be re-made by the Upper Tribunal.   I
    agree and so find.

23. With regard to the second matter which I had identified earlier  needed
    to be established, that is that but for the "historic injustice"  (that
    is that people such as the sponsor had not been allowed  to  settle  in
    this county earlier), the appellants would by now be settled, Mr Jarvis
    submitted that at the time of the original decision,  this  was  not  a
    live issue and so, if appropriate, the respondent should be admitted to
    challenge this aspect of the appellants' evidence.

24. In the circumstances,  I  considered  that  the  respondent  should  be
    allowed to challenge the sponsor's evidence that he would have  settled
    earlier if he could, and would have brought whatever children  he  then
    had with him, if Mr Jarvis considered that the  sponsor's  evidence  on
    this point should be challenged.



The Re-Hearing

25. As already noted, I heard live evidence from the sponsor, who was cross-
    examined.  He confirmed that his witness statements were true  and  was
    cross-examined.

26. In cross-examination, he said that he had entered the  UK  in  2009  to
    settle and that his wife had followed him in March 2010.  The  children
    had applied in November 2009.  His wife  had  been  granted  indefinite
    leave to remain, but not the children.

27. The sponsor told the Tribunal that  he  had  wanted  to  come  to  this
    country and sort out job prospects and housing and then bring his  wife
    and children after this was all settled.

28. As at the date of decision, which was 21 November 2011, the sponsor was
    in contact with his children twice a week.  However, he only  spoke  to
    one child, Laxmi (the second appellant).   Although  he  did  sometimes
    talk to the others, most of the time he only spoke to Laxmi.   She  was
    the more reliable child and she was the older  daughter  as  well.   He
    would talk to her about the money which he sent from the  UK  and  tell
    her to spend it wisely.  When asked if they spoke about anything  else,
    he replied that they did not.

29. In November 2011, all of his children in Nepal were studying.   Two  of
    them were studying dental hygiene and the other was doing a  bachelor's
    degree in business management.  Both of his daughters had finished  the
    studies that they were doing at that time,  but  they  were  now  doing
    further studies.  The third appellant was doing a Bachelor's degree  in
    business management and Laxmi, his older daughter, was  waiting  to  be
    enrolled in another course.  If they had been allowed to  come  to  the
    UK, they wanted to "study something".  They would have then gone on  to
    work wherever a job was available.

30. In re-examination, when  he  was  shown  the  relevant  documents,  the
    appellant confirmed that he had in fact come to this  country  in  2010
    and his wife had come in March 2011 (that is a year later than  he  had
    said earlier).

31. In November 2011, his two daughters were studying in Kathmandu, and his
    son lived in the family house. He lived with his mother (the  sponsor's
    wife) until she came to the UK.  He (the  sponsor)  had  paid  all  the
    bills for the house in Kathmandu.  His daughters had returned  to  that
    house during the periods when they were not studying.

32. I recorded that Mr Jarvis did not seek to  put  any  questions  to  the
    sponsor's wife, nor did he make any challenge to the evidence which the
    sponsor had given in paragraph 14 of his first witness statement to the
    effect that, had  he  had  the  opportunity  to  apply  for  settlement
    immediately after his discharge, he would have  applied  together  with
    his family.

33. None of the appellants submitted statements.

The Submissions

34. At the outset, before Mr Jarvis addressed the Tribunal on behalf of the
    respondent, Mr Jesurum accepted that he "would struggle" to argue  that
    the refusal of the applications was not in  accordance  with  the  law.
    However, whether or not  the  dismissal  of  the  applications  was  in
    accordance with  the  government's  policy  was  not  relevant  to  the
    Tribunal's consideration of  Article  8.   Mr  Jesurum  relied  on  the
    decision of Blake J in Mansoor [2010] to this effect.



Submissions on Behalf of Respondent

35. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Jarvis reminded the Tribunal  that  the
    application of the government's policy was not challenged in this case,
    and this appeal was brought solely under Article 8.  This being an out-
    of-country appeal the relevant date for assessing whether or not family
    life existed was the date of decision.  Mr Jarvis relied on  the  House
    of Lords decision in AS (Somalia) [2009] to this effect.

36. At paragraph  46  of  Gurung  the  Court  of  Appeal  had  referred  to
    paragraphs 50 to 62 of the Upper  Tribunal  determination  in  Ghising,
    which,  it  was  said  "contains  a  useful  review  of  some  of   the
    jurisprudence and the correct approach to be adopted".  In  particular,
    the Court of Appeal approved of  the  conclusion  at  paragraph  62  in
    Ghising that  "the  different  outcomes  in  cases  with  superficially
    similar features emphasises to us that the issue under Article 8(1)  is
    highly fact-sensitive".  The Court of Appeal specifically approved this
    statement, and endorsed it.

37. Mr Jarvis also placed reliance on the approach taken by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in Gurung to the joined appeals of NL and SL.  In  these  cases,
    the First-tier Tribunal had held that the  applicants  had  not  had  a
    family life with their parents which was protected by Article 8(1).  At
    paragraph  48,  the  Court  of  Appeal  had  laid  out  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's approach to family life  in  those  cases,  which  was  that
    although there was evidence  of  financial  support,  this  was  to  be
    expected in Nepalese culture and did not therefore suggest a bond  over
    and above that to be expected in a relationship between  adult  parents
    and their children.  The Court of Appeal had rejected the challenge  to
    these findings at paragraph 50, and found that the First-tier  Tribunal
    had been entitled to come to the conclusion that despite the  financial
    support, "the requisite degree of emotional dependence was absent".

38. The Tribunal was asked to note in these appeals that there had been  no
    detailed evidence from the appellants themselves about  the  effect  of
    the separation on them, and  the  flavour  of  the  sponsor's  evidence
    relating to his contact with  his  children  showed  that  this  was  a
    relationship which centered  around  the  financial  support  which  he
    provided and continues to provide.  His evidence  was  that  he  talked
    mostly about money, and mostly to Laxmi, the second appellant, who  was
    his oldest daughter in Nepal (he has another daughter in this country).

39. The respondent would submit that in the absence of any direct  evidence
    from the parties  themselves,  and  without  any  evidence  as  to  the
    sponsor's alleged depression or depressive feelings as at the  date  of
    decision, the Tribunal should conclude that  the  relationship  between
    the sponsor and his children  did  not  have  the  necessary  emotional
    dependence required.

40. The Tribunal should also note that the sponsor had come to  the  UK  of
    his own volition in 2010.  Although he was entitled to do this  because
    he had been granted indefinite leave to remain, it was still his choice
    to remove himself from his family in Nepal and  come  to  this  country
    when there was no legitimate expectation that his adult children  would
    automatically be allowed to enter.  It was made clear at  paragraph  26
    of Gurung that there was not an automatic  right  of  entry  for  adult
    dependent children.

41. Even  if,  notwithstanding  the  submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent, the Tribunal was to find  that  there  was  a  family  life
    between the sponsor and his children, Gurung  should  not  be  read  as
    suggesting that historic injustice was determinative of proportionality
    under Article 8(2).  If the Court of Appeal had  wanted  to  say  this,
    they would have; however, they restricted themselves to saying that  it
    was an important factor.  It was not  determinative  because  each  and
    every Article 8 case was different.  Family life did  not  have  a  set
    value.  Each and every relationship had to be considered on its merits.
     Other factors would also be relevant, such as whether a  person  would
    be a drain on resources or get a job.   Although  in  paragraph  41  of
    Gurung, the Court had recognised that the  "historic  injustice"  added
    weight to an applicant's claim,  they  did  not  say  that  the  public
    interest was weakened.  Courts must still have  regard  to  the  public
    interest in maintaining immigration control.

42. These appellants were students of whom at least two  were  living  away
    from the family home,  albeit  with  financial  assistance  from  their
    father.  They were in their twenties and clearly their day-to-day lives
    were in their own hands.  This was different  from  someone  unemployed
    living in the family house.  Even if they enjoyed a  family  life  with
    their father such as to engage Article 8(1), the decision was still not
    disproportionate.  They were independent people who  were  successfully
    advancing their student careers.



Submissions on Behalf of Appellant

43. Mr Jesurum accepted that unless the Tribunal was to find that there was
    a family life at the  relevant  time  between  the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor,  their  appeals  must  fail.   With  regard  to  the   precise
    interpretation of the Court of Appeal decision in Gurung, there may  be
    a difference between the appellants and the respondent.

44. As to whether or not there was family life, the historic injustice  was
    not irrelevant because it needed  to  be  considered  as  part  of  the
    factual matrix.  It was settled law that a voluntary separation did not
    necessarily bring about an end to family life.  The appellants would in
    this respect rely on Sen v Netherlands.

45. Although it was accepted that a Tribunal would  have  to  look  at  the
    situation after the sponsor had  come  to  the  UK,  and  although  the
    relevant date  was  November  2011,  nonetheless  the  Tribunal  should
    appreciate that the applications had been made in  2009.   An  unlawful
    decision had been taken in August 2010, which was found to  be  not  in
    accordance with the law.  So it was relevant that the  interference  in
    family life had commenced in August 2010.

46. The sponsor's evidence was that he had travelled to  the  UK  with  the
    intention of uniting his family thereafter.  He had taken up  the  long
    delayed honouring of a debt owed to him for his services to the  Crown.
    This was not just an ordinary Article 8 application.  The sponsor had a
    long delayed right to travel to this country.  When considering whether
    there was family life  in  November  2011,  the  Tribunal  should  take
    account of what had gone before.

47. The Tribunal should take note that  in  Patel,  a  case  in  which  the
    applicant's appeal was allowed, at paragraph 17 it  was  recorded  that
    the applicant's father had come to this country ahead of his  children,
    in anticipation of their joining him.

48. In this case, the evidence of the sponsor was  that  his  children  had
    been living in  accommodation  in  Kathmandu  paid  for  by  him.   The
    children who were at university returned home in holidays.

49. As was apparent from paragraph 49 of the European case of AA  v  United
    Kingdom [2012] Imm AR 1, one factor  which  a  court  must  examine  is
    whether there has been an independent life established, and the  second
    is whether there has been co-habitation in the family home.  It was the
    appellants' submission that none of the appellants had a family life of
    their own, which although not  determinative  was  a  relevant  factor.
    Also, prior to the sponsor's voluntary departure, which did  not  bring
    their family life to an end, the children had normally co-habited  with
    both their parents outside of term time.  The son remained in the  home
    and the daughters returned there outside term time.

50. As at August 2010, which was the date of the first, unlawful, decision,
    the appellants' mother had still been living  in  this  house,  as  was
    established by the documentary evidence.  The  voluntary  departure  of
    the father had  not  terminated  the  family  life,  and  nor,  it  was
    submitted, had the voluntary departure of the appellants' mother.

51. As to the quality of evidence advanced on  behalf  of  the  appellants,
    although it was correct that there had been no statement  from  any  of
    the appellants, evidence had been submitted of an emotional bond.   For
    example, at paragraph 28 of the sponsor's evidence, he had referred  to
    a "very close bond" and at paragraph 35 he had stated that  "we  are  a
    very close family".  At paragraph 37 he had stated that "my wife and  I
    are constantly worrying".  The failure of  the  appellants  to  provide
    statements themselves, was not determinative of this appeal.

52. In the sponsor's second statement of paragraph 17, he had  stated  that
    his relationship with his children was not just financial, but was also
    emotional and parental - "our children are without our guidance" -  and
    part of that guidance  was  that,  as  set  out  in  his  evidence,  he
    encouraged his daughter Laxmi to spend wisely.  He wanted to guide them
    until they were leading independent lives, and in their culture, as the
    family grew older, his children would become his support.  As the House
    of Lords noted at paragraph 18 of Huang, cultural factors were relevant
    to an assessment of Article 8.

53. Mr Jesurum urged the Tribunal to  appreciate  that  the  lack  of  many
    telephone calls did not necessarily mean that there was a  lack  of  an
    emotional bond.  This may be relevant to proportionality, but not as to
    whether there was a family life.

54. Although the Court of Appeal had said with regard to  the  other  cases
    considered on Gurung that it had been open to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    to find that there had been no family life despite  financial  support,
    the Court of Appeal was applying  the  second  appeals  test,  and  not
    approving the conclusion which the First-tier Tribunal had  reached  in
    itself.  All the Court of Appeal was saying in that case was that  such
    a finding had been open to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  test  was
    whether  there  were  more  than  mere  emotional  ties.   It  was  the
    appellants' case that this could be shown by  financial  support;  each
    case was fact-sensitive.   In  this  case  there  was  more  than  mere
    financial dependence, because the appellants depended  on  the  sponsor
    for the roof over their heads.  Their ordinary home was a  family  home
    in which until recently they had cohabited.

55. Whether or not the family life was weak would  go  to  proportionality,
    but in this case it was submitted that the threshold for  Article  8(1)
    was passed.

56. When the Tribunal considered the second question,  which  was  how  the
    historic injustice affected consideration of proportionality, the ratio
    of Gurung was that the Tribunal should adopt the compensatory  approach
    applied in the BOC line of authority.  The court should  adopt  a  "but
    for"  test  of  causation.   Although  historic   injustice   was   not
    determinative, what the cases of Patel and Gurung  show  was  that  the
    starting point was a reversal of the burden of  proof  with  regard  to
    proportionality.  The historic injustice was a very  important  factor,
    such that it was one of the primary factors,  and  in  the  absence  of
    countervailing factors beyond those already  taken  into  account,  the
    starting point should be that Article 8(1) rights should be vindicated.
     This was because the Tribunal should adopt  a  compensatory  approach.
    The fact that there had been a  historic  injustice,  absent  of  other
    factors, tilted the balance in favour  of  these  appellants,  even  if
    their family life  was  weak.   When  one  considered  the  purpose  of
    refusing admission, which was  to  maintain  immigration  control,  the
    righting of a wrong did not encourage  people  to  lack  confidence  in
    immigration control.



Discussion

57. I am very grateful to both representatives for putting their respective
    arguments with such clarity.  It is common ground first that unless  as
    at the date of decision there was family life  between  the  appellants
    and the sponsor, this appeal must fail.  It is also common ground  that
    if this Tribunal finds that there was family life  at  that  date,  the
    righting of a historic injustice would  be  a  very  important  factor,
    although not necessarily determinative, when assessing whether  or  not
    the continued exclusion of these appellants was proportionate.  In this
    regard, it is only right that I should record that  I  entirely  accept
    the evidence of the sponsor, which was in the event not  challenged  on
    behalf of the respondent,  that  had  he  been  allowed  to  apply  for
    settlement earlier, he would have done  so,  and  that  he  would  have
    brought his existing children with him at that time.

58. I agree with Mr Jesurum and Mr Jarvis that the  appellants  must  first
    establish that as at the date of decision there was family life.   What
    the Master of the Rolls, giving the judgment of the  court,  stated  at
    paragraph 26 of Gurung is instructive:

         "Frustration of the purposes of the policy

         26.  The answer to the second issue has already largely been given.
             Mr Drabble [Counsel for most of the applicants]  submits  that
             the purpose of the policy is to facilitate the  settlement  in
             the UK of the families of Ghurkha veterans. But the purpose of
             the policy as regards  adult  dependant  children  is  clearly
             stated on the face of the policy itself and it is far narrower
             than this. It draws  a  clear  distinction  between  dependant
             children who are under 18 and those who are over that age. The
             purpose of the policy is not to facilitate the  settlement  in
             the UK of adult dependant children. The policy recognises that
             such children  may  be  granted  leave  to  enter  under  rule
             317(i)(f) and if article 8 requires it.  Otherwise,  they  are
             not granted  leave  to  enter  unless  there  are  exceptional
             circumstances. This policy objective is not inconsistent  with
             any broader policy statement. ..."

59. In other words, applicants such as these will only be granted leave  to
    enter if Article 8 is in play.  There is  no  general  right  of  adult
    dependent children to enter because of the historic wrong done to their
    father.  This is of course consistent with what was stated by Sedley LJ
    at paragraph 15 of Patel that if by the time the children come to  seek
    entry clearance they are no longer part  of  the  family  life  of  the
    British overseas citizen (or in this case a Ghurkha  veteran)  who  has
    finally secured British citizenship, they will have no  entitlement  to
    come.

60. As noted above, Mr Jarvis has relied upon the findings of the Court  of
    Appeal in the appeal of NL and SL at paragraphs 47 to 50 of Gurung.   I
    set these out below:

         "The appeals of NL and SL
         47.  The First-tier Tribunal ("the FTT") held that NL and SL do not
             have a family life with their parents  that  is  protected  by
             article 8(1). The UT found that  the  FTT's  consideration  of
             this issue was adequate and disclosed no error  of  law.  That
             conclusion is challenged before this court. The appellants are
             now respectively 24 and 26 years of age. When their father was
             discharged from the  Ghurkhas,  he  served  with  the  Ghurkha
             Reserve Unit in Brunei for almost 10 years. During that  time,
             the appellants were living with their mother in  Nepal.  Their
             father was granted leave to settle in the UK in 2009 and their
             mother followed him in August 2010. The appellants remained in
             Nepal. They were both students whose course fees  were  funded
             by their father.
         48.  The  FTT  considered  whether,  in  these  circumstances,  the
             appellants enjoyed family life with their parents.  The  judge
             said (para 27) that there was very little evidence  of  family
             life between the appellants and their father  (who  was  their
             sponsor). There was, however, evidence that he supported  them
             financially, but this was expected in Nepalese culture. It did
             not, therefore, suggest a bond over and above that usually  to
             be expected from the relationship between  adult  parents  and
             their children. The judge said:
                  'The sponsor stated that they have  regular  contact  with
                  each other, but there was no real evidence about  how  the
                  Appellants related to their parents and the effect on them
                  of being separated from their parents  or  what  emotional
                  sustenance they received from their parents.'
         49.  The basis for the appeal is that the tribunals erred in law in
             failing to attach any (or any adequate)  weight  to  the  fact
             that the appellants had always lived with their parents  as  a
             family unit. Mr Malik says that the family unit, with a strong
             emotional bond and elements of financial  dependency,  enjoyed
             family life while the appellants were growing up  and  it  was
             not suddenly cut off when they reached their majority.
         50.  We accept the submissions of Ms McGahey that the FTT  did  not
             make any  error  of  law  in  reaching  its  conclusions.  The
             critical issue was whether there  was  sufficient  dependence,
             and in particular  sufficient  emotional  dependence,  by  the
             appellants on their parents to  justify  the  conclusion  that
             they enjoyed family life. That was a question of fact for  the
             FTT to determine.  In  our  view,  the  FTT  was  entitled  to
             conclude that, although  the  usual  emotional  bonds  between
             parents and their children were present, the requisite  degree
             of emotional dependence was absent."

61. I have in mind this judgment when considering whether in this case, the
    appellants  have  established  the  "requisite  degree   of   emotional
    dependence" such that I could properly find that the  appellants  still
    had a family life with their father as at the date of decision.

62. I consider first what the sponsor stated within his original statement.
     At paragraph 27, he stated that:

         "It is the duty of a father in our Ghurkha culture to support their
         child until such time they get married and become independent.   In
         my children's case, they were and  still  are  full-time  students.
         They are unmarried and single.  Therefore,  I  still  maintain  and
         support them."

63. Then, at paragraph 28, he stated that "my family and  I  share  a  very
    close bond", and at paragraph 29, that when he was "posted overseas for
    long stretched of period" he "missed my family immensely  during  those
    periods".

64. At paragraph 35, the sponsor stated that "we are a very  close  family"
    and that "the continued separation is causing suffering to us  all  and
    is breaking our tight family unit".

65. Then at paragraph 37, he stated that "my  wife  and  I  are  constantly
    worrying about our children who are left living alone  and  apart  from
    us".

66. In his wife's statement, she stated at paragraph 10 that  "my  children
    and I keep in regular touch by way of telephone" and that  "my  husband
    and I miss our children a lot and they miss us too".

67. As already noted, in his supplementary statement, the sponsor  expanded
    on this by saying that "our  children  are  without  our  guidance"  at
    paragraph 17, that he wanted to guide  them  until  they  were  leading
    independent lives (at paragraph 18) and that in his culture, as  people
    grew older, they would require the emotional support of their  children
    as the children became their support (at paragraph 19).

68. However, as also noted, there  was  no  evidence  before  me  from  the
    appellants themselves.

69. I have in mind in particular the answers given by the sponsor in cross-
    examination before me.  He told the Tribunal that  he  spoke  to  Laxmi
    about twice a week, and that although he did talk to the  others,  most
    of the time he only spoke to Laxmi.  She was more reliable.  When asked
    what sort of things he discussed with her, he said that he talked about
    the money which he sent from this country and told her to spend wisely.
     When asked specifically if he discussed anything else, he replied that
    he did not.

70. In light of this evidence, and in particular the answers given  by  the
    sponsor in evidence before me, I am not satisfied that  the  appellants
    have established that they have emotional  ties  which  go  beyond  the
    financial support they receive from their father.  In this  connection,
    I have found the sponsor's evidence when given the opportunity to  tell
    the Tribunal about anything he discussed with his children that he only
    discussed financial matters with them and only spoke  to  any  of  them
    twice a week, and even then mainly to Laxmi, particularly relevant.  As
    the First-tier Tribunal found in NL and SL, (which finding  was  upheld
    by the Court of Appeal in Gurung), the requisite  degree  of  emotional
    dependence would not necessarily be demonstrated by  financial  support
    alone.  In this case, beyond the statements of the sponsor and his wife
    that they are a close family which shares an emotional bond,  and  that
    the sponsor wishes  to  guide  his  children  until  they  are  leading
    independent lives, there was no evidence put before me that he has been
    giving them any guidance since he came to the UK, some time before  the
    date of the respondent's decision now being appealed.  Indeed, it seems
    apparent from his evidence before the Tribunal that he has not.   While
    I accept that each case is fact specific, in this case I am  unable  to
    find the requisite degree of emotional dependence.   The  children  all
    appear to be leading  independent  lives,  albeit  with  the  financial
    support of their father, as is  common  within  Nepalese  culture,  but
    without  any  guidance  or  other  emotional  support.   That,  in  the
    circumstances of this case, is not, in my judgment, sufficient.

71. Accordingly, and not  without  regret,  I  am  unable  to  allow  these
    appeals, and they must be dismissed.



Decision

I set aside the determination of the First-tier Tribunal and substitute  the
following decision:

The appeal of these appellants is dismissed, on all grounds.


Signed:                                 Date: 21 August 2013

Upper Tribunal Judge Craig


