
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/60389/2009


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Decision and Reasons       |
|On 28th  October 2014                           |Promulgated On 31st October|
|                                                |2014                       |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                          the hon. mr justice davis
                       upper tribunal judge GOLDSTEIN

                                   Between

                                     nmp
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                    THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER -BANGKOK



                                                                Respondent

                            ANONYMITY ORDER MADE


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss N Braganza, Counsel, instructed by Stevens
Machi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr R Hopkin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This an appeal by a young man to whom I shall refer to as P  against  a
    decision of the Entry  Clearance  Officer  in  Bangkok.  A  very  brief
    history is that his mother arrived in this country in 2002 and she  has
    been here ever since.  She has another child in this country  and  that
    child is a British citizen.

 2. The Entry Clearance Officer was presented in 2009 with  an  application
    by P to join his mother and his brother in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    application was expressed to be outside the Immigration  Rules  and  on
    the basis of his Article 8 rights.  The application was refused.  There
    was a request for reconsideration.  The matter was reviewed by an Entry
    Clearance Manager.  The refusal was maintained.  On 21st  October  2010
    the First-tier Tribunal, Judge Sweet, promulgated the determination  in
    his appeal against that refusal and dismissed the appeal.

 3. The history since then has been tortuous.   P  appealed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, was refused permission and the refusal of permission was  the
    subject of an application for judicial review.   That  judicial  review
    took some time to be heard. It was eventually determined by His  Honour
    Judge Thornton QC sitting as a Deputy High Court Judge on 21  November.
    The case is reported at the neural citation [2012] EWHC  4384  (Admin).
    The full terms of the decision are available at that  citation.   As  a
    result of Judge Thornton's ruling the application for leave  to  appeal
    now was granted.  All of that took some considerable time, quite why is
    not absolutely clear, but in any event here we  are  today  considering
    the appeal against Judge Sweet's determination reached over four  years
    ago.

 4. We do not propose to review in any detail the factual findings of Judge
    Sweet.  To do so would be to burden the  Tribunal  to  which  were  are
    going to remit this case with unnecessary information.  The  case  will
    be remitted for a de novo hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal.   We
    do that principally because we are quite satisfied,  both  on  our  own
    reading of the decision of Judge Sweet and after consideration of  that
    decision by the Administrative Court, that  the  reasoning  adopted  by
    Judge Sweet in relation to the Article 8 claim was wholly deficient. It
    simply did not address the  issues  at  all.   Most  significantly  the
    concluding sentence of the only paragraph in  the  determination  which
    concerns Article 8 reads as follows:

         "In any event there is  no  cogent  reason  why  the  sponsor  [P's
         mother], and her other son [the boy who  has  British  citizenship]
         cannot live in Vietnam to continue her life in that country."

 5. That sentence on its own deals a fatal blow to the  determination.   It
    cannot be right that a British citizen should have to go  and  live  in
    Vietnam.  In any event that  British  citizen  has  a  father  in  this
    country and to make an order which would in  effect  involve  that  boy
    going to live in Vietnam would interfere very  substantially  with  the
    Article 8 rights of the father.  The  connotations  are  endless.   The
    finding of the judge is simply unsupportable.

 6. We do not address in detail whether this is a case in which the  First-
    tier Tribunal on its re-determination will find that this is a case  in
    which the appellant falls within the  Immigration  Rules.   We  suspect
    that it will not but it would not be helpful to the First-tier Tribunal
    to be trammelled by some restrictive remittal of the case.  The  First-
    tier Tribunal will be considering the matter entirely de novo.  Whether
    they consider the case as falling within the Rules, which we  think  is
    highly unlikely, or a case that is  an  exceptional  case  outside  the
    Rules, which is possible, or a case that falls within Article 8,  which
    is equally possible, will be a matter for the new First  Tier  Tribunal
    judge.  For the purpose of the rehearing in the First-tier Tribunal  it
    will not be helpful at all for us to limit the scope  of  that  hearing
    and therefore for all the reasons we have given we quash  the  decision
    of Judge Sweet and we remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a
    rehearing.  The case of course will not be heard  before  Judge  Sweet.



    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005. We  make
    that order pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 to protect the identity of the Appellant.




                  Signed                                  Date 30 October
                      2014
                                      The Honourable Mr Justice Davis
                                      (Sitting as a Judge of the Upper
Tribunal)

