
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00628/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC via Skype    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 November 2020                  |On 26 November 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     SM
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:      Mr Greer, Counsel
For the respondent:     Ms Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)



Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is made. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  Appellant.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

      1. The appellant has appealed against a decision  made  by  First-tier
         Tribunal ('FTT') Judge Shergill, sent on 18 March 2020 in which his
         appeal was dismissed on international protection and  human  rights
         grounds.

      2. At the beginning of the hearing before me, Ms Everett accepted that
         the FTT decision contains an error of law, such that  the  decision
         of the FTT must be set aside.  Ms Everett was correct to make  this
         concession  and  I  accept   that   the   FTT   has   committed   a
         straightforward and fundamental error  of  law  that  vitiates  its
         credibility findings.

      3. In her decision letter dated 20 December 2019  the  SSHD  expressly
         accepted at [68] that the appellant was suffering from PTSD.   This
         was based upon an implicit acceptance of the  evidence  adduced  on
         behalf of the appellant in support of this, as  summarised  by  the
         SSHD at [67] - a  letter  from  Spinning  World  ALW  Psychological
         therapies confirming that he suffered from PTSD due to events  that
         happened in Iraq and he was likely to need  long  term  therapeutic
         support.  This concession was not withdrawn at any stage -  I  note
         from the record  of  proceedings  that  the  SSHD's  representative
         continued to fully rely upon the decision letter at  the  beginning
         of his submissions.  This issue does not appear to have been raised
         by Judge Shergill during the course of  the  hearing.   It  follows
         that the judge did not invite submissions on whether the respondent
         was correct to make this concession.    At [22] the judge  made  it
         plain that he regarded  the  evidence  said  to  support  the  PTSD
         diagnosis to be insufficient  and  inadequate.   This  has  led  to
         procedural unfairness. As the diagnosis was accepted  by  the  SSHD
         there was no need  for  the  appellant  to  have  produced  further
         evidence for the hearing.

      4. The PTSD diagnosis was directly relevant to the approach that ought
         to  have  been  taken  toward  the  appellant's   credibility   and
         vulnerability.  The FTT noted that the previous Tribunal's  adverse
         findings of fact  (particularly  in  relation  to  the  significant
         disputed issues of family contact and redocumentation) did not have
         the benefit of evidence relevant to the appellant's mental  health.
         In those circumstances the judge was obliged to  make  his  factual
         findings with this undisputed evidence in mind, and in  failing  to
         do so has erred in law.

      5. It is unnecessary  to  address  the  remaining  grounds  of  appeal
         because the findings of fact need to be remade  entirely.   I  have
         had regard to para 7.2 of the relevant Senior President's  Practice
         Statement and  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  factual  findings
         required in remaking the decision, and I have decided that this  is
         an appropriate case to remit to the FTT.

      6. It would be helpful if the FTT holds a directions hearing in  order
         to address issues arising in relation to the appellant's  past  and
         present vulnerability, with a  view  to  narrowing  the  issues  in
         dispute.



Decision

      7. The decision of the FTT involved the making of a material error  of
         law.  Its decision cannot stand and is  set  aside.   The  decision
         shall be remade in the FTT, by a judge other than Judge Shergill.


Signed:     UTJ Melanie Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Dated: 23 November 2020

