
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/00774/2016
                                                               PA/00775/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 July 2017                       |On 17 July 2017                      |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                       antigona [k] (First Appellant)
                           a K (Second Appellant)
       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made IN RESPECT OF SECOND APPELLANT ONLY)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Plowright, Counsel instructed by Malik & Malik
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
1.    The  first  appellant,  a  national  of  Albania,  has  permission  to
    challenge the decision of First-tier Tribunal (FtT) Judge Greasley sent
    on 31 January  2017  dismissing  her  appeal  on  asylum,  humanitarian
    protection and human rights grounds.
2.   The first appellant's grounds have  two  main  components.   The  first
    challenges the failure to consider the relevant Upper Tribunal  country
    guidance case of TD and AD (Trafficked women) CG [2016] UKUT 00092.  As
    Mr Plowright conceded this ground only has traction if it can be  shown
    that the judge's finding of fact  at  paragraph  57  was  unsound.   At
    paragraph 57 the judge stated:-
         "I do not accept that the appellant  has  effectively  been  driven
         away from family members.  She has stated in documentary  accounts,
         and her oral evidence,  that  initially  she  did  not  reveal  the
         domestic violence issue to her family as  she  was  concerned  that
         they would be worried.  The appellant has given a clear  impression
         in her evidence that she had a close family relationship  with  her
         parents who, even on the appellants own  account,  appear  to  have
         made a marriage arrangements (sic)  with  a  man  who  was  already
         married and the father of a child."
3.    The  other  main  component  of  the  ground  comprises  a  series  of
    challenges to the judge's credibility  findings  in  paragraph  57  and
    elsewhere.  Issue is taken first with the judge's assessment  that  the
    length of the first appellant's  stay  in  Belgium  [from  March  until
    August 2015] undermined her credibility.  At  paragraph  51  the  judge
    stated:-
         "Nor do I find it credible that the appellant would  have  remained
         with the family member in Belgium from March until August  2015,  a
         period of six months, prior to leaving.  The appellant  claimed  in
         oral evidence that  it  was  after  one  or  two  months  that  she
         suspected that the relative might be communicating with her  family
         in Albania, but it was not for approximately 4 or  5  months  later
         that  she  decided  to  leave.   I  find  these   actions   lacking
         credibility.  They are not the actions of someone genuinely in need
         of international protection."
4.   It is contended that the judge wrongfully failed to consider  that  the
    first appellant was a lone woman and heavily pregnant at the  time.   I
    consider this ground has no merit.  The  judge's  assessment  was  that
    because the first appellant claimed she began to suspect after  one  or
    two  months  that  the  relatives  she  was  staying  with   might   be
    communicating with her family in  Albania,  it  was  not  credible  she
    should continue to stay with them for several more months.  This ground
    amounts to a mere disagreement with the judge's finding of  fact  which
    was an entirely reasonable one for the judge to make.
5.   Much the same can be said of the challenge to the judge's finding  that
    the appellant's account of meeting Ms [X] "by coincidence"  immediately
    upon arrival in London and then being supported  by  this  woman.   The
    judge did not believe this claim, noting that  Ms  [X]  had  failed  to
    attend as a witness despite a previous adjournment so she could do  so.
    The judge considered that as the two women bore the same surname it was
    likely they were related.  Once again, I consider  the  grounds  do  no
    more than ventilate a disagreement with this finding.  The fact that Ms
    [X] was born in nearby Kosovo does not undermine  the  judge's  finding
    that they were related as the Albanian community in  Kosovo  has  close
    ties with Albania.  The judge considered Ms [X]'s explanation for being
    unable to attend and was fully entitled to find it unsatisfactory.
6.   I take out of order the challenge listed as 'ground 5' in  the  grounds
    to the judge's  finding  that  it  was  not  credible  that  the  first
    appellant had been able within a few days to fund  her  travel  out  of
    Albania by selling her jewellery and raised E2,000.   In  my  judgment,
    it was entirely open to the judge to find it  not  credible  she  would
    have had access to such sum at short notice, given that she claimed  to
    be  uneducated  and  not  employed.   This  ground  is   another   that
    constitutes a mere disagreement with the judge's finding and reasons.
7.   I turn to address the first appellant's ground 4 as this is the one  in
    which she challenges the core finding made by the judge at paragraph 57
    that she had not become estranged from her family and  would  have  the
    support of her family on return to Albania.  The  ground  alleges  that
    this finding reflects a failure to attach weight to the COI  indicating
    that the first appellant came from the  North  of  Albania  where  very
    conservative and traditional norms and virtues still apply  and  forced
    marriages were common.  Once again, I  consider  it  was  open  to  the
    judge, taking heed of the evidence as a whole to find  that  the  first
    appellant continued to have a close relationship with her parents.  Her
    statement that she had not told them about her husband's domestic abuse
    of her because they might worry did not indicate that they would  react
    by saying they wanted nothing to do with her.  The judge was  addressed
    by both representatives regarding the relevance of COI documents in the
    bundles.  This is no reason to consider the judge failed to  understand
    the  first  appellant's  claims  regarding  her  family.   The  judge's
    assessment of this matter was  clearly  made  in  the  context  of  the
    evidence as a whole and is not vitiated by legal error.
8.   Given that the first appellant's challenge to the judge's  findings  of
    fact have not passed muster, it is unnecessary  to  address  the  first
    section of the first appellant's grounds  which  complained  about  the
    failure to apply Tribunal country guidance.

Notice of Decision
9.   For the above reasons I conclude that the FtT judge did not  materially
    err in law and his decision to dismiss the first appellant's appeal  is
    upheld.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  second
appellant is granted  anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify  this  appellant.   This  direction  applies
both to the appellants and to the respondent.  Failure to comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date: 7 July 2017

    [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
