
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00393/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 August 2019                    |On 22 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                                    I M O
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Muhzam (CB Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Miss Isherwood, Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Sudan  born  on  29  November  1956.   He
    appeals the decision of the respondent on 4 January 2019 to refuse  his
    claim for protection.  The  appellant  arrived  clandestinely  in  this
    country on 6 July 2018 and was  arrested  concealed  in  a  lorry.   He
    stated that he had left Sudan  on  2  August  2016  and  had  travelled
    through various countries before reaching the UK.  He claimed asylum on
    his arrest and said he was a member of the Berti tribe  in  Sudan.   He
    claimed he had been arrested and detained by Sudanese  police  officers
    while closing  his  bookshop  which  was  near  a  university  where  a
    demonstration was taking place.  He stated he had been detained for two
    weeks and beaten and tortured.  He had been released on  conditions  to
    report to the police station and act as  an  informant.   He  had  left
    Sudan in breach of these conditions and feared persecution on return as
    a perceived supporter of  the  political  opposition  to  the  Sudanese
    Government.

2.   A key feature in this case is that  the  Secretary  of  State  did  not
    accept the appellant's claim to have been a member of the Berti  tribe.
    Furthermore it was not accepted that the appellant's claim to have been
    arrested and detained was made out.  In paragraph 48 of the decision it
    was stated:

         "Even if your claim to be of Berti ethnicity were to  be  accepted,
         which it is not, for the reasons given below  it  is  not  accepted
         that you have a genuine subjective fear on return."


3.   Reference was made to  the  country  guidance  cases  of  AA  (Non-Arab
    Darfuris - relocation) Sudan CG [2009] UKAIT 00056  and  MM  (Darfuris)
    Sudan (CG) [2015] UKUT 10 (IAC).  The respondent noted that  SG  (Iraq)
    [2012] EWCA Civ 940 had made it clear at paragraph 47

         "That decision makers and Tribunal  Judges  are  required  to  take
         country guidance determinations into account, and  to  follow  them
         unless  very  strong  grounds  supported  by  cogent  evidence  are
         adduced, justifying their not  doing  so.   To  do  otherwise  will
         amount to an error of law."


4.   The First-tier Judge accepted that the appellant was a  member  of  the
    Berti tribe as claimed and that he had worked in a  bookshop  near  the
    university from 2016 but rejected  the  appellant's  account  in  other
    respects in the light of numerous inconsistencies.  She did not  accept
    the account of arrest and detention and found that the account  he  had
    given was not credible.  The judge was also satisfied  that  there  had
    been no adverse interest in the  appellant's  family  by  the  Sudanese
    Authorities since he had left Sudan  nor  that  he  had  in  fact  been
    politically active there or that he intended to be  politically  active
    on his return.  The judge did not  accept  that  the  appellant  had  a
    genuinely held political view which would put him at risk if he were to
    express it in Sudan.  Given his complete lack of political  involvement
    in Sudan the judge concluded that he had  been  attending  protests  in
    London as a means of bolstering his asylum  claim,  rather  than  as  a
    result of genuine political  conviction.   The  judge  also  took  into
    account the failure by the appellant to claim asylum in  at  least  two
    safe countries before he claimed asylum in the United Kingdom.

5.   Having concluded that the appellant had not given a true  account,  she
    considered whether he would be at risk as a member of the Berti  tribe,
    taking into account the relevant country guidance in  paragraph  13  of
    her decision.  If the guidance was followed then  the  appellant  as  a
    member of the Berti tribe would succeed.  The judge  then  went  on  to
    consider the respondent's  argument  about  the  country  guidance  and
    concluded her determination as follows:

         "14. However, the Respondent submitted that  this  was  a  case  in
             which there are strong grounds supported by cogent evidence to
             justify a departure from the Country Guidance case  law.   The
             submission is supported by the Respondent's Country Policy and
             Information Note: Non-Arab Darfuris August 2017.  I considered
             the  evidence  contained  within  that   document.    I also
             considered the facts of this case: it is undisputed  that  the
             Appellant,  a  62-year-old  man,   has   lived   in   Khartoum
             undisturbed by the Sudanese authorities for over 56 years.  He
             appears to have lived peacefully with  his  family  throughout
             that time, making a living  through  first  farming  and  then
             through his work in the bookshop.  Although he is a member  of
             a Darfuri tribe, he  speaks  Arabic  and  no  longer  has  any
             particular links with that region.  When he was in Sudan,  the
             Appellant had no political involvement, nor did he  engage  in
             any activity which might have brought him to the attention  of
             the  Sudanese  authorities.   That  undisputed   evidence   in
             combination with my finding that the  Appellant's  account  of
             persecution was not credible, supported  the  contention  that
             the risk of persecution does not necessarily  attach  to  this
             Appellant, albeit he is a non-Arab Darfuri.   In  my  judgment
             there are strong grounds  to  justify  a  departure  from  the
             country guidance here.


         15.  I considered whether the Appellant's activities in the  United
             Kingdom may put him at risk of persecution on return to Sudan.
              The limited evidence before me was that the Secretary General
             of the Darfur Union in the United Kingdom and Northern Ireland
             had seen the Appellant at demonstrations  in  London  on  four
             separate days between December 2018 and March  2019.   At  the
             first three he appeared simply  to  be  present,  and  at  the
             fourth he  was  helping  with  the  catering.   There  was  no
             evidence  before  me  to  indicate  whether  the   Appellant's
             presence might have been  recorded  by  Sudanese  intelligence
             operatives.  There is no suggestion that the  Appellant  is  a
             political organiser, or that he has an online presence.  I was
             not satisfied that there is a reasonable likelihood  that  his
             attendance at the four events described has or  will  come  to
             the  attention  of  the  Sudanese  authorities.   I was  not
             satisfied that he is at risk of persecution as a result of his
             activities in the United Kingdom.


         16.  I considered the second ground of appeal, namely whether there
             is a real risk that the Appellant would suffer serious harm if
             he returns to Sudan.


         17.  I considered whether he is at risk of suffering  serious  harm
             on return because of his status as a returning asylum  seeker.
             I had regard to the guidance in IM and AI (Risks -  membership
             of Beja Tribe, Beja Congress and IEM)  Sudan  CG  [2016]  UKUT
             00188 (IAC) in making my assessment.


         18.  Following the guidance in that  case,  I  was  satisfied  that
             there is no risk to the  Appellant  simply  because  he  is  a
             returning asylum seeker.  In IM and AI the guidance states:


                  'In order for a person to be at risk on  return  to  Sudan
                  there must be evidence known to the  Sudanese  authorities
                  which implicates the claimant in activity which  they  are
                  likely to perceive as a potential threat to the regime  to
                  the extent that, on return to Khartoum there is a risk  to
                  the claimant that he will be targeted by the  authorities.




                  ...


                  The decision maker is required to place the individual  in
                  the airport on return or back home in  his  community  and
                  assess how the authorities are likely  to  re-act  on  the
                  strength of the information known to them about him.


         19.   In  his  skeleton  argument,  Mr  Madanhi  referred  to   the
             Respondent's Country Policy and Information Note  from  August
             2017 and also, at paragraph 17,  quoted  from  a  letter  from
             Madeleine Crowther.  I noted that the parts of those documents
             reproduced in the skeleton argument were  concerned  with  the
             situation for  non-Arab  Darfuris  in  Darfur  as  opposed  to
             elsewhere in Sudan.  The Appellant's home is in Khartoum.


         20.   The  letter  is  reproduced  in  full  at  page  126  of  the
             Appellant's bundle.  I noted  some  of  the  examples  cited,
             particularly at page 130. However, particularly  in  light  of
             the country guidance in IM and AI, I was  not  satisfied  that
             there is a general risk to returning asylum seekers: each case
             has to be looked at individually, and so  individual  examples
             are not particularly helpful.


         21.  On my findings, I was satisfied that there is  no  information
             about the Appellant which might cause the Sudanese authorities
             to see him as a potential threat to the regime: he  has  lived
             an unassuming life with his family in Khartoum until  he  left
             Sudan in 2016.  Although he is from the Berti tribe, there  is
             nothing obviously singling him out as such: he told Mr  Verney
             at para 121 that the only way the authorities  would  know  he
             was Berti was from his accent.


         22.  In his report, Mr Verney referred to recent events  in  Sudan,
             and referred to a number of news reports about state  violence
             against demonstrators.  I acknowledged that  there  has  been
             some increased violence in Sudan in recent months, but  I  was
             satisfied that that does not give  rise  to  a  risk  to  this
             Appellant if  he  should  be  returned:  he  is  not  in  fact
             politically involved and would be unlikely to involve  himself
             in  demonstrations  upon  his  return,  given  that  he  never
             involved himself in any such activity before  he  left  Sudan.
             He is not a journalist, a doctor, or a student, all groups who
             appear from the recent material to be at risk  of  persecution
             in Sudan.  At para 235 of his report, Mr Verney  details  'the
             targeting of young Darfuris'.  The Appellant is  not  a  young
             man, and in my judgment unlikely to be seen in the same way as
             the groups described by Mr Verney in his report.


         23.  At para 258 of his report, Mr Verney states that  'in  reality
             (the Sudanese authorities)  take  people  into  detention  and
             maltreat them solely on the basis of their ethnic identity and
             the assumption they support the opposition'.  However, none of
             the source material he  produces  in  support  of  his  report
             supports this particular  statement.   The  articles  produced
             speak mainly of the government response to demonstrations.


         24.  I was satisfied  that  the  Appellant  does  not  qualify  for
             humanitarian protection, nor would there be a  breach  of  his
             rights under Articles 2 and 3 ECHR  if  he  were  returned  to
             Sudan.


         25.  I finally turned to the third ground of appeal, and considered
             whether returning the Appellant to Sudan  would  constitute  a
             breach of his rights under article 8 ECHR.  He has  no  family
             life in the United Kingdom: it was not  in  dispute  that  the
             Appellant's entire family remain in Sudan.


         26.  I therefore considered his right to private life, and  whether
             if the Appellant were returned to Sudan there  would  be  very
             significant obstacles to his  integration  there.   Throughout
             his 62 years the Appellant has known very  little  other  than
             life in Sudan, and particularly in Khartoum.  He has a  family
             and a home there  to  which  he  can  return.   There  are  no
             obstacles to reintegration in this case.


         27.  Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
             2002 provides that the maintenance  of  effective  immigration
             controls is in the public interest. I was satisfied  that  the
             Appellant did not meet the Immigration Rules. I concluded that
             there would  be  no  disproportionate  interference  with  the
             Appellant's  private  life  if  he  were  returned  to  Sudan.
             Additionally, there were no exceptional circumstances in  this
             case which would  mean  there  would  be  unjustifiably  harsh
             consequences for the Appellant if he were returned to  Sudan."




6.   Accordingly the judge dismissed the appeal.

7.   In the grounds  of  appeal  there  was  no  challenge  to  the  factual
    findings of the First-tier Judge.  Permission was  granted  however  on
    the question of departure from the relevant country guidance.   At  the
    hearing Mr Muhzam relied on his skeleton argument and the grounds.   It
    was noted that in the case of IM and AI referred to  by  the  judge  at
    paragraph 17 of the decision AI had claimed to be a member of the Berti
    tribe and there was no basis upon which the Tribunal could depart  from
    previous country guidance in relation to AI.  The evidence in the  CPIN
    Report described a confused situation and was not sufficient to warrant
    departure from the country guidance.  The appellant would  be  at  risk
    because of his ethnicity and the decision was materially flawed in  law
    and should be set aside.

8.   Miss Isherwood submitted there was no material  error.   The  Secretary
    of State had made it clear in the decision letter that he  argued  that
    the Tribunal should depart from country guidance.  The  judge  had  not
    erred in her decision.  She had concluded that the appellant  was  from
    the Berti tribe and had  lived  in  Khartoum  but  had  rejected  other
    aspects of his claim.  She had not accepted that  there  had  been  any
    adverse interest in  the  appellant's  family  and  the  appellant  had
    demonstrated no genuine political interests in the United Kingdom.  She
    had referred to the case of IM and AI in paragraph 17 and had  set  out
    part of the guidance in that case.  Paragraph 6 of the headnote  stated
    that the evidence established that targeting was  not  random  but  the
    result  of  suspicion  based  upon  information  in  the   Authorities'
    possession, although it may be limited.  In paragraph 7 it  was  stated
    that caution should be exercised when the claim is based  on  a  single
    incident.

9.   The appellant's claims, apart from his membership of the  Berti  tribe,
    had not been believed and the judge had been entitled  to  conclude  as
    she had done in paragraphs 20 and 21 of the decision.  The Home  Office
    material had been properly sourced and the judge had to  weigh  up  all
    the material before her.  The grounds were no more than a disagreement.



10.  In reply it was submitted that cogent evidence  was  required  and  the
    points relied on by the respondent in the decision  were  not  properly
    sourced and it was submitted the country guidance  should  be  followed
    and not departed from.  The judge could not select which  parts  of  IM
    she was to follow.  There was a material error of law.



11.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.   In  this
    case the issue is whether a departure from  the  country  guidance  was
    justified.  It  was  argued  in  ground  two  that  the  decision   was
    irrational. The judge had been invited by the respondent to  find  that
    there were strong grounds supported by cogent  evidence  to  justify  a
    departure from country guidance case law.  Although  she  had  accepted
    that the appellant was a member of the Berti tribe, his claim had  been
    rejected as lacking credibility in  other  salient  aspects.   All  the
    judge was left with were the points she looked at in paragraphs 14(ff).
     The judge considered  references  to  the  skeleton  argument  by  the
    appellant's then representative in paragraph 19 of the decision, noting
    that the appellant's home was Khartoum, not Darfur.

12.  It is submitted before me that the material in  the  Home  Office  CPIN
    simply painted a confused situation and was not sufficient  to  warrant
    departure from the country guidance.  In my view the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Judge was properly reasoned and she  had  in  mind  all  the
    material before her including the CPIN, country guidance and the expert
    report.  She was entitled to accept the invitation by the  Home  Office
    to depart from the country guidance on the facts of this case.  As  she
    was departing from country guidance what was  said  in  IM  and  AI  at
    paragraph 217 does not conflict with  the  result  in  this  particular
    appeal. While I have  carefully  considered  the  submissions  made  on
    behalf of the appellant  I  do  not  find  that  salient  material  was
    overlooked or that the  decision  was  irrational  as  claimed  in  the
    grounds. It is no light matter to establish irrationality.

13.  For the reasons I have given there is no material error of law  in  the
    decision and this appeal is dismissed.

    The First-tier Judge made an anonymity order which it is appropriate to
    continue.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Judge made no fee award and I make none.


Signed                                  Date: 21 August 2019

G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal
