
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00238/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 13 June 2017                           |On 10 July 2017                   |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                      THE HON. MRS JUSTICE CHEEMA-GRUBB
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                              CHINH VAN NGUYEN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Asiimwe, instructed by Pillai & Jones
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge  Fox  made
    following a hearing at Harmondsworth on 1 March 2017, promulgated on 21
    March.

Background

 2. This is a case about the application of Section 32 of  the  UK  Borders
    Act 2007 which  states  that  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department must make a deportation order  in  the  case  of  a  foreign
    criminal subject to the exceptions particularised in Section 33 of that
    Act.

 3. The appellant, Chinh Van Nguyen is 38 years old  having  been  born  in
    Vietnam on 22 October 1988.  We should say that this is  the  date  the
    appellant has given as his date of birth although  as  pointed  out  at
    this hearing there were proceedings for age assessment when he made his
    original asylum claim in 2005 which resulted in a finding  against  his
    claim.  The age assessment is  not  directly  relevant  to  the  matter
    before us today.

 4. The appellant's case is that  he  entered  the  United  Kingdom  on  15
    November 2004 using a false document, namely a passport which bore  his
    photograph but belonged to  someone  else.   On  17  November  2004  he
    claimed asylum  on  the  basis  of  religious  persecution  as  he  had
    distributed Buddhist literature with his father in Vietnam.  His  claim
    was refused in a notice dated 4 April 2005.  He failed  to  attend  his
    appeal hearing which was dismissed in his absence on 23  May  2005  and
    the appellant exhausted his appeal rights  on  3  June  of  that  year.
    After a break he was granted indefinite leave to remain on 13 July 2010
    on the basis of the legacy casework exercise.  However on  18  December
    2014 he was sentenced to 51 months' imprisonment  for  causing  serious
    injury whilst  driving.   We  shall  come  on  to  the  facts  of  that
    conviction  in  due  course.   On  the  basis  of  the  conviction  the
    respondent made a decision to deport the appellant pursuant to  Section
    32, sub-Section (5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.  That decision is dated
    6 April 2016.  She also concluded  that  this  decision  complied  with
    Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009.   The
    appellant made human rights representations which were refused  by  the
    respondent in a decision dated 6 May 2016.  He then claimed  asylum  on
    the basis of political activities in  the  United  Kingdom.   This  was
    refused in a notice dated 28 December 2016.

Law: Deportation of foreign criminals: the applicable legislation

 5. The Secretary of State's power to deport non-UK nationals derives  from
    Section 3, sub-Section (5) of the Immigration  Act  1971,  as  amended,
    which reads so far as material:

         "A person who is not a British citizen  is  liable  to  deportation
         from the United Kingdom if -

         (a)  the Secretary of State deems his deportation to  be  conducive
             to the public good."

 6. The UK Borders Act 2007 provides for a regime governing the deportation
    of non-nationals who are convicted in the United  Kingdom  of  criminal
    offences.  Section 32 reads so far as material as follows:

         "(1) In this section 'foreign criminal' means a person -


             (a)  who is not a British citizen,


             (b)  who is convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and




             (c)  to whom Condition 1 or 2 applies.


         (2)  Condition 1 is that the person is sentenced to a period of
             imprisonment of at least 12 months.


         (4)  For the purpose of section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971
             ...the deportation of a foreign criminal is conducive to the
             public good.


         (5)  The Secretary of State must make a deportation order in
             respect of a foreign criminal (subject to section 33)."


 7. Section 33 as referred to above contains a number of exceptions to  the
    obligation on the respondent to deport a  foreign  criminal.   On  this
    appeal only exception 1 is relevant which  by  sub-Section  2  applies,
    "where removal of the foreign criminal in pursuance of the  deportation
    order  would  breach  (a)  a  person's  Convention  rights....".    The
    consideration by a court or Tribunal of whether a decision  made  under
    the immigration legislation is in breach of the rights  of  any  person
    under Article 8 ECHR is subject to the provisions of  part  5A  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 which  was  introduced  by
    the Immigration Act 2014 with effect from 28 July 2014.   Section  117A
    (2) provides  that  in  considering  whether  an  interference  with  a
    person's right  to  respect  for  their  private  and  family  life  is
    justified  under  Article  8(2)  "the  court  or  tribunal   must   (in
    particular) have regard (a) in all cases to the  considerations  listed
    in Section 117B and (b) in cases concerning the deportation of  foreign
    criminals to the considerations listed in Section 117C":

         "117B:   Article 8: public interest  considerations  applicable  in
                all cases

                (1)    The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is
                    in the public interest.

                (2)    It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in
                    the interests of the economic well-being of  the  United
                    Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain in the
                    United  Kingdom  are  able  to  speak  English,  because
                    persons who can speak English -

                    (a)    are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                    (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

                (3)    It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in
                    the interests of the economic well-being of  the  United
                    Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain in the
                    United Kingdom are financially independent, because such
                    persons -

                    (a)    are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                    (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

                (4)    Little weight should be given to -

                    (a)    a private life, or

                    (b)    a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

                    that is established by a  person  at  a  time  when  the
                    person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

                (5)    Little weight should  be  given  to  a  private  life
                    established by a person at  a  time  when  the  person's
                    immigration status is precarious.

                (6)    In the  case  of  a  person  who  is  not  liable  to
                    deportation, the public interest does  not  require  the
                    person's removal where -

                    (a)    the person has a genuine and subsisting  parental
                        relationship with a qualifying child, and

                    (b)    it would not be reasonable to expect the child to
                        leave the United Kingdom."

         Section  117C  Article  8:  Additional  considerations   in   cases
         involving foreign criminals provides:

             (1)  the deportation of foreign criminals  is  in  the  public
                  interest.

             (2)  The more serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
                  criminal,  the  greater  is   the   public   interest   in
                  deportation of the criminal.

             (3)  In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") he was not  being
                  sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  four  years  or
                  more, the public interest requires C's deportation  unless
                  Exception (1) or Exception (2) applies.

             ...

             (5)   Exception  (2)  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine   and
                  subsisting relationship with a qualifying  partner,  or  a
                  genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with   a
                  qualifying child, and the effect of C's deportation on the
                  partner or child would be unduly harsh.

             ...
             (7)  The considerations in sub-sections (1), (2), (6) are to
                  be taken into account where a court or Tribunal is
                  considering a decision to deport a foreign criminal only
                  to the extent that the reason for the decision was the
                  offence or offences for which the criminal has been
                  convicted."

Appeal

 8. It was the decision of 28 December 2016 which was the  subject  of  the
    appeal before  the  Immigration  Judge.   In  his  judgment  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal  on  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and  human
    rights (i.e. Articles 2, 3 and 8 ECHR) grounds.   His  findings  appear
    below at paragraphs 41-47 as follows:

         "41. The appellant has failed to satisfy the burden  of  proof.   I
             firstly consider the appellant's asylum  claim.   My  starting
             point is  the  Tribunal  decision  dated  25  May  2005  which
             affirmed the adverse credibility findings of the  respondent's
             corresponding decision; Devaseelan applied.

         42.   The  appellant  has  raised  a   new   claim   in   different
             circumstances.  He now relies  upon  political  opinion  as  a
             convention reason  rather  than  religion.   I  have  had  the
             benefit of observing the  appellant.   When  asked  about  his
             historic asylum claim he had difficulty in recalling it.

         43.  Once coached on the substance of that claim he confirmed  that
             he  had  claimed  asylum  on  the  basis  of  religion.    The
             appellant's evidence that Buddhism is regarded  as  camouflage
             for Viet Tan is unconvincing at best.  There  is  no  reliable
             evidence of a credible nexus between the appellant's 2  asylum
             claims.

         44.  Upon the available evidence it is reasonable to conclude  that
             the appellant had forgotten the basis of his  historic  asylum
             claim as it was false.  The appellant failed  to  engage  with
             the first appeal.  This is a modus operandi he adopted  during
             the course of his criminal trial which required a  warrant  to
             cause the appellant to appear.

         45.  I do not accept the  appellant's  claims  that  detention  has
             frustrated the collation of  corroborative  evidence.   It  is
             reasonable to conclude that the appellant has been given ample
             time to contact his  alleged  political  associates  with  the
             benefit of formal legal representation.

         46.  Nor do I accept his explanation that political operations  are
             conducted in secret which prevents  his  representatives  from
             obtaining evidence on his behalf.  When the available evidence
             is considered in the round it is reasonable to  conclude  that
             the absence of reliable evidence is due to the absence of  any
             political activity as claimed.

         47.  When the available evidence is considered in the round  it  is
             reasonable to conclude that the appellant advances a false and
             opportunistic claim in an attempt to frustrate  his  departure
             from the UK.  The appeal fails in accordance with the  Refugee
             Convention, humanitarian protection and Articles 2 and 3  ECHR
             for these reasons."

    At paragraphs 48-55 the judge stated:

         "48. I now consider Article  8  ECHR.   It  is  apparent  that  the
             appellant  cannot  satisfy  the  respondent's  definition   of
             Article 8 ECHR.  I therefore turn to consider the 5 stage test
             as set out in Razgar [2004] UKHL 29.  I remind myself that the
             respondent  is  entitled  to  control  the  entry  of  foreign
             nationals into the territory and  she  afforded  a  margin  of
             appreciation in the administration of this.   A  fair  balance
             must  be  struck  between  the  competing  interests  of   the
             individual and the needs of wider society.

         49.  There is no reliable evidence of family life for  the  purpose
             of  Article  8  ECHR.   The  appellant   concedes   that   his
             relationship with the child's mother has come to  an  end  and
             that she has embarked upon a new relationship.

         50.  As the appellant's credibility  is  damaged  for  the  reasons
             stated above I do  not  accept  the  appellant's  self-serving
             evidence that he is the biological father of the child despite
             another name  appearing  on  the  child's  birth  certificate.
             There is no reliable nexus between the father's name as stated
             on the child's birth certificate and the appellant's name.

         51.  However for completeness I consider the appellant's  claim  to
             have a child in the UK.  I firstly remind myself that there is
             no suggestion that the child is expected to leave the UK.  The
             appellant has stated that he  has  maintained  remote  contact
             with the  child  whilst  in  prison.   There  is  no  reliable
             evidence to demonstrate why this arrangement  cannot  continue
             when the appellant returns to Vietnam.

         52.  I also note the absence of the child's  mother  who  chose  to
             prioritise her work commitments over the  appellant's  alleged
             need  to  maintain  physical  contact  with  the  child.   The
             available evidence taken at its  highest  also  leads  to  the
             reasonable conclusion that the child has been subsumed into  a
             new family unit with the mother's new partner.  This does  not
             assist the appeal.

         53.  I also remind myself that the length of the appellant's prison
             sentence engages the higher threshold of  public  interest  in
             favour of his removal; EJA, MF (Nigeria) and  section  117  of
             the 2002 Act applied.  Any mitigation has  been  addressed  at
             the point of sentencing and I  remind  myself  that  I  remain
             bound by the higher threshold.

         54.  For the reasons  stated  there  is  no  reliable  evidence  to
             demonstrate that the appellant has  satisfied  the  evidential
             burden upon  him  to  override  the  public  interest  in  his
             removal.

         55.  I do not accept that the appellant has no ties to  Vietnam  as
             claimed.  In examination-in-chief he stated that he has had no
             contact  with  anyone  in  Vietnam  since  2004.   In   cross-
             examination he revealed that he has contact with  the  child's
             maternal  grandmother.   When  the   available   evidence   is
             considered in the round it is reasonable to conclude that  the
             appellant seeks to suppress evidence of his ties to Vietnam in
             an attempt to bolster his appeal."

 9. The judge's decision is said to be flawed on the basis that -

    (1)  He did not provide adequate reasons for  concluding  "hastily  and
         unfairly" that the appellant's account was not credible, and

     (2) He failed to engage with the appellant's claim based on  political
         opinion and dismissed it without giving any  or  adequate  reasons.
         In addition

    (3)  The Article 8 decision was insubstantially reasoned.

10. Permission to appeal was granted by the First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane
    on 20 April 2017 on the basis that absent the arguable  errors  of  law
    alleged the outcome of the  appeal  might  have  been  different.   The
    respondent, in writing, contests the  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the
    Immigration  Judge  did  not   make   any   error,   directed   himself
    appropriately and gave adequate reasons why the appellant's account was
    not believed and that the judgment read as a whole makes clear why  the
    appeal against the 28 December 2016 decision failed.  In the  same  way
    that the First-tier Judge did we remind  ourselves  of  the  burden  of
    proof which lies on the appellant:

    (1)  As to the Section 32 UK Borders Act 2007  he  has  to  demonstrate
         compelling reasons why he should not be deported;

    (2)  As to his refugee claim he has to prove on a reasonable degree  of
         likelihood that he has a well-founded fear  of  persecution  for  a
         Convention reasons;

    (3)  As to humanitarian protection he has to prove substantial  grounds
         for fearing a risk of serious harm;

    (4)  For his  human  rights  claim  he  has  to  demonstrate  that  the
         Secretary of State for the Home Department's obligations under  the
         European Convention on Human Rights are engaged and that there is a
         real risk of harm to him at the date of the hearing.  The  standard
         is of course the balance of probabilities.

11. We have had assistance today from submissions by  Counsel  representing
    the appellant and the Home Office Presenting Officer  representing  the
    respondent.  We have had the opportunity to consider all  the  evidence
    that was before the First-tier Tribunal.  In particular we have  regard
    to:

    (1)  The appellant's screening interview record dated 17 November  2004
         in which he relied on a fear of persecution  due  to  his  Buddhist
         religion;

    (2)  His Statement of Evidence Form dated 15 March 2005 which sets  out
         the basis of his claim for asylum, namely his fear  of  persecution
         in Vietnam because he  had  assisted  his  father  in  distributing
         Buddhist books to people in their commune.  The books and  leaflets
         had, he said, contained a section criticising  the  government  for
         its repression of various religions including Buddhists although he
         and his father had not known that when they had taken  delivery  of
         the material from people who did not live in Vietnam.   His  father
         had been arrested and he believed his own life to be in danger.  He
         had been arrested and held for a few hours and threatened.  He  had
         not reported any incidents of persecution to the police in  Vietnam
         as the police were the agents of government control.

    (3)  His Asylum Interview Record dated 15 March 2005 in  which  he  was
         asked in detail about his activities prior to leaving Vietnam.   He
         could not remember some dates because it had been a long time since
         the events concerned.  He  said  his  mother  had  died  some  time
         earlier and although he had written once to his family  in  Vietnam
         since arriving in the United Kingdom he had  not  heard  back.   He
         sought protection in the UK until his father was released  and  any
         charges he faced were dropped.

    (4)  The refusal letter dated 4 April 2005 set out eight  paragraph  of
         reasoning with details including details of apparent  discrepancies
         in the information the appellant had provided.

    (5)  The First-tier Tribunal's decision rejecting  his  appeal  against
         that determination by the respondent.

    (6)  His application for a  certificate  of  approval  for  a  marriage
         together with the birth certificate of a child the  appellant  says
         is his daughter although a different name has been used to register
         the details of the father of that child.

    (7)  The respondent's decision  granting  indefinite  leave  to  remain
         dated 13 July 2010.

    (8)  A transcript of  the  sentencing  remarks  of  His  Honour,  Judge
         Critchlow at Guildford Crown Court on 18 December 2014 in which  he
         describes the offences for which the appellant had to be  sentenced
         as follows:

             "You have to be sentenced for two offences of causing  serious
             injury by dangerous driving.  You were driving a motor car,  a
             Lexus 300 containing your wife and two young children  on  the
             A30 near Camberley when without warning you decided to perform
             a U-turn out of a layby.  Something that had gone  on  in  the
             vehicle had  caused  you,  an  unlicensed  and  uninsured  and
             inexperienced driver  to  take  over  the  driving,  that  was
             something you should not have done and it was  immediately  an
             unlawful act...  You plainly either did not look or failed  to
             see Mr Cox and his pillion passenger approaching and they were
             there to be seen on this straight road.  By your manoeuvre you
             gave Mr Cox no chance of avoiding a collision  as  you  turned
             right across his path and it is  plain  from  the  photographs
             that he hit  you  amidships  on  the  driver's  door  and  the
             consequence for him and for  his  passenger  were  immediately
             extremely serious and could have been  fatal....  No  sentence
             within the  guidelines  permitted  and  legally  permitted  by
             Parliament can restore the health and mobility of Mr  Cox  who
             is in court today and his life at 27 has changed  forever  and
             he will spend his life now  coping  with  paralysis  from  the
             chest down.  I have read the victim  impact  statement  and  I
             recognise the courage he is showing in coping with the effects
             of that day and the serious injuries  he  sustained.   I  have
             also read the statement of Miss Maria Bello, a student  nurse,
             his girlfriend, and the effect on her of the  spinal  injuries
             have been serious, though plainly not as serious as  those  to
             Mr Cox.... In the view of this court this is  a  most  serious
             example of this offence.  You have  to  be  sentenced  on  two
             counts reflecting that two people were very seriously  injured
             and I have to consider whether or not a  consecutive  sentence
             should be imposed to reflect the culpability and harm that was
             caused. ...I consider that this was at the top  of  the  range
             without any specific guidelines for this  offence  because  of
             the nature of what you did and  the  aggravating  factors.   I
             therefore consider that giving you some credit for your guilty
             plea the  sentence  in  respect  of  count  1  is  51  months'
             imprisonment, that is  four  and  a  quarter  years  and  that
             reflects a 15 percent discount from the maximum sentence. ...I
             do impose a consecutive sentence because this was an  incident
             which involved a danger to a motor cycle with  two  people  on
             it, resulting  in  two  serious  separate  injuries  to  those
             individuals  and  motor  cyclists  are  vulnerable,   and   so
             therefore I impose a consecutive  sentence  of  21  months  on
             count 2 to reflect the totality as well as  having  regard  to
             the injuries.  It would have been longer but for the  fact  of
             totality.  That makes a total sentence of 72 months,  that  is
             six years' imprisonment."

    Returning to the list of evidence that we have before us:

    (9)  The order of the  Court  of  Appeal  Criminal  Division  when  the
         consecutive sentence on count 2 to which we have just referred  was
         quashed and ordered to run concurrently to the sentence on count  1
         making a sentence of 51 months' imprisonment rather than 72 months.

    (10) Media articles about the circumstances of the offences.

    (11) The subsequent notice  of  deportation  dated  5  April  2016  and
         reasons.

    (12) The appellant's solicitor's letter dated 6 May 2016 which contains
         some inaccuracies but in essence asserts  that  the  appellant  had
         been in the United Kingdom for a long time, had  been  well-behaved
         apart from the events leading to his convictions in 2014 and he had
         a child who would suffer if he were deported.

         Reliance was also placed on his fears of  persecution  in  Vietnam.
         The respondent sought further information about these  matters  and
         although the appellant's second asylum claim in totality itself  is
         not included in our papers, the content can  be  gleaned  from  the
         next document we have seen which is

    (13) The appellant's political asylum statement made  in  January  2017
         which is relatively short and reads as follows in its body:

             "Basis of claim for asylum in the United Kingdom

             I have been in the UK legally for ten years and have spent  my
             formative life in this country.  I have  no  family,  friends,
             home or job to return to in Vietnam, a country I barely  know.
             It certainly has a government I despise and a political system
             I have campaigned against and  as  a  result  of  my  previous
             activities and my activities in the UK it is unsafe for me  to
             return to Vietnam.  My parents were sympathisers  and  members
             of Viet Tan and were faced persecution and eventually possible
             death for their activities.  I was forced to flee as I was  in
             danger too and the government was searching for me.   Since  I
             have been in the UK I have developed a more keen  interest  in
             politics and especially since  2010  I  have  been  an  active
             volunteer with Viet Tan.  I have distributed leaflets for them
             in the UK, I have written to the Vietnamese government and  to
             the Vietnamese embassy through my friends who  translated  the
             letters into English and other relevant bodies campaigning for
             the release of many  people  illegally  detained  in  Vietnam.
             People like father Nguyen Van Dai, Le Quoc Quan and others.  I
             have also arranged and signed many petitions.  I  was  also  a
             very active social media blogger and had  a  very  interactive
             twitter and pro democracy  Facebook  account.   Democracy  for
             Vietnam is something I cannot give  up  campaigning.   I  have
             attended demonstrations and protests  outside  the  Vietnamese
             embassy.  I believe that the Vietnamese Government is aware of
             me since I left the country and is aware of my  activities  in
             the UK as many protests the Vietnamese embassy officials  took
             many photographs  of  the  protestors  by  mingling  with  the
             protestors in casual clothes.  I cannot give up  my  political
             beliefs as I believe that democracy and human rights is  every
             Vietnamese national's God given right and the CVP cannot  deny
             us this right.  I have campaigned for this right in the UK and
             have sincerely believed in it and sacrificed my money and time
             in this country despite  living  here  and  having  indefinite
             leave to remain....".

     Under the heading 'Conclusions':

         "I  apologise  for  not  recollecting  everything  in   detail   as
         remembering such  events  is  painful  and  disturbing.   If  I  am
         returned to Vietnam I fear for my life, safety and freedom from the
         Vietnamese government, I have no family or friends to look after me
         in Vietnam.  I need help please."

     It is right to point out that in the  signed  copy  of  this  statement
    that Mr Asiimwe provided to us today there is further reference to  the
    closing of his social media accounts while he has been in  custody  and
    other difficulties in obtaining material referred to in the passages we
    have just set out.

     Returning to the material before us:

    (14) The decision letter dated 28 December 2016 which extends  to  over
         twelve pages of  reasoning  for  the  refusal  of  the  appellant's
         subsequent human rights claim and which  points  out  that  he  had
         supplied no documentary  evidence  to  support  the  assertions  of
         political activity he had made.

12. The First-tier Tribunal Judge heard the  appellant  give  evidence  and
    made adverse findings  about  him  and  his  evidence.   The  appellant
    adopted his statement and explained that he is father to a girl but  he
    had used a different name to register her birth.   No  explanation  was
    given for this.  He was in touch with the child who had not been living
    with him because he was separated from the mother who had  gone  on  to
    form another relationship but he said  he  had  maintained  contact  by
    telephone and in writing.  He was not  able  to  provide  corroborative
    evidence of his activities because he was in custody and a third  party
    could not approach the organisation he had  worked  with.   His  social
    media accounts had been suspended due to inactivity  while  he  was  in
    custody and he  had  no  means  of  contacting  any  of  his  political
    associates.  He would as a result of these activities be  a  person  of
    interest were he returned to Vietnam.  The mother of his  daughter  had
    not attended the hearing but if he were at liberty he would be able  to
    gather further evidence.

Submissions

13. Mr Asiimwe relied on his grounds and submitted that the judge  had  not
    adequately reasoned his decision in refusing the appellant's appeal:

    (1)  He did not consider fresh  evidence  presented  by  the  appellant
         about his sur place activities  and  relied  on  the  fact  that  a
         previous asylum claim had been refused in 2005.  At paragraph 46 it
         is submitted the judge was wrong to conclude that  there  had  been
         ample time for the appellant to provide corroboration.  Mr  Asiimwe
         submitted that it was simply not reasonable to  conclude  that  the
         lack of evidence was due to the absence of political activity.   If
         the appellant had been given further time he may have been able  to
         obtain evidence in support of his assertions.

    (2)  However Mr Asiimwe had to concede that he could  not  point  to  a
         single class of evidence not sought or enquiry that was not carried
         out because  the  appellant  was  in  custody  nor  was  there  any
         particular line of enquiry that he had been able  to  instruct  his
         solicitors to conduct but which had  been  frustrated  because  the
         appellant has been in  custody.   Indeed  the  appellant  has  been
         represented throughout these proceedings  and  certainly  since  28
         December 2016.  It is also to be noted that the appellant  obtained
         bail and release from detention on 26 May 2017.  He does not attend
         this hearing.   He  has  not  provided  any  further  statement  or
         information of any form setting out what further material if any he
         would wish to be able to put before a decision maker or  an  appeal
         court.

    (3)  As to submissions, in respect of Article 8 Mr Asiimwe submits that
         in the decision of Judge Fox he did not  explain  sufficiently  why
         the family connection was not  present.   On  the  contrary  it  is
         submitted an obvious family connection was present and this will be
         interrupted by the deportation and should counter the  requirements
         of the respondent to deport a foreign criminal.

14. Mr Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer submitted  that  the  grounds
    had no merit. With conspicuous fairness  he  did  articulate  potential
    inadequacies in the determination of the First-tier Judge which we have
    considered with particular care.  Regarding paragraph 41, he points out
    that this support for an adverse credibility finding arose from a claim
    made in 2005 at which the appellant was not heard  in  evidence.   That
    claim resulted in a dismissed appeal which has been relied upon by  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge as support for his own credibility  findings.
    In our view the judge was entitled to take the decision into account to
    some extent and certainly his concise expression at paragraph 41 fairly
    reflects the Tribunal's decision on 25 May 2005.

15. Mr Deller also drew our attention to the formulation used by the  judge
    in his decision, "it was reasonable to conclude" against the  appellant
    and Mr Deller invites us to consider whether that may  demonstrate  the
    use of a burden and standard of proof higher than the lower standard of
    which the appellant bore the burden.  In this  regard  we  can  observe
    that earlier in his decision at paragraphs 17 to  22  Judge  Fox  dealt
    with the burden of  proof  in  respect  of  the  asylum  claim  and  in
    paragraph 19 he says the following:

         "The burden lies with the appellant, to prove that he has  a  well-
         founded fear of persecution, for a Convention reason.  The standard
         of  proof  is  the  lower  standard,  on  a  reasonable  degree  of
         likelihood, in accordance with Ravichandran [1996] Imm AR 97.   The
         evidence to prove this is assessed according to the  principles  of
         Karanakaran [2000] Imm AR 271."

    This is a correct statement of  the  law  and  we  find  no  reason  to
    conclude other than the judge applied the burden and  standard  he  set
    out there.

16. In response to Mr Asiimwe's submissions Mr Deller  notes  the  lack  of
    evidence including any evidence from his associates.   He  encapsulates
    his submissions in this way, that this was not "an impressive case"  as
    presented to the Tribunal and remains so.  In particular he  draws  our
    attention to the shift from a religious claim  in  2004  to  sur  place
    political activity claim in 2016.  Secondly, he points to the  lack  of
    evidence to support the appellant's asserted activities and he  reminds
    us that the appellant has been represented  throughout.   In  reply  Mr
    Asiimwe urges us to allow the appeal on the basis that there has been a
    material error in the decision and the only just  outcome  would  be  a
    remittal for a re-hearing.



Findings and Conclusions

17. Do paragraphs 41 to 47 adequately express  a  fair  assessment  of  the
    merits of the appeal?  Do they disclose a failure to apply the  correct
    burden and standard of proof?  On Mr Asiimwe's first  point  the  judge
    was bound to reflect upon the evidence presented and to have regard  to
    relevant background information where available such as the history  of
    a previous asylum claim.  He had to apply the burden  and  standard  of
    proof and he had to express his decision in a way that  was  clear  and
    fully explained when he reached the conclusion that the appeal  had  to
    fail.  The parts of the decision we have set  out  earlier  demonstrate
    that  the  judge  did  consider  the  appellant's  claim  of  political
    activities and he looked specifically  for  evidence  in  support.   He
    found that the appellant had been given ample time to obtain  evidence.
    He was entitled to do so.  He found that there were inconsistencies  in
    the account the appellant gave about his historical claim but  although
    he could have pointed out in  the  appellant's  favour  that  time  had
    passed and recollections may fade, nevertheless the judge was  entitled
    to take the inconsistencies into account.

18. The findings of a lack of actual political activity  as  claimed  which
    the judge reached in paragraph 46 could have been more  fully  set  out
    both in terms of the evidence the appellant had provided  (which  would
    have meant a summary of his short statement  set  out  above)  and  the
    burden and standard of proof which  the  judge  applied.   Nonetheless,
    even today there is no corroborative evidence and we can  but  conclude
    that the judge was entitled to come to the conclusion that  he  did  on
    the evidence provided to him.

19. As to the Article 8 argument which is dealt with at paragraphs 48 to 53
    again an unhelpful degree of compression is displayed.  But there is  a
    difference between concision and superficiality in setting out reasons.
     Here the judge has failed to set out the five stage test Razgar [2004]
    UKHL 29.  He does deal with the question of a family life  and  whether
    the decision interferes with it.  Having answered that  first  question
    effectively in the negative albeit  acknowledging  that  the  appellant
    claimed to have some form of contact with the child  he  said  was  his
    daughter even while in prison it was not  strictly  necessary  for  the
    judge to then go on and consider the remaining questions in Razgar  but
    even if he should have gone on to consider  the  fifth  question,  i.e.
    proportionality, the need to  conduct  a  balancing  exercise  and  the
    findings at paragraphs 54 and 55 concerning the public interest in  the
    appellant's removal and the lack of hardship in his return to  Vietnam,
    demonstrate that even if  not  addressed  directly  the  outcome  of  a
    proportionality judgment would have been the same.

20. Drawing these threads together and having considered  the  matter  with
    care we do find an error of law in  the  decisions  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge but this  is  restricted  to  the  lack  of  transparent
    demonstration  of  his  reasoning  for  the  conclusions  reached.   In
    particular as Judge Keane  observed  paragraphs  41  to  47  provide  a
    limited expression of the judge's findings.  However that is not an end
    of the matter.  We must go on to  consider  whether  this  error  is  a
    material error in all the  circumstances  i.e.  does  it  lead  to  the
    decision being set aside and require a new decision which may  have  to
    be made in this Tribunal or after remittal.  As  we  have  pointed  out
    this is not a case in which we  are  invited  to  receive  any  further
    evidence nor is the appellant able to point to  any  line  of  enquiry.
    Having considered the evidence presented before the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge which amounts to a dearth of material to  support  the  political
    asylum claim we conclude that the judge was bound to have come  to  the
    decision he did in this case. There was a conspicuous lack  of  weighty
    private and family life considerations in this case and that which  did
    appear to be present, including his relationship  with  his  biological
    daughter, are equally incapable of defeating  the  public  interest  in
    deportation in this case.

Notice of Decision

21. In the circumstances this appeal must fail and the  decision  of  Judge
    Fox is affirmed.

22. No anonymity direction has been made previously in this case,  none  is
    sought today and none is made.


Signed                                  Date:  4 July 2017

The Hon. Mrs Justice Cheema Grubb

