
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00803/2020 (V)
                                                           PA/00804/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (via remote video means) |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25th January 2021                          |On 24th February 2021         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                   AT & AT
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONS MADe)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Bobb, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This has been a remote hearing which has not been objected  to  by  the
    parties.  The form of remote hearing was by video, using Skype.   There
    was a brief interruption  to  the  video  hearing  near  the  end  with
    connection being lost, following which the hearing was  reconvened  and
    continued without any further technical difficulties  or  interruption.
    A face to face hearing was not held to  take  precautions  against  the
    spread of Covid-19 and as all issues  could  be  determined  by  remote
    means.  The file contained the documents in paper format.

 2. The Appellants appeal with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Davies promulgated on 2 April 2020,  in  which  the
    Appellants' appeals against the decision to refuse their protection and
    human rights claims dated 31 December 2019 were dismissed.

 3. The Appellants are a mother and her three year old  daughter,  who  are
    both Albanian nationals.   I  refer  in  this  decision  to  the  First
    Appellant, the adult, as the Appellant and where needed to  the  Second
    Appellant as the child Appellant or Appellant's daughter.  On  occasion
    both are referred to together as the Appellants.

 4. The Appellant claims to have entered the  United  Kingdom  on  22  July
    2015, claiming asylum on 23 July  2015.   The  Appellant  was  referred
    through the National Referral Mechanism for  consideration  of  whether
    she was a victim of trafficking on 6 August 2015, which resulted  in  a
    conclusive grounds decision on 31 May 2017 that she was not a victim of
    trafficking or modern slavery.  The Respondent refused the asylum claim
    on 5 February 2018 and the Appellant's appeal against that refusal  was
    dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal on 17 October 2018.

 5. First-tier Tribunal Judge Jones  in  the  decision  promulgated  on  17
    October 2018 made significant adverse credibility findings against  the
    Appellant in her first appeal, rejecting the core of her claim to  have
    been trafficked and to be at risk on return to Albania.  The only  part
    of the claim that was accepted was that the  Appellant  had  previously
    worked as a prostitute in Belgium and as to her family circumstances in
    Albania (namely that she had previously lived  with  her  parents,  who
    were both registered as disabled, and her younger  brother,  then  aged
    18).  It was found that  the  Appellant  would  continue  to  have  the
    support of her family on return to Albania and with that support  could
    raise her child.  Further, it was found  to  be  plainly  in  the  best
    interests of the child to remain living with the Appellant and to enjoy
    her full rights of citizenship on return to Albania with the Appellant.



 6. The Appellant sought permission to  appeal  from  both  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal,  both  of  which  were  refused.   The
    Appellant sought permission to apply for Judicial Review of the refusal
    of permission by the Upper Tribunal, was refused by  Her  Honour  Judge
    Robinson sitting as a Deputy High Court Judge on 5 April 2019.  In that
    refusal, the ground relating to reliance on country guidance was  found
    to have  poor  prospects  of  success  given  the  adverse  credibility
    findings and finding that the Appellant had not  been  trafficked  (the
    country guidance being applicable to trafficked women).  The  challenge
    to the finding that the Appellant had not been trafficked was found  to
    be hopeless  and  the  remaining  grounds  amounted  to  no  more  than
    disagreement.

 7. The Appellant made further submissions on 29 April 2019, which raised a
    number of areas of disagreement with the previous  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision, with findings said to be clearly perverse and then focused on
    the claim that the Appellants had been abandoned by family  in  Albania
    and at risk on return there as a single parent family with a child born
    out of wedlock.  The further submissions were refused  on  31  December
    2019.

 8. The Respondent refused the application  the  basis  that  much  of  the
    submissions were a repeat claim,  previously  considered  and  rejected
    (with reliance placed on findings of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Jones)
    and it was not  accepted  that  the  new  evidence  was  sufficient  to
    establish a real risk to the Appellant on return to Albania (as it  did
    not establish that the Appellant had been disowned  by  her  family  as
    claimed), nor would there be any breach of  Articles  3  or  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights on medical  grounds,  as  treatment
    would be available on return.  The Appellants did not meet any  of  the
    requirements for a grant of  leave  to  remain  under  the  Immigration
    Rules,  within  Appendix  FM  or  under  paragraph  276ADE.   The  best
    interests of the child Appellant were  considered  and  the  Respondent
    found that the Appellant and her daughter  could  return,  as  Albanian
    nationals, to  reside  in  a  secure  environment  together,  with  the
    Appellant being able to obtain employment and re-establish herself  and
    the  child  Appellant  entitled  to  undertake   education.    Specific
    reference was given to the support of extended family as found by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Jones.

 9. First-tier Tribunal Judge Davies dismissed the  appeal  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 2 April 2020 on all grounds.  The starting point in  the
    decision in accordance  with  the  principles  in  Devaseelan  was  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Jones  with  a  summary  of  the
    earlier findings set out, including the  adverse  credibility  findings
    and that the Appellant was not a victim of trafficking, she  would  not
    be at risk of trafficking on return to Albania and that on  return  she
    would have the support of family and with such support she could  raise
    her daughter there.   Although  the  Appellant  continued  to  rely  on
    claimed errors in the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Jones,  it
    was found that there was  no  basis  for  departing  from  the  earlier
    decision.

10. The First-tier Tribunal then considered in  paragraphs  42  to  55  the
    fresh evidence relied upon by the Appellants, which included  a  letter
    from the Department of Social Protection  at  Gramsh  (the  Appellant's
    home area) dated 20 March 2019 (the "social  worker's  letter")  and  a
    letter from the Appellant's younger brother.  Although lengthy,  it  is
    helpful given the nature of the grounds of appeal to set out the First-
    tier  Tribunal's  findings  and  reasons  for  rejecting  the   further
    evidence; which are as follows:

         "46.  There are a number of concerns I have about  this  additional
         evidence.  First of  all,  it  followed  a  few  months  after  the
         dismissal of the Appellant's case by Judge Jones.   The  Judge  had
         specifically found that she would have the support of her  parents.
         The letter or declaration as it is called appears  as  a  piece  of
         advocacy for the Appellant.  The letter is unbalanced  in  that  it
         makes  no  reference  to  any  protection  available  through   the
         Department for the Appellant and her  child  but  simply  concluded
         that return would be suicidal.

         47.  The author of the social services letter referred to her visit
         to the family home where a mother and  father  and  brother  lived.
         Both the Appellant in her oral evidence and the younger brother  in
         his letter confirmed that he lived at home with  his  parents  upon
         whom  he  was  dependent.   The  younger  brother  is   supportive.
         However, the social worker  referred  to  the  brother's  reactions
         being extreme.  No reference was made to  a  conversation  with  an
         older brother not living in the house.  The reference could only be
         to the younger brother and what the  social  worker  stated  is  of
         course inconsistent with the support he has demonstrated.

         48.  The Appellant was asked if her older brother  was  present  at
         the social work visits to the family home.  She did not know.   She
         did not know either whether [the younger brother]  was  present  at
         the visits.

         49.  The Appellant  confirmed  that  all  the  information  in  the
         possession of the social worker was from  [younger  brother].   She
         was asked why the social worker did not contact her.  The Appellant
         stated: "I am not in contact with these people.  Don't want  to  be
         in touch  with  anyone  else  in  Albania."   It  is  difficult  to
         understand how social workers could make an appropriate  assessment
         of any danger to the Appellant and her child without having contact
         with her.  It was clear from the Appellant's response that she  had
         no intention of having any contact with the people  it  is  alleged
         younger brother contacted  in  order  to  facilitate  a  return  to
         Albania.

         50.  The Appellant demonstrated in her oral evidence that she  knew
         little or nothing about the visits.  She did not know the number of
         visits.  She knew that several visits were made.  She did not  know
         if they were invited into the house.  She claimed that  the  social
         workers explained why they had come to the house but was unable  to
         provide details of the explanation.

         51.  The Appellant was also asked whether [her younger brother] was
         present at the visits.  She stated that  she  did  not  know.   The
         question was put again.  She was asked if he  was  present  at  any
         visits.  She did not know.  There are the big the  question  as  to
         how [her younger brother] was able to give such a detailed  account
         of what was  said  at  the  meeting.   I  remind  myself  that  the
         Appellant confirmed that she was periodically in contact with  [her
         younger brother].

         52.  I noted that [the Appellant's younger brother] used  the  same
         (translated) word 'harsh' to describe the attitude of  the  family.
         On the other hand, it was put to the Appellant in cross-examination
         that his letter was different from what the social work declaration
         stated.  According to the social worker, the older  brother  stated
         that he would not feel sorry to kill the Appellant, he would prefer
         to be in jail with honour and they had always been  a  good  family
         and he could not forgive  his  sister.   [The  Appellant's  younger
         brother's]  description  of  the  brother's  words  was  completely
         different.  The Appellant's explanation was  that  the  letter  was
         from his own experience and  the  social  worker  letter  was  more
         detailed because of  their  experience.   However,  both  documents
         report to state what the older brother had  said.   Taken  with  my
         concerns about which brother was present at the alleged interviews,
         the discrepancy amplifies my concern about the weight I can put  on
         the social work document.

         53.  I also note that although the document  was  written  for  the
         benefit of the Tribunal in the UK there is  no  indication  in  the
         report as to how the social workers became involved  in  the  first
         place.  The position is unclear.  The Appellant  had  not  been  in
         touch with social services.  Indeed she did not wish  to  speak  to
         them.   The  report  indicated  that  the  father  was   completely
         dismissive and did not wish to prolong  the  discussion.   Yet  the
         suggestion is that a number of visits were made.

         54.  The burden is on  the  Appellant  to  the  lower  standard  to
         establish that I can put weight upon  the  document  on  which  she
         relies.  Taking account of all the evidence and with  the  concerns
         about the Appellant's credibility from the earlier appeal I am  not
         satisfied that she has done so.   There  are  too  many  unanswered
         questions.  Much of [her younger brother's] letter is also based on
         what was reportedly said by the Appellant's family  to  the  social
         workers notwithstanding the uncertainty as to whether he  was  even
         at the meetings."

11. Overall on risk on return, the First-tier Tribunal  was  not  satisfied
    that  there  were  grounds  to  depart  from  the   earlier   decision,
    notwithstanding  the  additional  evidence,  because  that   additional
    evidence was not reliable.  The Appellant was not at risk on return  to
    Albania solely on account of having a child out of wedlock and  it  was
    in the best interests of her daughter to remain living with her,  in  a
    country of which she was a national.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  found
    that the Appellant's younger  brother,  whilst  young  and  unemployed,
    would be likely to offer personal support.  The Appellant's parents had
    previously supported her, notwithstanding her history of working  as  a
    prostitute in Belgium and at the time of  the  earlier  Tribunal,  must
    have been aware of the birth of the child Appellant.

12. In relation to the medical grounds, the First-tier Tribunal  considered
    the further medical evidence available but concluded that there was  no
    fresh evidence to justify departure from the previous  conclusion  that
    medical treatment would be available to  the  Appellant  on  return  to
    Albania.  There is no further challenge to these findings.

13. In relation to Article 8 of the European Convention  on  Human  Rights,
    the First-tier Tribunal recorded in the decision  that  there  were  no
    oral submissions on this point and also found no reason to depart  from
    the previous findings on this from First-tier Tribunal Judge Jones.

The appeal

14. The Appellants appeal on four grounds, the first  of  which  is  broken
    down into numerous sub-parts which need to be set out relatively fully.
     The first ground of appeal is that the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in
    law in its approach to the reliability of the social  worker's  letter,
    in particular that it was not considered in light of objective  country
    background material and country guidance cases on Albania,  considering
    the document in isolation and with too great a focus on how and why  it
    was obtained rather  than  its  substantive  contents.   The  Appellant
    states that there was detailed evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal
    from her and her younger brother as to how the letter  came  about,  in
    essence it was an attempt to reconcile the family  when  the  Appellant
    was faced with the prospect that she may need to return to  Albania  if
    she was unable to overturn the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Jones.  The scenario was  said  not  to  be  inherently  incredible  or
    implausible.

15. The sub-parts of this ground which specifically address  the  reasoning
    of the First-tier Tribunal set out above are as follows:

      i) In circumstances where the Respondent had  not  asserted  that  the
         document was a forgery, the First-tier Tribunal in any event  found
         the document not to be genuine, therefore a fraud,  but  failed  to
         apply the higher standard of proof in relation to this.

     ii) The First-tier Tribunal failed to  consider  the  document  in  the
         round against the background of country evidence which  establishes
         that Albania, particularly the  northern  parts,  have  traditional
         conservative values with a strong concept of honour.  Further, that
         the Respondent had the opportunity to verify the genuineness of the
         document which came from a named individual  and  official  source,
         but had failed to do so.

    iii) In relation to paragraph 46 of the First-tier Tribunal's  decision,
         the letter was only in relation to efforts to reconcile the  family
         and there was no evidence either way as to whether  the  Department
         of Social Protection could offer any protection.

     iv) In relation to paragraph 47 of the First-tier Tribunal's  decision,
         it is bordering on perverse to find  an  inconsistency  as  to  the
         Appellant's brother's approach where it is clear that the Appellant
         has two brothers, the younger of which is  supportive  and  it  was
         obviously the older brother who made the threat to her recorded  in
         the social worker's letter.

      v) In relation to paragraph 49 of the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision,
         the Appellant submits that contrary to the finding that the  social
         worker could not have assessed the situation without direct contact
         with her; it was entirely possible to do so with  information  from
         the Appellant's younger brother and visits to the family home.

     vi) In  relation  to  paragraphs  48,  50  and  51  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal's decision, the Appellant submits  that  contrary  to  the
         decision, it was clear from the context that the Appellant's  older
         brother was at one of  the  meetings  and  the  Appellant  was  not
         present and therefore could not be expected to give details of  it.
         Further, the Appellant's younger brother gave his  evidence  either
         from his presence at one or more of  the  meetings,  and/or  having
         read the social worker's letter.

    vii) In relation to paragraph 52 of the First-tier Tribunal's  decision,
         the Appellant submits that the reasoning is illogical and there are
         inconsistent findings between paragraphs 51 and 52.

   viii) In relation to paragraph 53 of the First-tier Tribunal's  decision,
         the Appellant submits that contrary  to  the  findings,  there  was
         sufficient evidence as to how the social worker's letter came about
         and on its face it explains that there were  a  number  of  visits.
         Conversely, there was a  lack  of  evidence  that  the  Appellant's
         father was dismissive nor that he  did  not  want  to  prolong  the
         discussion.  It would be reasonable to infer that the letter was  a
         summary or concluding statement after all of the discussions.

     ix) In relation to paragraph 54 of the First-tier Tribunal's  decision,
         a higher standard of proof than that applicable was applied to  the
         question of whether there was a real risk  to  the  Appellant.   In
         particular, matters are taken into account which are said not to be
         relevant to the reliability  of  the  evidence  or  risk  (such  as
         whether the Appellant knew if either brother  was  at  any  of  the
         meetings) and that any deficiencies in the  letter  should  not  be
         judged by the standard of social services in the United Kingdom.

 1. Overall, the Appellant submits that although a  number  of  the  points
    taken individually may appear to be  disagreement  with  the  findings,
    taken  cumulatively  they  amount   to   errors   of   law,   including
    demonstrating a lack of reasoning.

 2. The second ground of appeal is that the First-tier Tribunal  failed  to
    properly assess the best interests of the child Appellant; relying only
    on the earlier findings of  Firs-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Jones  on  this
    rather than assessing the best interests at the date of  hearing.   The
    Appellant submits that the First-tier Tribunal should  have  considered
    the child Appellant's  age,  vulnerability  as  a  child  born  out  of
    wedlock, the perception of her extended  family  that  shame  has  been
    brought upon them by her birth, the direct and implied  threat  to  her
    mother and the conservative nature of Albanian society.  Further,  that
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  relied  upon  earlier  findings  which  were
    demonstrably perverse given that the Appellant's  evidence  as  to  her
    family situation was wrongly recorded.

 3. The third ground of appeal is that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law
    in failing to apply the parts of AM and BM (Trafficked  women)  Albania
    CG [2010] UKUT 80 (IAC) and TD and AD  (Trafficked  women)  Albania  CG
    [2016] UKUT 00092 (IAC) which are  of  general  application  about  the
    nature of society in Albania, the position of women and the approach to
    illegitimate children.  These matters were  submitted  to  be  relevant
    even through the Appellant was found not to have been trafficked.

 4. The fourth and final ground of appeal is that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    failed to make any findings on Article 8 of the European Convention  on
    Human Rights when this was raised as a ground of  appeal  with  written
    submissions made in the skeleton argument on behalf of  the  Appellant.
    The Appellant specifically claimed that she  met  the  requirements  in
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules on the basis that  she
    would face very significant obstacles  to  reintegration  as  a  single
    parent with a child born out of wedlock and a family who could  not  or
    would not support her.

 5. At the oral hearing, Mr Bobb relied on the detailed written grounds  of
    appeal, with further oral submissions expanding on the same.   Mr  Bobb
    sought to rely on the case  of  MJ  (Singh  v  Belgium:  Tanveer  Ahmed
    unaffected)  Afghanistan  [2013]  UKUT  00253  (IAC)  that  the  social
    worker's letter was one of a category of documents identified that  the
    Respondent should have sought to verify as it would be easy to  do  so,
    having come from an unimpeachable source and having been  signed  by  a
    named  individual.   The  Respondent  had   previously   verified   the
    Appellant's travel records with the authorities in  Albania.   Although
    it was accepted that there was no express reliance  on  MJ  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, Mr Bobb submitted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    erred in failing to conduct a proper assessment of the document by  not
    considering the Respondent's lack of verification and/or  not  reducing
    the weight to be  attached  to  the  Respondent's  submissions  on  the
    genuineness of the document because of her failure to verify it.

 6. In relation to paragraph 46 and the First-tier Tribunal's reference  to
    the letter being self-serving, Mr Bobb reiterated that all evidence  is
    to an extent self-serving  and  this  statement  takes  the  matter  no
    further in the First-tier Tribunal's reasoning.

 7. Mr Bobb placed specific reliance on the grant of  permission  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Pitt against the Respondent's initial refusal to  accept
    the Appellants' further submissions as a fresh  claim  under  paragraph
    353 in relation to the First-tier Tribunal's reliance  on  the  earlier
    finding that the Appellant had not previously claimed any risk of  harm
    to her or her child because she was born out of  wedlock;  without  any
    consideration of the background country evidence or general information
    contained in the country guidance decisions relied upon.  In  addition,
    Mr Bobb submitted that as in paragraph 152 of AM and BM, the  Appellant
    would be returned to  Albania  without  a  passport  and/or  at  public
    expense, such that it is likely that she would  be  identified  at  the
    border and her family contact; therefore at risk on return.

 8. As to the second ground of appeal, Mr Bobb  submitted  that  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Jones erred in law as to  the  assessment  of  the  best
    interests of the child Appellant and First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Davies
    erred in law in relying on the same without detained assessment of  the
    child Appellant's best interests following the  new  evidence  about  a
    lack of family support on return to Albania.

 9. Mr Bobb relied on the written grounds of  appeal  in  relation  to  the
    fourth ground of appeal  and  accepted  that  this  ground  essentially
    stands or falls with the  other  grounds  given  the  specific  factual
    matrix in this case.

10. On behalf of the Respondent, Mr  Lindsay  opposed  the  appeal  on  all
    grounds which he  submitted  were  in  essence  disagreement  with  the
    decision under appeal and continuing disagreement with the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Jones.

11. In relation to the first ground of appeal, it was  submitted  that  the
    Respondent never alleged fraud or that the social  work  letter  was  a
    forgery, nor was there any such finding by the First-tier Tribunal  and
    therefore no errors as to the correct standard of  proof.   The  First-
    tier  Tribunal  was  however  right  to  approach  the  document   with
    circumspection given the previous adverse credibility  findings,  which
    included a rejection of the core of the Appellant's  protection  claim,
    two refusals of permission to appeal against the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Jones and a failure to obtain permission  to  Judicially
    Review the Upper Tribunal's refusal.  The document  was  considered  in
    the round together with  all  other  evidence  and  the  principles  in
    Tanveer Ahmed were applied by the First-tier Tribunal.

12. Mr Lindsay submitted that the social worker's letter was  not  evidence
    that it would be easy for any First-tier Tribunal  to  give  weight  to
    given that it was not a witness statement, nor an  expert  report.   In
    the circumstances of this case, it is also problematic that the  letter
    was not commissioned by the Appellant and that she had  had  no  direct
    contact or involvement at all in it or the substance contained therein;
    nor was there any discussion between  the  Appellant  and  her  younger
    brother about the visits.  As such, the Appellant was not in a position
    to demonstrate the reliability of the letter or  its  contents.   There
    was no explanation from the Appellant as to why she did  not  seek  the
    evidence herself and there was no evidence that her younger brother was
    at any of the visits to report what happened.

13. Overall, the First-tier Tribunal gave careful and thorough  reasons  in
    paragraphs 46 to 52, with  entirely  appropriate  findings  as  to  the
    weight to be attached  to  the  social  worker's  letter.   Mr  Lindsay
    suggested that the Appellant placed too much weight on the reference to
    the Appellant's brother in paragraph 47 given the contents of paragraph
    52 which shows  that  the  Judge  clearly  understood  there  were  two
    brothers.

14. As to verification of the document, Mr Lindsay submitted that there was
    no duty on the Respondent to verify the letter on  the  facts  of  this
    case; the principle in MJ not arising here as the document in  question
    was of a different category and in circumstances where  such  documents
    are easily falsified.  Further, the Appellant had not been involved  in
    obtaining the evidence and had previous  adverse  credibility  findings
    against her.  The First-tier Tribunal expressly applied the  principles
    in Tanveer Ahmed which were expressly confirmed as applicable in MJ.

15. Finally, on the  first  ground  of  appeal,  the  reliance  on  MJ  and
    verification was not raised before the First-tier Tribunal and  it  was
    not a Robinson obvious point.  In any event, it  does  not  assist  the
    Appellant.

16. In relation to the second ground of appeal, there was  no  evidence  of
    any change in circumstances in relation to the  child  Appellant  since
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Jones and  therefore  nothing
    new to consider as to her best interests.  If there is no error of  law
    in the finding that the Appellant had not been disowned by  her  family
    and would have family support on return, then there can be no  material
    error of law as the child Appellant would not be materially  worse  off
    in Albania compared to in the United Kingdom given her  entitlement  to
    benefits as an Albanian national.

17. Overall, this ground stands or falls with the first ground  of  appeal.
    Mr Lindsay accepted that if a material error of law was  found  on  the
    first ground, then there would be some  difficulty  in  the  Respondent
    supporting the assessment made; but if there was family  support,  this
    could not be a free-standing ground of  appeal  with  any  prospect  of
    success.

18. In relation to the third ground of appeal, Mr  Lindsay  submitted  that
    they were simply not relevant as the country guidance was  all  focused
    on trafficked women and the Appellant was not trafficked.  Although the
    decisions contained  evidence  of  circumstances  more  generally,  the
    Appellant should have relied upon specific evidence of  those  matters.
    In essence, in this ground of appeal, the Appellant is suggesting  that
    the First-tier Tribunal erred in law in not expanding the categories in
    the country guidance.

19. In relation to the final ground of appeal,  the  Appellant  essentially
    continues on the  theme  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Jones  made
    perverse  findings  and  misunderstands  the  nature  of  findings  and
    particularly adverse credibility findings which involved not all of the
    Appellant's claim being accepted.  The fact that the  Appellant  stated
    something in her witness statement before the first Tribunal  does  not
    mean that it was an accepted fact.

20. In reply, Mr Bobb  reiterated  that  the  grounds  must  be  considered
    cumulatively, although some stood individually  as  errors  of  law  in
    their own right.

Findings and reasons

21. The lengthy grounds of appeal in this  case  all  essentially  turn  on
    whether there  was  an  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    rejection of the two further pieces of  evidence  relied  upon  by  the
    Appellant since her last appeal was dismissed, namely a letter from the
    Department of Social Protection (the social worker's letter) and  to  a
    lesser extent, a letter from her younger brother.  It  is  accepted  on
    behalf of both parties that the second ground of appeal in relation  to
    the best interests of the child Appellant  stands  or  falls  with  the
    first ground of appeal.  If the First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  err  in
    finding family support on return to Albania, it was accepted that there
    was nothing further to consider in relation to  the  child  Appellant's
    best interests, there was no change since the earlier Tribunal decision
    and no further factors were raised.  If however there was an  error  in
    the finding of family support being available  on  return  to  Albania,
    then there would likely be further considerations for the assessment of
    the child Appellant's best interests which  needed  to  be  taken  into
    account by the First-tier Tribunal who would, in  those  circumstances,
    have erred in not considering the same.

22. Although I find that the second ground of appeal  does  stand  or  fall
    with the first,  there  is  one  specific  point  relied  upon  by  the
    Appellant that it  is  convenient  to  deal  with  given  the  repeated
    reliance upon it.  The Appellant submits that a finding in paragraph 55
    of the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Jones was plainly perverse
    and therefore should not have been relied upon by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Davies.  The part of this paragraph  challenged  as  perverse  is
    that the decision recorded that it was not suggested by the Appellant's
    Counsel that the Appellant would be at risk of ill treatment on  return
    to Albania solely as a result of having a child out  of  wedlock.   The
    Appellant states that this is directly contrary to her evidence  before
    that Tribunal, which was that her parents would never  accept  a  child
    out of wedlock and would never accept her or the child.

23. The Appellant does not, in reliance on this, understand the  difference
    between her own evidence as to family acceptance (or otherwise) of  her
    having a child out of wedlock and the legal submission on her behalf as
    to risk on return because she had had a child out of wedlock.  The  two
    are not the same thing and are not directly contradictory  and  in  any
    event, her claim about a lack of family support was rejected.

24. In this particular case, there was nothing to suggest any risk  to  the
    Appellant outside of her family (or even home  area)  as  a  result  of
    having a child out of wedlock and the evidence upon which the Appellant
    now relies in the form of the social worker's letter refers directly to
    her parents' view that the Appellant can do whatever she wants as  long
    as she stays away from the family and the threat said to have been made
    was on the basis of what her brother said would happen if she  returned
    home.  Further, there is a clear  misunderstanding  of  the  very  high
    threshold for perversity, particularly in  the  circumstances  of  this
    case where the permission to appeal was refused by both the  First-tier
    Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal and permission to  apply  for  Judicial
    Review of the latter was also refused.

25. I also find that the final ground of appeal in relation to Article 8 of
    the European Convention on Human Rights similarly stands or falls  with
    the first ground.   That  is  because  in  essence,  the  same  factual
    circumstances are relied upon by the Appellant in relation to both risk
    on return for the purposes of her protection claim and  as  to  whether
    there are very significant obstacles to reintegration for the  purposes
    of paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration  Rules  and  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.  Whilst I accept that  there  were
    written submissions on behalf of the Appellant in relation to Article 8
    upon which no express findings were made by the First-tier Tribunal (on
    the basis that no Article 8 claim was not  orally), upon which specific
    findings should have been made, in reality, this could  not  have  been
    material to the outcome of the appeal given the rejection of  the  core
    of the Appellant's protection claim to the lower standard of  proof  on
    identical facts.  There were no further findings of fact  required  and
    on those already made, it is clear that the  Appellant's  human  rights
    claim would in any event have been dismissed for the same reasons.

26. The third ground of appeal overlaps with aspects of the first ground of
    appeal and I consider these together.  The third ground of appeal as to
    applicability of country guidance is not a free-standing error  of  law
    in the absence of factors relied upon in the first ground of appeal and
    it is important to note that this same ground of appeal was relied upon
    in relation to the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Jones  and
    rejected, up to and including in  the  application  for  permission  to
    apply for Judicial Review of the refusal of permission to appeal.

27. On the first and third grounds of appeal,  I  deal  with  each  of  the
    distinct points raised in the grounds of appeal and orally on behalf of
    the Appellant, bearing in mind that it is accepted  that  not  all  are
    independently capable of amounting to a material error of law and  that
    the Appellant has expressly relied upon the cumulative  nature  of  the
    points raised.

28. The first point relates to whether the Respondent and/or the First-tier
    Tribunal had alleged or found that the social  worker's  letter  was  a
    forgery and if so, whether the  correct  standard  of  proof  had  been
    applied.  There is nothing to suggest that the Respondent alleged  that
    the document was a forgery and the point that such documents are easily
    available in Albania does not go this  far.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    does not suggest any such allegation of fraud by the Respondent and  in
    its own findings, only goes so far as finding that  the  Appellant  has
    not established, to the lower standard applicable, that weight  can  be
    attached to the  document  taking  into  account  the  earlier  adverse
    credibility findings and all of the evidence in the round.  That is not
    a finding that the document is fraudulent or a forgery  and  the  issue
    before the First-tier Tribunal was not a binary question of whether  it
    was genuine or not, but an assessment as to the weight to  be  attached
    to it considering everything in the  round.   In  these  circumstances,
    where there was no finding, expressly or  implicitly  in  the  decision
    that the document was a forgery, there  can  be  no  error  as  to  the
    standard of proof applied.

29. The second point in the first ground of appeal is linked to  the  third
    ground of  appeal,  as  to  whether  the  social  worker's  letter  was
    considered in the round against the background country evidence  as  to
    the traditional nature of society in Albania.  This is  a  point  which
    the Appellant has repeatedly relied upon,  including  when  seeking  to
    challenge the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Jones  and/or  the
    refusal of permission to appeal the same.  This same point was rejected
    in all of those applications, up to and including the High Court on the
    basis that the country guidance cases relied upon were specific to  the
    circumstances of trafficked women and therefore not applicable to  this
    Appellant who had not been trafficked.  Those reasons remain applicable
    in  the  present  appeal  against  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Davies'
    decision.   The  country  guidance  relied  upon  was  specifically  in
    relation  to  trafficked  women  and  authoritative  (subject  to   the
    exceptions of cogent evidence being relied upon to depart from it) only
    in relation to that category of person, which the  Appellant  does  not
    fall in to.

30. In any event, the wider evidence  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  the
    country guidance cases as to the  conservative  nature  of  society  in
    Albania and the importance of honour, particularly in the north,  could
    only support the Appellant's claim to the limited extent that her claim
    to have been disowned by her family was plausible  in  accordance  with
    background country evidence.  However, that does not and could not have
    advanced her claim in any significant or material way in light  of  the
    adverse credibility findings, specific finding (on her own claim)  that
    her family continued to support her previously despite having worked as
    a prostitute in Belgium and given the range of  reasons  given  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal as to why the further evidence in the form  of  the
    social worker's letter and letter from the Appellant's younger  brother
    could not be given weight  (even  if  it  was  factored  in  that  such
    evidence was not inconsistent with background country evidence).

31. On verification  of  the  social  worker's  letter,  I  find  that  the
    Respondent was not under any obligation to do so on the facts  of  this
    case and the basic principles in Tanvir Ahmed continued  to  apply  and
    were applied in this appeal.  In any event, this is not a matter  which
    was raised before the First-tier Tribunal and it does not come close to
    a Robinson obvious point such that the First-tier Tribunal did not  err
    in law in not considering either whether  the  Respondent  should  have
    verified the document, or, as put in oral submissions, in not  reducing
    the weight to be  attached  to  the  Respondent's  submissions  on  the
    document.  The latter was unnecessarily convoluted given that the  task
    for the First-tier Tribunal was to determine the weight to be  attached
    to the document (not submissions on it by one or other party) and it is
    trite that the weight to be attached  to  a  document  is  primarily  a
    matter for the First-tier Tribunal.

32. The third point within the first ground of appeal directly  relates  to
    paragraph 46 of the First-tier Tribunal's decision  and  the  Appellant
    submits that the First-tier Tribunal errs in finding  that  the  social
    worker's letter is unbalanced because it does not refer  to  protection
    available to the Appellant in circumstances where the letter was  never
    intended to do other than confirm the failed attempts to reconcile  the
    Appellant with her family.

33. However, this reason relied upon by the First-tier Tribunal is  clearly
    related to the final paragraph of the letter  which  states:  "I  think
    returning to Albania will be 'suicidal' for [the Appellant] because she
    does not have the support of her family and  she  will  be  faced  with
    economic difficulties.  She will have difficulty in raising her  child,
    she will be subject to prejudice from people.  To have a child  out  of
    wedlock is not normal for a lot of people in Albania.  It is considered
    immoral and a breaking of the family code."

34. The reason in the last part of paragraph 46   does  not  apply  to  the
    letter as a whole or the purpose for it, but to  this  last  conclusion
    reached without the Appellant having any direct contact with the social
    worker, without any information as to what information had  been  given
    to them about her and without any reasons  given  for  this  conclusion
    which is outside of the main substance and reason for the  letter,  the
    Appellant's claim to have been disowned by  her  family.   The  concern
    raised at the end of paragraph 46 of the decision that  the  letter  is
    unbalanced  and  reaches  a  simple  (and  I  would   add,   unreasoned
    conclusion) about return was entirely reasonable and open to the First-
    tier Tribunal.   There  is  no  error  of  law  in  this  and  none  is
    specifically asserted in the grounds of appeal, which  on  this  point,
    amounts to no more than disagreement or further submissions  on  behalf
    of the Appellant.

35. The fourth point in the first ground of appeal concerns the finding  in
    paragraph 47 of the decision that the social worker's reference to  the
    Appellant's brother threatening her was the Appellant's younger brother
    and not, her older brother, on the basis that there was  no  record  of
    any conversation with an older brother not living in the house.

36. The social worker's letter states that several visits were made to  the
    house where the Appellant's father, mother and brother live;  which  in
    the context of the evidence from the Appellant and her younger brother,
    is inferred to be the house where the Appellant's  father,  mother  and
    younger brother live.  There is nothing  in  the  evidence  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal as to where the Appellant's  older  brother  lives,
    although the social worker's letter does refer to 'sons' and  therefore
    two brothers; it does not refer to any contact at all  with  the  older
    brother at the family home or otherwise.  In  addition,  there  was  no
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal as to the number of  visits  or
    who was present during them; either  from  the  Appellant  herself  who
    simply did not know, or from her younger brother who wrote a letter  in
    support.  Whilst at first sight the First-tier Tribunal appears to have
    reached a surprising conclusion  about  which  brother  threatened  the
    Appellant in the social worker's letter, read in the context  of  other
    findings and considering what information is (and is not) on  the  face
    of the letter itself, I do not find that it discloses any error of  law
    when considering the weight to be attached to the two further pieces of
    evidence by the First-tier Tribunal, particularly when  clear  findings
    were made as to the younger  brother  being  supportive  later  in  the
    decision.   There  was  no  failure  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal   to
    understand the Appellant had two brothers.  It was open to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to raise concerns as to inconsistent evidence  about  the
    Appellant's brother when the social  worker's  letter  did  not  itself
    identify which brother was being referred to  (having  only  identified
    who could only be the younger brother living in the house visited), nor
    directly refer at all to the Appellant's  older  brother,  nor  did  it
    refer in any way to the younger brother's claimed role in obtaining the
    assistance or evidence.

37. In any event, even if the First-tier Tribunal were wrong  in  that  the
    letter referred to a threat from the Appellant's older brother (not the
    younger brother), it is difficult to see how  this  alone  could  be  a
    material error of law in the context of the reasons  given  for  little
    weight being attached to the documents; which were  more  wide  ranging
    than this point and in the context of the decision  as  a  whole  which
    finds  the  Appellant's  younger  brother  to  be  supportive  and  the
    Appellant not to be credible.  I return later to  whether  there  could
    cumulatively be an error of law.

38. The fifth point within the first ground of appeal relates to  paragraph
    49 of  the  decision,  the  Appellant  stating  that  contrary  to  the
    decision, it was entirely possible for the social worker to assess  the
    situation without direct contact with the Appellant.  Although this may
    be the case for assessing whether the Appellant had  been  disowned  by
    her family (upon which an assessment could reasonably be  made  on  the
    evidence of interactions with the family alone), this paragraph in  the
    decision is clearly in relation to the risk to the  Appellant  and  her
    child on return and therefore primarily aimed at the  final  conclusion
    paragraph in the social worker's letter  upon  which  it  was  entirely
    reasonable and open to the First-tier Tribunal to question  whether  an
    appropriate  assessment  could  be   made   without   the   Appellant's
    involvement.

39. In any event, even if it was possible for the social worker to make  an
    appropriate  assessment  without  any  involvement  at  all  with   the
    Appellant, the grounds of appeal fail to identify the error of  law  in
    the First-tier Tribunal considering that it was difficult to understand
    how an appropriate assessment of danger to the Appellant and her  child
    could be made without such contact.  This is  particularly  so  in  the
    context of the letter itself containing no information as to  what  the
    social worker knew about the Appellant and her child,  nor  from  whom.
    The contents of and reasons  in  paragraph  49  of  the  decision  were
    reasonably open to the First-tier Tribunal on the evidence before it.

40. The sixth point in the first ground of appeal also  fails  to  identify
    any error of law in  the  three  paragraphs  specifically  referred  to
    (paragraphs 48, 50  and  51),  instead  making  submissions  as  to  an
    inference that the First-tier Tribunal should  have  made  but  without
    reference to any evidence that was before it upon  which  to  base  the
    proposed conclusion.  Contrary to the grounds, it was  far  from  clear
    that the Appellant's older brother was at one of the  meetings  and  to
    say that the younger brother gave his evidence from either presence  at
    one or more meetings and/or from reading  the  social  worker's  letter
    takes  the  matter  no  further  and  does  not  address  the  concerns
    highlighted in paragraphs 51 and 52 in particular.  There was simply no
    evidence at all before the First-tier Tribunal as to who was present at
    any of the visits by the social worker, the Appellant did not know  and
    her younger brother's letter was silent on the issue, as is the  social
    worker's letter.

41. In relation to the seventh point in the first ground of  appeal,  there
    is no illogicality or inconsistency in the reasons and findings made by
    the First-tier Tribunal in paragraphs 51 and 52 of  the  decision.   In
    paragraph 51 it is recorded that  the  Appellant,  even  when  pressed,
    stated that she did not know if her younger brother was at any  of  the
    social worker's meetings, despite being  in  contact  with  him,  which
    raised the question of how he could give a detailed account of what was
    said with no evidence that he was there.  In paragraph 52,  the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  highlights  the  difference  in  wording  between   the
    Appellant's younger brother's letter and the social worker's letter  of
    what both present as a direct quote of the  (older)  brother's  threat;
    which it was not accepted was adequately explained  by  the  Appellant.
    The First-tier Tribunal placed weight on the discrepancy  and  lack  of
    information  as  to  who  was  at  the  home  visits.   There   is   no
    inconsistency between these findings, they are entirely consistent  and
    were open to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  make  on  consideration  of
    discrepancies between the two documents relied upon.

42. The eighth point in the first ground of appeal relates to paragraph  53
    of the decision which the  Appellant  states  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    erred in reaching a finding contrary to the evidence before  it  as  to
    how the social worker's  letter  came  about.   However,  although  the
    Appellant gave an explanation as to  this,  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    point in this paragraph is that there was no indication in the document
    itself as to how the social workers became involved.  That  is  correct
    on the facts, there was no such information in the document itself  and
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  already  raised  concerns   about   the
    Appellant's  evidence  about  this  (or  more  specifically,  lack   of
    involvement and evidence about it) and as to her credibility generally.



43. The further point raised by the Appellant is that there was a  lack  of
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal that the Appellant's father was
    dismissive and did not want to prolong the discussion with  the  social
    worker.  However, although  that  exact  description  was  not  in  the
    letter, it was reasonable  and  open  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    conclude this on the basis of the record of  the  Appellant's  father's
    words in the letter which included "I am ending this conversation  here
    and I do not want to hear about her.".   This point in the  grounds  of
    appeal amounts to no more than disagreement with the decision, does not
    identify any error of law and in any event, is a relatively minor point
    rather than a key part  of  the  reasoning,  being  just  one  of  many
    examples of a discrepancy or lack of information on  the  face  of  the
    document itself.

44. The final point in the first ground of appeal is said to relate to  the
    standard of proof applied to the question of risk to the  Appellant  on
    return, that too high a standard was  applied  and  irrelevant  matters
    were taken into account.  This point simply misreads paragraph 54 which
    is not a conclusion as to whether the Appellant faces a  real  risk  of
    persecution on return but is solely and expressly only a conclusion  on
    the weight to be attached to the  social  worker's  letter.   There  is
    further and contrary to the grounds of appeal, no express  reliance  on
    the Appellant's lack of knowledge about whether either of her  brothers
    were present at any social worker visits  in  this  paragraph;  only  a
    reference to the lack of any evidence at all as to whether the  younger
    brother's letter was based on  what  he  personally  heard  as  it  was
    unknown whether he was present at the relevant time.

45. What is  clear  from  paragraph  54  is  that  the  document  has  been
    considered in the round, including taking into account earlier  adverse
    credibility findings and the information  which  is  missing  from  the
    Appellant's claim (either from her, her younger brother or on the  face
    of the social worker's letter itself).  There is no suggestion  in  the
    decision, express or that can be  inferred  that  there  has  been  any
    unfair comparison with the standards of social services in  the  United
    Kingdom, nor in fact that there had been any comparison at all.

46. For the reasons set out above, the  matters  identified  in  the  first
    ground of appeal do not individually have any merit in establishing  an
    error of law in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision.   The  numerous
    points raised disclose in the main, no more than disagreement with  the
    findings made (including the findings made by First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Jones) and/or misunderstanding or misreading of the  decision  in  both
    specific paragraphs and when read as a whole.

47. At first sight, the only  point  with  arguable  merit  and  which  was
    specifically referred to in the grant of permission was as  to  whether
    the First-tier Tribunal erred in finding  the  social  worker's  letter
    referred  to  the  Appellant's  younger  brother  (not  older  brother)
    threatening her if she returned home; but on  closer  consideration  in
    the context of  the  document  itself,  wider  evidence  and  the  full
    reasoning given by the First-tier Tribunal; this was a conclusion  that
    was not irrational or perverse; nor did it disclose any error  of  law.
    In any event, as above, this alone could not be an error of  law  which
    materially affected the outcome  of  the  appeal  given  the  range  of
    adverse reasons and findings made; of which  this  was  one  relatively
    minor point.  Further, there are no other  errors  of  law  within  the
    numerous points relied upon by the Appellant within the context of  the
    first  and  third  grounds  of  appeal  which   could   be   considered
    cumulatively as material to the outcome of the appeal.  I find no error
    of law on the first or third grounds of appeal.

48. As above, the second and fourth grounds of appeal stand  or  fall  with
    the first and third grounds of appeal on the  specific  facts  of  this
    case.  As I have found no error of law  on  either  of  those  grounds,
    there can not, as accepted  by  both  parties,  be  any  error  of  law
    material to the outcome of the appeal on these remaining grounds.   The
    appeal is therefore dismissed.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   G Jackson                           Date         7th February 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

