
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00389/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14th June 2017                             |On 13th July 2017             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                                   mr a g
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Gayle, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a  citizen  of  Iran  born  on  21st  May  1984.   The
    Appellant has an extensive immigration history having  previously  made
    applications for student visas the last of which made on 8th March 2009
    was successful.  The Appellant returned to Iran and latterly claims  to
    have left Iran in June 2016 assisted by an agent arriving in the UK  on
    2nd July 2016 when he claimed asylum.  The Appellant's basis for asylum
    is that he fears if returned to Iran he will face mistreatment  due  to
    his political opinion as he has claimed to have written blogs and  been
    accused of anti-government activities by the authorities.   However  in
    his screening interview the Appellant's claim for asylum was based upon
    a fear that if returned to Iran he will  be  executed  because  he  had
    converted  to  Christianity  from  Islam  and  that  as  a  result  the
    authorities  had  an  adverse  interest  in   him.    The   Appellant's
    application was refused by Notice of Refusal dated 30th December  2016.
    The application of the Appellant's wife SN, who travelled with  him  to
    the UK, is dependent upon the Appellant's appeal.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Parker at Stoke on 13th February 2017.  In a decision and reasons
    promulgated on 27th February 2017 the Appellant's appeal was  dismissed
    on  all  grounds.   Judge  Parker  however  did  grant  the   Appellant
    anonymity.  No application is made to vary that order  and  I  maintain
    it.

 3. On 27th February 2017 Grounds  of  Appeal  were  lodged  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  On 23rd  March  2017  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Gillespie
    granted the Appellant permission to appeal.  Judge Gillespie considered
    that it was arguable, as averred in the Grounds  of  Appeal,  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in  his  assessment  of  the
    genuineness  of  the  Appellant's  alleged  conversion  by   mistakenly
    considering his church attendance to be a "belated" device when he  had
    in fact  been  attending  a  Christian  congregation  since  the  month
    following his arrival in the United  Kingdom.   Further  he  considered
    that it was likewise arguable that  the  learned  judge  erred  in  his
    definitive finding  that  there  can  be  no  interference  by  Iranian
    authorities in the site,  blogfa.com,  without  addressing,  or  giving
    reasons to disregard, such evidence to the contrary as might have  been
    advanced by the Appellant.

 4. On 13th April 2017 the Secretary of State responded to the  Grounds  of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  It is noted therein that it  was  asserted  that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge considered all the material relied on  by
    the Appellant to come to the decision and that it was  clear  from  the
    decision that the Appellant's knowledge of Christianity was limited and
    also during cross-examination the Appellant himself said that  religion
    had nothing to do with the reason he left Iran.  Further in  regard  to
    the Appellant's claimed blogging it is submitted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge did not find the Appellant's evidence reliable and found
    that the claimed raid on the house did not occur.

 5. It is on that basis the Appellant's appeal comes before me in the Upper
    Tribunal to determine whether or not there is a material error  of  law
    in the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   The  Appellant
    appears by his instructed Counsel, Mr Gayle.  Mr Gayle is familiar with
    this matter  having  appeared  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    Secretary of State appears by her Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  Mr
    Bates.

Submission/Discussion

 6. Mr Gayle relies on the Grounds of Appeal.  He submits that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge has failed to provide sufficient,  or  sustainable,
    reasons for his findings of adverse credibility and that there has also
    been a failure to consider the Appellant's evidence on the  appropriate
    standard of proof for  asylum  claims.   He  starts  by  taking  me  to
    paragraphs 26 to  31  of  the  determination  where  the  Tribunal  has
    rejected the Appellant's assertions in relation to  his  apostasy.   He
    notes that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  found  that  the  Appellant's
    attendance at church was indicative of a belated attempt to  bolster  a
    weak asylum claim.  He submits that that finding is a material error in
    the judge's analysis on the basis that the  Appellant's  attendance  at
    church was not belated.  He points out when the  Appellant  arrived  in
    the UK namely early July 2016 and that he began attending at  Wakefield
    Baptist Church during the same month.  Further when dispersed to  Derby
    in August 2016  he  and  his  wife  immediately  began  to  attend  the
    community church there.  He further submits that the witnesses who gave
    evidence on the Appellant's behalf provided compelling evidence of  the
    genuineness of his conversion to Christianity and that contrary to  the
    judge's assertions the Appellant had discharged the burden upon him  to
    show that it was reasonably likely he had  converted  to  Christianity.
    He accepts that in the Appellant's asylum interview the main thrust  of
    the Appellant's basis for an appeal was his blog  but  emphasises  that
    there was some reliance on  his  church  attendance.   He  consequently
    submits that the error of law is finding that the attendance of  church
    was belated then there is clear evidence that the  Appellant  had  been
    attending church soon after he arrived in the UK.  He comments that the
    finding by the judge at paragraph 30 that the Appellant's witnesses did
    not know about inconsistencies in the Appellant's asylum and  screening
    interview would be correct but points out  that  they  were  not  asked
    about them.  He further emphasises that the blog site is controlled  by
    the authorities and the Appellant relies on a simple Google search.  He
    submits there was no need for an expert's report and that the  evidence
    from the Google search is  conclusive.   He  refers  to  the  objective
    evidence in particular that to be found in  the  authority  of  AB  and
    Others (internet activity - state of evidence)  Iran  [2015]  UKUT  257
    (IAC) and that there is therein reference to blogs being closed down by
    the authorities.  He asked me to find material errors of law and to set
    aside the decision and to remit  the  matter  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for rehearing.

 7. Mr Bates acknowledges that the Appellant claimed asylum on entry to the
    UK but points  out  that  his  evidence  was  that  he  was  already  a
    Christian.  He argues that there are  delays,  despite  what  is  said,
    until August when he attends church.  He further points out that  there
    are discrepancies in the Appellant's Home Office interview  highlighted
    at paragraphs 13 to 28 of the Notice of Refusal picked up at paragraphs
    25 to 27 of the decision.   He  accepts  that  the  two  witnesses  are
    genuine but that the evidence he found at paragraph 25 was  not  tested
    but that the discrepancies with which the judge was addressing  are  to
    be found at paragraphs 26 and 27 thereafter.  Further the judge was, he
    submits, entitled to make the findings with regard to  the  Appellant's
    wife's testimony at paragraph 28 and whilst he  acknowledges  that  the
    judge has not given reasons for commenting that he does not think  that
    she is telling the truth he submits that that omission is not  material
    to the overall determination.

 8. He turns to the issue with regard to the blogging.  The fact  there  is
    no website is no reason to say it is hosted from Iran  (and  indeed  in
    this instant that it is not), it originates in Canada  and  that  there
    has been no objective evidence produced supporting the risk that  might
    arise from the blogging and that  the  Google  search  proves  nothing.
    Either it was designed for Farsi speakers or not but that that does not
    disprove the Secretary of State's arguments.  He submits that the judge
    was entitled to give appropriate weight to  the  Respondent's  evidence
    and credibility as set out at paragraphs 37 and 38.   He  asked  me  to
    find that there are no material  errors  of  law  and  to  dismiss  the
    appeal,

 9. Mr Gayle in brief response pointed out that  the  judge  has  erred  in
    finding that the Appellant did  not  attend  church  between  July  and
    August when in fact there is clear evidence that he did.  Therefore the
    decision is unsafe on the basis that the Appellant's belief should have
    been questioned at that time but was  not.   Further  he  submits  that
    there has been a failure to give reasons by the  judge  as  to  why  he
    rejects the Appellant's wife's testimony and that the Google search  is
    clear that whilst the blog can be hosted in  Canada  it  can  still  be
    under the control of the Iranian regime.  The fact  that  there  was  a
    blog means that the Appellant would be at risk on return to Iran.

The Law

10.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

11. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

12. A proper approach to credibility requires an assessment of the evidence
    and of the general claim.   In  asylum  claims  relevant  factors  will
    include  the  internal  consistency  of   the   claim,   the   inherent
    plausibility of the  claim  and  the  consistency  of  the  claim  with
    external factors of the sort typically found in country  guidance.   In
    this case the judge has not found that  the  Appellant's  testimony  is
    credible.  However the judge has erred in certain aspects  in  reaching
    those findings.  Firstly the judge has concluded that the delay in  the
    Appellant in attending church taints his claim for asylum based on  his
    religious beliefs.  It seems that there  is  evidence  that  the  judge
    failed to take into account that the Appellant had attended  church  in
    Wakefield prior to August 2016 and had he given  due  consideration  of
    this  factor  he  might  have  come  to  a  different  finding  on  the
    credibility of this aspect.

13. Secondly, the judge has found at paragraph 28 that he did not  consider
    that the Appellant's wife's evidence was true.  That is a  finding  the
    judge is entitled to make.  What he has failed to do  is  to  give  his
    reasons for reaching that conclusion.  Mr Bates considers that that  is
    not material albeit that he acknowledges that it is  an  error.   In  a
    case of this nature I consider that it is material bearing in mind that
    at the end of the day the judge has looked at the Appellant's  and  his
    spouse's testimony in the round in making adverse credibility  findings
    are to be made then it is  only  proper  that  reasons  are  given  for
    reaching such conclusions.

14. Thirdly it is submitted that the judge has given  inappropriate  weight
    to the Appellant's blog and the fact that the objective evidence states
    that even though it is hosted in another country it can  be  under  the
    control of the Iranian regime which might lead to the  Appellant  being
    at  risk  on  return  to  Iran.   Whilst  the  judge  has   given   due
    consideration to the blog his findings particularly at paragraph 36 and
    37 set out his reasons for doing so  and  why  he  concludes  that  the
    Appellant is not at risk from his alleged blogging activities.

15. This is a case where the Appellant relies on two bases for  his  asylum
    claim.  Firstly his Christianity and secondly his blogging  activities.
    So far as the aspects relating to Christianity the  judge  has  clearly
    erred in his assessment  of  the  evidence.   He  has  failed  to  make
    findings with regard to how he  makes  his  decision  relating  to  the
    Appellant's wife's credibility and whilst he has given reasons relating
    to his findings on the Appellant's blog this is a case that, due to the
    lack of safety of the findings of credibility, that needs to be  looked
    at as a whole and overall there are therefore findings that are unsafe.
     Without the errors of law the judge might have made different findings
    on credibility and on the appeal in general.

16. In such circumstances the correct approach is to find  that  there  are
    material errors of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    and to remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal for  rehearing.
    I wish to emphasise however that that is not to say that on a  complete
    rehearing of this matter a different judge would not ultimately come to
    exactly the same conclusions that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has
    come to.  That is a matter for the judge on the rehearing.

Decision and Directions

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains  material  errors  of
law and is set aside.  The following directions are given:

 1) That the matter be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Stoke
    on the first available date 28 days hence with an ELH of three hours.

 2) That none of the findings of fact are to stand.

 3) That the rehearing is to be before any First-tier Tribunal Judge  other
    than Immigration Judge Parker.

 4) That there be leave to  either  party  to  file  up-to-date  subjective
    and/or objective evidence upon which  they  intend  to  rely  at  least
    fourteen days prior to the restored hearing.

 5) That a Farsi interpreter do attend the restored hearing.

The First-tier Tribunal Judge made an anonymity direction.   No  application
is made to vary that order and I maintain it.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed  D N Harris                               Date: 10th July 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed D N Harris                            Date: 10th July 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


