
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00451/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via video (Teams)     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 May 2021                       |On 15 June 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                Quyet NGUYEN
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr A Caskie, counsel, instructed by McGlashan MacKay
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

This decision follows a remote hearing in respect of which  there  has  been
no objection by the parties. The form of remote hearing was by  video  (V),
the platform was Microsoft Teams. A face  to  face  hearing  was  not  held
because it was not practicable and all  issues  could  be  determined  in  a
remote hearing.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Mackenzie (the judge) who, in a decision promulgated on 31
         May 2018, dismissed the appellant's  protection  and  human  rights
         appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State for the  Home
         Department ("the respondent" or "SSHD")  dated  22  September  2017
         refusing the appellant's protection and human rights claim.


Background

      2. There is a long history to this appeal. The appellant is a national
         of Vietnam, born on 10 February 1986. It is not disputed  that  the
         appellant is Catholic.


      3. The following is a brief  summary  of  the  appellant's  protection
         claim. As a university student  he  wrote  articles  with  Catholic
         friends concerning a church that had been turned into  a  hospital.
         These articles  were  photocopied  and  passed  to  other  Catholic
         students. The appellant believes that he was under surveillance  at
         university from government informants.


      4. After graduating in 2009 the appellant worked as a history  teacher
         for about two years but became disillusioned with the  curriculum's
         approach to Vietnamese Catholics and decided to  become  a  priest.
         The appellant failed his exams  to  become  a  priest  but  instead
         decided to become a  "volunteer"  to  "help  spread  the  spiritual
         message of Christianity". He lived in a parish house and  travelled
         between  churches  teaching  the  Catholic  faith  to  adults   and
         children. During this time the appellant claimed  to  have  written
         articles critical of the government's treatment of Catholics  which
         were often printed and posted  on  the  Church  notice  board.  The
         appellant believed that these articles could have been uploaded  to
         the Internet.

      5. The appellant claims that he became involved in protests against  a
         decision by the government to allow the  Formosa  Company  to  take
         over a church property at Ky Anh in 2015. The appellant claimed  he
         was involved in a demonstration with 300 people  at  Ky  Anh  where
         there was fighting with the police, although the appellant was  not
         involved in the fighting. The appellant maintains that  the  police
         were photographing and watching people.

      6. In 2016  the  Formosa  Company  caused  an  environmental  disaster
         involving toxic waste that affected the livelihood of people around
         Vinh city and which affected many Catholics in particular. In  July
         2016 the appellant gave a lecture to a large public  meeting  in  a
         church hall critical of the Vietnamese government and  the  Formosa
         Company. The appellant claimed that he recognised  security  guards
         connected with the police in the audience. After  the  lecture  the
         appellant claims the police visited a parish where he often stayed,
         but that he managed to avoid them. The police informed  the  parish
         priest that the appellant was being disloyal  and  spreading  anti-
         government propaganda.

      7. In July 2016 the appellant was stopped by the police  when  driving
         an elderly priest  to  Mass  on  a  motorbike.  The  appellant  was
         insulted and accused  of  being  a  traitor.  In  August  2016  the
         appellant was again stopped by the police when taking the priest to
         a  special  Mass.  He  was  verbally  insulted   and   accused   of
         participating in anti-government activities. The appellant was told
         to stop what he was doing but argued back. He claims that a lot  of
         other Catholics intervened on his behalf and that they  outnumbered
         the police. The police were intimidated by the large crowd and  the
         appellant was able to continue to the Mass. After this incident the
         police kept watch on the parish and the appellant went into hiding.
         He then received a summons and believed that  if  he  answered  the
         summons he may be sent to prison. The  appellant  therefore  stayed
         hidden and used various contacts in the Catholic faith  to  contact
         an agent to facilitate his departure from Vietnam.

      8. The appellant left Vietnam around the beginning of  September  2016
         and was flown to Russia. He then travelled through  Latvia,  Poland
         and onto  France.  The  appellant  claims  he  arrived  in  the  UK
         illegally in November or December 2016. He  claimed  asylum  on  31
         August 2017 after being encountered by the police.  The  respondent
         accepted that the appellant  is  Vietnamese  and  a  Catholic,  but
         rejected  his  claim  to  have  been  targeted  by  the  Vietnamese
         authorities on the basis that it was not credible.  The  respondent
         does not consider that there would be any risk to him on his return
         to Vietnam.

      9. The appellant appealed the respondent's decision pursuant  to  s.82
         of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002.  The  judge
         dismissed the appeal but the  appellant  was  given  permission  to
         appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  In  a  decision  promulgated  on  21
         December 2018 Upper Tribunal Judge  Macleman  found  there  was  no
         material error of law in the judge's  decision  and  dismissed  the
         appeal. The appellant sought and obtained permission to  appeal  to
         the Court of Session.

     10. In a Joint Minute dated 20 October  2020  the  appeal  was  settled
         extra-judicially, it being accepted that the Upper  Tribunal  erred
         in law. The following reasons were given:


          i. At section 5.3.1 of his report (item 3 of  the  Appendix)  the
             expert  witness  Professor  Bluth  stated  that  returnees  to
             Vietnam would be routinely questioned at the airport; he  then
             proceeded to give examples of persons targeted in Vietnam;


         ii. At paragraph 56 of its decision (item 4 of the  Appendix)  the
             FTT had found that, as a result of his not being wanted by the
             authorities before the norm, the appellant was not 'at risk of
             being interrogated and mistreated' upon his return there;


        iii.  Paragraphs 3 and 7 of his grounds of appeal to the UT (item 7
             of the Appendix) argued that the appellant was  at  risk  from
             the Vietnamese authorities as being perceived to be  a  person
             involved in political protests; reference was made to  section
             5.3 of the report of Professor Bluth;


         iv. At paragraph 4 of its decision (item 8 of the Appendix) the UT
             observed that risk on return as  a  failed  asylum-seeker  had
             been raised before it, but found that  failed  asylum  seekers
             were not at risk by  virtue  of  that  alone;  then  found  at
             paragraph 11 that the FTT had  reached  no  conclusion  as  to
             whether the appellant is a catechist, and that finding had  to
             be read in it would be negative;


          v. Neither Tribunal  therefore  engaged  with  the  assertion  in
             Professor  Bluth's  report   that   a   returnee   will   face
             interrogation; and that as a consequence might be at  risk  of
             being perceived by the authorities as  a  person  involved  in
             protests.


     11. The consequence of the Joint Minute was that the  appeal  would  be
         allowed and the Upper Tribunal's decision  dated  7  December  2018
         would be set aside.  The  case  was  remitted  back  to  the  Upper
         Tribunal.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

     12. The  judge  had  before  her  various  documents  produced  by  the
         respondent and the appellant including an expert country report  by
         Prof Christoph Bluth dated 5  April  2018,  a  statement  from  the
         appellant dated 28 March  2018,  and  a  summons  allegedly  issued
         against the appellant on 12 August  2016.  Also  before  the  judge
         were:


          a) a letter of appointment dated 11 March 2014 in respect of  the
             appellant's appointment as a catechist of "Sub- parish of Ngoc
             Thanh";


          b)  a "certificate  of  authenticity"  dated  23  September  2017
             issued by the Catholic Church of  Vietnam,  Diocese  of  Vinh,
             Parish of Xa Doai, Sub-parish of Ngoc Thanh,  confirming  that
             the appellant was a parishioner, that he contributed "positive
             activities for religious life", and that he was trained as and
             became a catechist of the Sub- parish;


          c) a further "certificate" from pastor Peter Nguyen Van  Vinh  of
             the Vinh Bishop's Office dated 26 November 2017 asserting that
             the appellant worked as a catechist for a period of time, and;


          d) a further "certificate" dated 24 September 2017 from a  parish
             priest also asserting that the appellant was a catechist.


     13. The judge heard oral evidence from  the  appellant,  he  was  cross
         examined, and she heard submissions from both representatives.  The
         judges findings are located at [34] onwards. She  first  considered
         background evidence contained in the March 2018  CPIN  relating  to
         Registered Religious Groups in Vietnam and to  Catholics.  At  [36]
         the judge did not find the appellant  would  be  at  real  risk  of
         persecution on his return  to  Vietnam  on  account  of  him  being
         Catholic. The judge noted that the appellant was able  to  practice
         his religion, live in parish houses and actively teach  Catholicism
         without difficulty until 2016. The judge stated,  "I  do  not  find
         that the views expressed by Professor Bluth in his Report or to  my
         conclusion on this point."


     14. At [38] to [54]  the  judge  gave  her  reasons  for  rejecting  as
         incredible the appellant's account that he  had  engaged  in  anti-
         government activities and had come to the adverse attention of  the
         Vietnamese authorities. These included vagueness in respect of  the
         appellant's recollection whether  the  articles  he  circulated  to
         students  had  been  published  online,  his  inability  to  locate
         articles said to have been posted on church  noticeboards  and  his
         vagueness and lack of explanation for the absence of  enquiries  to
         trace these articles, a contradiction in his evidence  relating  to
         the publication of articles online, a contradiction in relation  to
         his adoption of pseudonyms in respect  of  the  authorship  of  his
         articles, the  implausibility  and  vagueness  of  his  account  of
         evading police detection and being able to evade  the  police  when
         stopped, and contradictions between his claim at interview to  have
         gone into hiding and his claim in his  witness  statement  to  have
         remained in his small village where he was known to the police. The
         judge also noted the absence of  expert  evidence  to  support  the
         validity of the summons and the absence of an explanation as to why
         the originals had been only produce on the day of the hearing,  and
         the delay in the appellant's claim for asylum.


     15. In her conclusion at [55] the judge did not find that the appellant
         gave a credible account of his background and the  reasons  why  he
         came to the UK. The judge did  not  find  any  of  the  documentary
         evidence before her or anything said in  the  report  by  Professor
         Bluth altered her assessment of the appellant's evidence. The judge
         found that the appellant came to the UK as an economic migrant.  At
         [56] the judge found that, given her reasons for  disbelieving  the
         appellant's claim, he had not proved to the lower standard that  he
         would be at risk  of  being  interrogated  and  mistreated  on  his
         return. The appeal was dismissed.


The challenge to the judge's decision

     16. The grounds contend that the judge failed to adequately engage with
         the expert report by Professor Bluth and failed to make  any  clear
         finding as to whether the appellant was a catechist. It was said to
         be "virtually inconceivable" that a catechist in the area local  to
         the Formosa plant  would  not  have  participated  in  the  Formosa
         protests, or at the very least be perceived as such in the event of
         being returned to Vietnam. The question whether the  appellant  was
         or  was  not  a  catechist  was  therefore  a  material  factor  in
         determining the plausibility and credibility of his account.  Given
         that the expert indicated  at  5.3  of  his  report  that  returned
         Vietnamese are interrogated by immigration officials  and,  in  the
         context of failed asylum seekers, the interrogation  will  be  more
         thorough  and  take  longer,  there  was  a  real  risk  that   the
         appellant's answers would  result  in  the  Vietnamese  authorities
         perceiving him as  someone  who  was  involved  in  anti-government
         protests.


     17. At the remote 'error of law' hearing Ms Everett was made  aware  of
         the Joint Minute described at paragraph 10 above. She accepted that
         (v) of the Joint Minute indicated that neither the FTT nor  the  UT
         had considered the expert's assertion that  a  returnee  will  face
         interrogation and that the  appellant  may  be  at  risk  of  being
         perceived by the authorities as a person involved  in  protests.  I
         additionally expressed my concern that the judge failed to make any
         clear findings as to whether the appellant was a catechist. In  the
         circumstances both parties were  of  the  view  that  the  decision
         contained a material error of law  and  that  the  case  should  be
         remitted back to the FTT for a de novo hearing.

Discussion


     18. The judge did  not  make  any  clear  finding  as  to  whether  the
         appellant was a catechist. The judge did not refer to or  make  any
         clear findings in respect of the documentary  evidence,  identified
         at paragraph 12 above, supporting the appellant's  claim  to  be  a
         catechist. Whilst the judge found that the appellant  was  able  to
         practice his Catholic faith the appellant's claim to be a catechist
         was a relevant factor in assessing his alleged activities  critical
         of the Vietnamese state.


     19. Whilst the judge gave a number of legitimate reasons for concluding
         that the appellant's account of his  critical  activities  was  not
         credible, that assessment was undertaken  without  it  being  clear
         whether the judge accepted the appellant was a  catechist.  If  the
         appellant was a  catechist  then  this  was  a  factor  capable  of
         rendering it  more  likely  that  the  appellant  would  have  been
         involved in protests against the Formosa Company and the Vietnamese
         authorities, and therefore supporting his account. Further, if  the
         appellant was a catechist from the area he claimed to have  resided
         in, then there may be a real risk that this  information  would  be
         disclosed to the Vietnamese authorities on his  return  to  Vietnam
         during  any  interrogation.  The  judge  failed  to  undertake  any
         assessment as to whether the appellant may be perceived as  someone
         who was likely to have been involved in the  protests  against  the
         Formosa Company and the Vietnamese authorities given his role as  a
         catechist and his place  of  residence.  For  these  reasons  I  am
         satisfied that the judges findings, though supported by  legitimate
         reasons, is unsustainable.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

     20. Under Part 3  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Practice
         Statement of the 18 June 2018 the case may be remitted to the First-
         tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:


         (a)  the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
             First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for
             that party's case to be put to and considered  by  the  First-
             tier Tribunal; or


         (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial  fact  finding  which  is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-
             made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
             tier Tribunal.


     21. The judge's failure  to  determine  whether  the  appellant  was  a
         catechist has rendered her adverse credibility findings unsafe.  In
         these circumstances there will need to be a full  re-assessment  of
         all the evidence rendering it appropriate to remit the matter  back
         to the First-tier Tribunal for a full fresh (de novo) hearing,  all
         issues open.


Notice of Decision

The making of the First-tier Tribunal's decision involved the making  of  an
error on a point of law requiring it to be set aside.

The case will be remitted back to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
hearing  before  a  judge  other  than  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
Mackenzie.



Signed D.Blum          Date: 31 May 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
