
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00411/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 February 2020                  |On 5 March 2020                      |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                                     NAM
                        (ANONYMITY ORDER MAINTAINED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. M. Kelleher, Barnes Harrild & Dyer Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. E. Turfan, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS






BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellant is Kurdish  and  an  Iraqi  national.  He  was  born  and
    brought up in Kirkuk and has no connection with the IKR.    It  is  the
    Appellant's case that he is not in possession of an Iraqi passport  and
    that the Iraqi Embassy declined to provide him with a new one as he was
    not able to prove his identity.   It is also  his  case  that  he  lost
    contact with his family in Iraq in 2015.

2.   The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom and applied for  asylum  on
    15 June 2006. His application was refused and he did not appeal against
    this decision. Further representations were submitted on his behalf  on
    13 July 2009 and his further protection  and  human  rights  claim  was
    refused on 23 July 2016. He then lodged further submissions on 27  June
    2017 and 25 October 2018 and his protection  and  human  rights  claims
    were refused on 12 December  2018.  He  appealed  and  his  appeal  was
    dismissed on asylum grounds by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Talbot  in  a
    decision promulgated on 11  March  2019.  His  appeal  was  allowed  on
    Article 8 grounds.

3.   The Appellant appealed against  the  decision  to  dismiss  his  asylum
    appeal and First-tier Tribunal Judge Chohan granted him  permission  to
    appeal on 6 January 2020.  The Secretary of State did not  cross-appeal
    in relation to the human rights decision.

ERROR OF LAW HEARING

 4.  Ms Kelleher provided the Tribunal  with  a  useful  skeleton  argument,
    which she had also given to the Home Office Presenting  Officer.  Later
    in the hearing, the Home Office Presenting Officer withdrew paragraph 4
    of the Respondent's Rule 24 Response. Both  representatives  also  made
    oral submissions and I have taken these into account when  reaching  my
    decision below.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

5.   As a general rule, country guidance cases remain  authoritative  as  to
    the objective conditions in a  particular  state  until  overturned  by
    higher authority or superseded by new country guidance (See Jackson  LJ
    in AB (Sudan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]  EWCA
    Civ 921).

6.   At the time of  the  decision  under  challenge  the  relevant  country
    guidance was to be found in AAH (Iraqi  Kurds  -  internal  relocation)
    Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 00212 (IAC), which characterised Kirkuk Governorate
    as a "contested area" for the purposes of any entitlement to subsidiary
    protection. In R (Iran) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2005] EWCA Civ 982 Brooke LJ found that the core findings of a country
    guidance case must be  followed  absent  "...good  reasons,  explicitly
    stated, for not doing so".
7.   The Home Office  Presenting  Officer  submitted  that  further  country
    guidance in the SMO, KSP & IM (Article 15(c);  identity  documents)  CG
    Iraq [2019] UKUT 400 indicates that First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Talbot
    was correct to find that Kirkuk  was  no  longer  a  "contested  area".
    However, I must consider whether at the  time  of  the  hearing  on  14
    February 2019, the Judge had followed appropriate country guidance. The
    Judge should also have taken into account that in SG (Iraq) v Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2012]  EWCA  Civ  940  the  Court  of
    Appeal found that decision  makers  must  take  country  guidance  into
    account and follow it unless "very strong grounds supported  by  cogent
    evidence" indicates that they should not.

8.    In paragraph 20 of his  decision,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Talbot
    relied on unspecified "widely available country information  (including
    the most recent CPIN reports)" to find that the security  situation  in
    Kirkuk has changed. The only detail he provided of this evidence was in
    paragraph 22 of his decision,  which  in  fact  stated  that  "security
    conditions have improved since the Islamic State's control of territory
    was disrupted but IS fighters are active in some areas of  the  country
    and security conditions are fluid".  In paragraph 23 he  also  accepted
    evidence  relied  on  by  the  Appellant  which  indicated  that  there
    continued to be "violent conflict and terrorist attacks in  the  Kirkuk
    area" and that there were "active security  concerns  which  pose  some
    risk to civilians and not only to members of the armed  forces".   This
    evidence would not appear to meet the  test  of  "very  strong  grounds
    supported by cogent evidence" to show that the country  guidance  which
    was current at the date of the appeal should not be followed.

9.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Talbot also relied on  the  decision  in  The
    Queen on the application of Qaraman Mohamed Amin v Secretary  of  State
    for the  Home  Department  [2017]  EWHC  2417  (Admin).  However,  this
    judicial review decision was not capable on its own  of  overturning  a
    country guidance decision and was at best persuasive. In  addition,  it
    had been handed down on 15  September  2017  which  was  prior  to  the
    decision in AAH (Iraq) CG [2018] UKUT 0021 and had not impacted on that
    country guidance to the extent to  change  the  Upper  Tribunal's  mind
    about its country guidance.

 10. In addition, when considering whether the Appellant  had  lost  contact
    with his relatives in Iraq in 2015, First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Talbot
    may have taken into account the oral evidence given before him  but  he
    had failed to take into account the objective evidence relating to  the
    violence and disruption which occurred in Kirkuk in 2015 and the  years
    which followed and which led to the mass displacement of  those  living
    in that area.  In addition, First-tier Tribunal Judge Talbot  had  also
    relied on HK &  Others  (minors  -  indiscriminate  violence  -  forced
    recruitment by Taliban - contact with family  members)  Afghanistan  CG
    [2010] UKUT 378. However, this was country  guidance  relating  to  the
    factual situation in Afghanistan for unaccompanied children and was not
    binding in relation to the situation in Iraq.

11.  As a consequence, I find that there were errors of  law  in  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Talbot's decision.

12.  I also  agree  with  the  parties  that,  as  the  Judge's  credibility
    findings were not sustainable the appeal  should  be  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed on the asylum grounds.

(2)  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  de  novo
    on international protection grounds  by  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    other than First-tier Tribunal Judges Talbot or Chohan.

Nadine Finch
Signed                                  Date 28 February 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch
