
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00044/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard Remotely via Skype for Business|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31 March 2021                     |On 12 April 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     MHM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Johnrose
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a male citizen  of  Iraq.  He  appeals  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal against a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  was
    promulgated on 2 October 2020.

 2. At the Upper Tribunal initial hearing heard remotely on 31 March  2021,
    Mr Diwnycz, who appeared for the Secretary of State, told me  that  the
    appeal was not opposed for the  following  reasons.  First,  the  judge
    (apparently following an error initiated at the Case Management Review)
    wrongly proceeded on the basis that the appellant would be returned  to
    Sulemaniyah and not Baghdad. Mr Diwnycz  said  that  all  non-voluntary
    returns continue to be to Baghdad  only.  Secondly,  the  Secretary  of
    State agrees that the judge erred at ([25] - on page 7- there  are  two
    paragraphs numbered [25]) by finding that the appellant's claim to have
    been threatened by relatives of the woman  SF  could  not  be  accepted
    without corroborative evidence.

 3. I agree that the decision is flawed by  legal  error  for  the  reasons
    outlined by Mr Diwnycz. The Case  Management  Review  judge  and  Judge
    Drake who conducted the substantive hearing appear to have been  misled
    by representations  made  by  the  Presenting  Officer  regarding  non-
    voluntary returns to  Iraq  returns  but  the  fact  remains  that  the
    Tribunal's assessment of risk on  return  has  failed  to  address  the
    position of the appellant in Baghdad and how  he  might  safely  travel
    onwards to his home area. I also agree that, although he does  not  say
    so in terms, it is clear that the judge considered that he could attach
    little, if any,  weight  to  the  uncorroborated  'assertions'  of  the
    appellant. That was a error in law. Moreover, it  is  not  obvious  how
    this part of the evidence of the appellant (that he had been threatened
    by individuals in Iraq) might ever easily  be  corroborated  especially
    given that the appellant has been living in the  United  Kingdom  since
    December 2018.

 4. In the light of these errors, there will need to be a hearing de  novo.
    That hearing is better conducted  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    which this appeal is now returned for it to remake the decision.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand. The appeal is returned to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for that Tribunal to remake the decision following  a  hearing
    de novo. The parties may adduce fresh evidence provided copies  of  any
    documentary evidence (including witness statements)  are  sent  to  the
    other party and to the Upper Tribunal no less than 10 days  before  the
    next hearing.

    Listing  Directions:  first  available  date;  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    determine whether remote  or  face  to  face  hearing;  Kurdish  Sorani
    interpreter; Not Judge Drake; Manchester or Bradford (whichever  offers
    earlier date); 2 hours.






          Signed                                                        Date
31 March 2021
         Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
