
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00914/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2nd October 2018                           |On 30th October 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                    [M K]
                       (ANONYMITY direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge J. J. Maxwell, promulgated on 14th September  2017,  following  a
    hearing at Stoke-on-Trent, Bennett House, on 31st August 2017.  In  the
    determination, the judge, having found  the  Appellant's  claim  to  be
    entirely bogus and unsustainable, purported then to allow  the  appeal,
    whereupon the Respondent Secretary of State, subsequently applied  for,
    and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal,  and  thus
    the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Pakistan, and was born on [  ~  ]
    1985.  He appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  dated  13th
    January  2017,  refusing  his  claim  for   asylum   and   humanitarian
    protection, pursuant to paragraph 339F of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3.  The  basis  of  the  Appellant's  claim  is  that  he  is  a  Kashmiri
    nationalist, fighting for the rights of people in Azad Kashmir,  to  be
    liberated from any foreign occupation, and to  have  independence.   He
    claims that he became a local member in his village and  became  active
    in his party.  Due to his activities he was given an interview with the
    party in 2007.  He was then given full membership to recruit people and
    put up posters and go door to door.  He was  not  paid  for  this.   He
    dedicated himself to the cause of independence.  His  family  supported
    him.  He was then elected as vice president after  this.   He  suffered
    threats and harassment from 2007 onwards.  The situation got worse.  He
    received threats from  the  intelligence  services.   He  was  told  in
    threatening letters that he would  be  killed  by  the  police  or  the
    intelligence services.  In June 2011 elections were held in Kashmir and
    he was blocked by a group of hostile people  who  wanted  him  to  sign
    papers to show his approval of Pakistan and this he refused to do.

 4. Following his arrival in the  UK,  the  Appellant  has  been  attending
    meetings in London and Birmingham.  He is a general secretary  for  the
    party in  Nottingham.   He  fears  he  will  be  killed  by  his  local
    Government and police if he were to  return  to  Pakistan  due  to  his
    political activities (paragraph 17).

The Judge's Findings

 5. The judge, at the hearing on 31st August 2017, found that the Appellant
    was not in attendance, and  nor  was  anybody  else  appearing  on  his
    behalf.   The  judge  found  that  no  reason   was   given   for   the
    nonattendance.  He concluded that it was not a  funding  issue  because
    the Appellant did have benefit of legal aid.  In fact, the appeal ought
    to have been properly heard on 28th February 2017, but  an  application
    was made by his former representative for an adjournment  because  they
    wanted to rely upon expert evidence from a psychiatrist and a  document
    verifying through an expert the Pakistani first incident  reports,  but
    none of this was available when Judge  Maxwell  sat  to  determine  the
    appeal.   And,  neither  was  there  any  explanation.   There  was  no
    application for an adjournment either.  The judge proceeded to hear the
    appeal (see paragraph 9).

 6. The judge found there to be "significant  credibility  issues"  in  the
    Appellant's case.  These ranged from vague responses when  asked  about
    party policies, to inconsistencies in his asylum interview, to when  he
    acquired the membership card for his party.  Importantly also the judge
    referred to how the Appellant had been unable  to  accurately  describe
    the flag for his party (see paragraph 22(vi)).  The Appellant was  also
    inconsistent about the  injuries  he  received,  referring  to  how  he
    "received a bullet" but then stating it was not a bullet but that there
    were knives involved and he was hit on the head and arm (see  paragraph
    22(vi)).  The judge was not  satisfied  that  there  was  an  extremely
    largescale fight and a public disturbance in 2000 involving  2,000  and
    3,000 people because there were no such reports in the media at all.

 7. Finally, the judge concluded that he could not ignore the fact that the
    Appellant had failed to attend the hearing of this appeal,

         "Particularly as it was  adjourned  for  the  specific  purpose  of
         enabling him to adduce evidence for which the funding was in place.
          I draw the inference he is not prepared to allow his  evidence  to
         be tested.  I find this significantly undermines the credibility of
         his account" (see paragraph 22(ix)).

 8. The judge then went on to consider a letter from Tanvir  Azam,  who  is
    the party president of the district (at paragraph  24),  together  with
    "series of newspaper articles submitted by the Appellant in support  of
    both his claimed activities in  Kashmir  and  in  the  United  Kingdom"
    (paragraph 25).  The judge concluded that the veracity and accuracy  of
    these articles was not an issue.  The issue was whether  "the  Pakistan
    Authorities would or might  be  inclined  to  believe  their  contents"
    (paragraph 25).  The judge observed that if they did  not  then  it  is
    clear that their conclusion would be  that  the  Appellant  was  not  a
    threat to anyone.  There were no less than seventeen  articles  in  the
    bundle (paragraph 25).

 9. The judge's firm conclusion was that,

         "I do not find any of the documentation submitted by the  Appellant
         can be accurate or  reliable  however,  so  far  as  the  newspaper
         articles are  concerned,  it  is  fruitless  expectation  that  the
         Pakistani Authorities would apply this standard if they  are  aware
         of these newspaper articles" (paragraph 27).

10. Against this background, the judge  concluded  "with  the  greatest  of
    reluctance" that the Appellant, on the lower standard would be at  risk
    of persecution if returned to Pakistan "even if, as I suspect, this  is
    a cynical and dishonest claim.  The nature of the persecution  is  such
    that relocation would not be a viable option as he would remain at risk
    wherever he settled in Pakistan" (paragraph 30).  The  judge  proceeded
    to allow the appeal.

Grounds of Application

11. The grounds of application state that the judge erred  in  law,  having
    found that there were several issues which undermined  the  Appellant's
    credibility (at paragraph 22) and having concluded  (at  paragraph  30)
    that this was a "cynical and dishonest claim".  The judge's reasons for
    allowing the appeal seems to be solely  on  account  of  the  purported
    newspaper articles produced by the Appellant,  even  though  the  judge
    found (at paragraph 27) that none of the documentation submitted by the
    Appellant to be accurate or reliable.  The judge's reasoning  seems  to
    be that the Pakistani Authorities would not distinguish between genuine
    and false articles.  However, it was not clear why the  judge  believed
    that such a fraudulent article would  come  to  the  attention  of  the
    Pakistani Authorities or why they would  not  be  able  to  distinguish
    between genuine and  false  articles.   Accordingly  the  decision  was
    irrational.

12. On 14th November 2017, permission to appeal was granted by the Tribunal
    on the basis of YB (Eritrea) [2008] EWCA Civ  360  (at  paragraph  15),
    which draws attention to opportunistic and insincere claims, being such
    which the Authorities would be in a position to recognise  as  such  in
    the home country, were a person to be returned there.

Submissions

13. At the hearing before me on 2nd October 2018, Mr Mills  submitted  that
    he would rely upon the grounds of application.  The Appellant  had,  in
    fact, not been reporting for quite a period of time, and it may well be
    that he had absconded.  Nevertheless, this was  a  decision  which  was
    unsustainable.  The  judge  had  found  the  newspaper  reports  to  be
    unreliable and to be contrived for the purpose of simply gaining  leave
    to remain in the UK.  At paragraph 27, the judge is  quite  clear  that
    the endeavour by the Appellant in this regard is such that none of  the
    documentation is "accurate or  reliable".   However,  the  judge  then,
    without any foundation, went on to say that it was fruitless to  expect
    the Pakistani Authorities  to  be  able  to  distinguish  genuine  from
    nongenuine documents.  There was no basis for this.   Mr  Mills  relied
    upon YB (Eritrea).

14. The Appellant was not in attendance, and neither was  there  anyone  on
    his behalf to speak for him, and I heard  nothing  therefore  from  the
    Appellant's side.

Error of Law

15. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.

16. First, there can hardly be a more important issue to a  person  without
    legal status in the UK, and their attendance at a hearing  to  seek  to
    establish a more firmer basis for  their  residence  in  this  country.
    Yet, this is an Appellant who has persistently failed  to  attend.   He
    has done so without any reasons.  He has done so even  when  there  has
    been legal aid  in  place.   He  has  done  so  without  providing  any
    documentation in the form of a proper bundle  for  the  Authorities  to
    consider.

17. Second, the decision by  the  judge  is  plainly  unsustainable  below,
    because he has found the Appellant to have been engaged in  "a  cynical
    and dishonest  claim"  (paragraph  30).   He  has  found  none  of  the
    documentations submitted to have been accurate or  reliable  (paragraph
    27).  The only reason why the appeal was  then  allowed  was  that  the
    judge found that the Authorities in  Pakistan  would  not  be  able  to
    distinguish between a genuine and an untruthful account.  That does not
    follow.

18. It does not follow also because the articles in question  do  not  name
    the Appellant.  Moreover, in a country as  large  as  Pakistan,  it  is
    entirely speculative to assume that the Authorities would, in the first
    instance, be aware of what various regional newspapers were publishing;
    and the second instance, be concerned so much as to care what was being
    said, especially if what  was  being  published  was  with  a  view  to
    bolstering an otherwise fraudulent asylum claim.

19. The decision in YB (Eritrea) [2008] EWCA Civ 360 makes this quite clear
    (at paragraph 15) and there  is  no  rule  of  law  that  an  Appellant
    succeeds simply because of a sur place claim which  would  have  to  be
    taken at face value in the home country.  That is not so.

Notice of Decision

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.   I  have  taken
    into account the findings of the judge, the evidence  before  him,  and
    the submissions that I have heard today.  For the reasons I have  given
    above, the appeal of the Appellant is dismissed.

21. No anonymity direction is made.

22. I dismiss the appeal of the Appellant.


Signed                              Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 22nd October 2018
