
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA006322017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 26 July 2017                           |On 18 August 2017                 |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                                    s H A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Naik, Counsel instructed by Islington Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. I do so in order to avoid  a  likelihood
    of serious harm arising to the  appellant  from  the  contents  of  her
    protection claim.

 2. This is an appeal against the decision promulgated on 11  May  2017  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Seelhoff which refused the  protection  claim
    of the appellant.

 3. This case has a somewhat complicated history.  For the purposes of this
    decision the background is as follows.  The appellant is from  Somalia.
    It is accepted that she is from the Ashraf minority clan and originates
    from El Wak in the Gedo area.

 4. The appellant married in 1990. Her oldest child, a daughter,  was  born
    in 1992. Her second child, a son, was born in 1993.

 5. The appellant divorced her first husband around 1993. She  married  her
    second husband in 1994. Her first husband died in 1995.  The  appellant
    and her second husband did not have children. In 2000 the appellant was
    raped in front of her husband by clan  militia.   In  2001  her  second
    husband left Somalia because of the difficulties there.  The  appellant
    and her children from her first marriage remained  in  Somalia,  living
    with the family of her second husband.

 6. It was then understood by the appellant and her family that her  second
    husband  had  died.   Her  brothers  and  her  first  husband's  family
    pressured her to marry her first husband's brother and she did so.  She
    had three children from that marriage, twins born in  2001  and  a  son
    born in 2005.

 7. The appellant then discovered that her second husband was not dead  but
    was living in the UK with refugee status.  Her third  husband  and  his
    family agreed that her second marriage  remained  valid  and  that  the
    third marriage should not have  been  contracted.  The  appellant  then
    travelled to Ethiopia in 2006 with four of  her  children,  her  oldest
    child remaining in Somalia. The appellant was granted  leave  to  enter
    the UK as the dependant of a refugee, her second husband.  In 2008  she
    came to the UK, leaving the children in  the  care  of  her  sister  in
    Ethiopia. She visited them in 2009.

 8. The appellant and her second husband had a child together in the UK  in
    2009 but their relationship broke down and they separated in 2010.  The
    appellant arranged for her four children in Ethiopia to make  a  family
    reunion application to join her. Only her eldest son was granted  entry
    clearance.

 9. In December 2012 the  appellant  learned  that  her  daughter  who  had
    remained in Somalia who had  married  and  became  pregnant,  had  been
    killed. The appellant maintains that she was told that this was because
    it had become known to Al Shabab that the appellant had entered into  a
    bigamous or adulterous marriage with her third husband.  The  appellant
    maintains that this event led her to claim asylum in her own right on 7
    December 2012.

10. The respondent refused the appellant's asylum claim in a decision dated
    6 January 2017.  The appellant appealed and the  hearing  before  Judge
    Seelhoff took place on 25 April 2017. The decision refusing the  appeal
    was promulgated on 11 May 2017.

11. The appellant raises three grounds of challenge against the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal:

          i) She is at risk of mistreatment  in  Mogadishu  for  a  Refugee
             Convention reason and the First-tier Tribunal failed to assess
             this aspect of her claim

         ii) She cannot relocate to an area in Somalia where she  will  not
             face mistreatment as she cannot travel safely  from  Mogadishu
             to El Wak

        iii) Even if she could travel safely to El Wak,  she  would  be  at
             risk there as someone perceived  to  transgressed  Sharia  law
             because of her improper marriage to her third husband

Ground One

12. At [57] the First-tier Tribunal Judge found that the appellant faced an
    Article 15(c) risk in Mogadishu as she would be returning as  a  single
    woman, a member of a minority clan with no formal links to the city and
    had limited access to funds.  That finding followed the guidance of the
    Upper Tribunal in MOJ & Ors (Return to  Mogadishu)  Somalia  CG  [2014]
    UKUT 00442 (IAC) at (xii) of the head note:


         "(xii) ... On the other hand, relocation in Mogadishu for a  person
         of a minority clan  with no former links to the city, no access  to
         funds and no other form  of  clan,  family  or  social  support  is
         unlikely to be realistic as, in the absence of means to establish a
         home and some form of ongoing financial support  there  will  be  a
         real risk of  having  no  alternative  but  to  live  in  makeshift
         accommodation within an IDP camp where there is a real  possibility
         of having to live in conditions that  will  fall  below  acceptable
         humanitarian standards."

13. The appellant maintains that the First-tier Tribunal  was  required  to
    find, first, whether she was a refugee if returned to Mogadishu, as was
    proposed, and, only if that was not shown to be so, whether  she  faced
    an Article 15 (c) risk. She had argued before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    that as a lone, minority clan woman with no family or  clan  protection
    available in Mogadishu, she had made out a claim to face persecution as
    a member of a particular social group.

14. The appellant relied on the country information  showing  a  particular
    risk to women, for example, the respondent's "Country  Information  and
    Guidance Somalia: Women fearing gender-based harm/violence" (CIG) which
    states at 1.2.15:

         "There is generalised and widespread discrimination  towards  women
         in Somalia. Sexual and gender-based violence -  including  domestic
         violence, rape, sexual abuse, exploitation  and  trafficking  -  is
         widespread and  committed  with  impunity  by  a  range  of  actors
         including government security forces, members of  armed  opposition
         groups,  militias,  family  and   community   actors   and   AMISOM
         peacekeepers. Internally Displaced Persons (IDP) women,  especially
         those from minority clans, are particularly exposed to  sexual  and
         gender-based violence."

15. The appellant also relied on paragraph 1.2.7 of the  CIG  which  states
    that "Female returnees in particular face threats against the person in
    IDP camps, where the Somali National Police Force are unable to provide
    protection, especially those belonging to minority clans."

16. It was not suggested before me for the respondent  that  the  appellant
    did not face persecution as a member of a particular  social  group  in
    Mogadishu. The respondent's defence to this ground was that in order to
    show that she is a refugee in Mogadishu, the appellant must  also  show
    that  it  is  not  reasonable  to  expect  her  to  relocate  to  avoid
    persecution. The  failure  to  assess  whether  she  is  a  refugee  in
    Mogadishu could only be material if one of the other  two  grounds  had
    merit and the appellant was able to show  that  she  either  could  not
    access El Wak or would still be at risk there. That appeared to  me  to
    be a correct analysis and it is therefore  necessary  to  look  at  the
    second and third grounds before reaching a final decision on the  first
    ground.

Ground Two

17. The First-tier Tribunal's view on  the  ability  of  the  appellant  to
    travel to El Wak is at [59]:

         "It was not suggested in Counsel's submissions that  the  Appellant
         could not travel to El-Waq."

18. However, the skeleton argument for the appellant that  was  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal put forward at paragraph 42 that the  Tribunal  was
    required to consider the risk of the appellant's travel from  Mogadishu
    to her home area.

19. Further, the skeleton argument referred the First-tier Tribunal to  the
    CIG on risks to women travelling in Somalia. Paragraph 1.2.17of the CIG
    stated:

         "Furthermore 'women travelling without male  friends  or  relatives
         are in general likely to face a real risk of sexual violence' ..."

    and at paragraph 1.2.19:

         "For areas of south and central Somalia which  are  not  under  the
         control of Al Shabaab, AMM and others found that family and/or clan
         connections may have an important part to play in  determining  the
         reasonableness of a proposed place of relocation.  Travel  by  land
         across southern and central Somalia to  a  home  area  or  proposed
         place of relocation may  well,  in  general,  pose  real  risks  of
         serious harm, not only from Al Shabaab checkpoints but  also  as  a
         result of the present famine conditions.  Women travelling  without
         male friends or relatives are in general likely to face a real risk
         of sexual violence (see paragraphs 604-605)."

20. The respondent argues that, albeit the First-tier Tribunal should  have
    made an assessment of the risk of the journey to El  Wak,  this  ground
    has no merit as it was found that the appellant would be  able  to  get
    assistance from her family in order  to  return  home.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's assessment of the availability  of  support  from  her
    brothers is found at [48] and [49]:

         "48. ... there is no reason to believe that her  brother  would  no
             longer be in the region.  The Appellant would also likely have
             significant clan ties in that  area  albeit  to  her  minority
             clan.

         49.  The Appellant has claimed that she is not on good  terms  with
             her brothers on a number of occasions.  However the Respondent
             has not accepted this because the Appellant's brothers seem to
             have been active and involved with her  marriages  albeit  the
             Appellant also says that their support was typically dependent
             on what they stood to gain from her being in the  relationship
             she was in at any given time.  Even if the Appellant  were  to
             go to El-Waq she would continue to have a son in  the  UK  and
             access to resources from here.  If  the  Appellant's  brothers
             believed that they would gain from  her  marrying  a  man  who
             lived in England, it seems logical  that  they  would  believe
             that they might gain from her having a son living lawfully  in
             England.  The Appellant would be  returning  to  Somalia  with
             some basis for bargaining for support from her family and even
             if she is not on good terms with  them  it  is  reasonable  to
             expect her to access what support she can."

21. The First-tier Tribunal judge goes on at [58] to find that:

         "Given that the Appellant is likely to have significant  clan  ties
         and potentially family ties in that city (El Wak) I find  that  her
         removal to Somalia  would  not  place  the  UK  in  breach  of  its
         obligations under the refugee Convention."

22. In my  judgment,  the  findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the
    appellant's brothers being prepared to offer her some support, even  if
    only out of self-interest, were made in the context  of  the  appellant
    having managed to return to El Wak. There  was  no  assessment  of  the
    risks of the journey and whether her brothers would travel to Mogadishu
    to assist her.

23. The country evidence suggests that the risks to women are, in  general,
    high and there is  the  specific  country  evidence  on  attempting  to
    relocate set out above in [19]. In that context, as  indicated  in  the
    grant of permission to appeal it is not:

         "inevitable that the judge would also have found that the appellant
         would have male relatives who would be  prepared  to  meet  her  at
         Mogadishu airport and take her home or that there would then be  no
         risk to the appellant en route".

24. I am satisfied that the decision discloses a material error in  failing
    to assess whether the  appellant  could  be  expected  to  travel  from
    Mogadishu to El Wak and that this aspect of the appeal must be re-made.



Ground Three

25. The appellant's third ground is that even were it possible for  her  to
    reach El Wak she also  faces  a  risk  of  persecution  for  a  Refugee
    Convention reason there and the First-tier Tribunal did not assess that
    aspect of her claim correctly.  The conclusion on this  aspect  of  the
    claim is set out at [58]:

         "In respect of return to El-Waq, I reach a different  decision.   I
         do not accept that there is any evidence of any  specific  risk  to
         the Appellant over and above the risk to other Somali women in that
         region.  I do not accept that there is any evidence to show that Al-
         Shabab currently have significant control over that city.  I do not
         accept that there is any rational  basis  for  a  belief  that  the
         Appellant is personally at risk of being targeted on account of her
         history.  There is no rational reason for believing that Al  Shabab
         would become aware of the Appellant's history nor that  they  would
         consider targeting her to be a priority in a city that they do  not
         control.  The risk to the Appellant in my assessment is  no  higher
         than the risk to any other woman in  that  city.   Given  that  the
         Appellant is likely to have significant clan ties  and  potentially
         family ties in that city I find that her removal to  Somalia  would
         not place the UK in breach of its  obligations  under  the  refugee
         Convention."

26. In support of this ground, the appellant relied on paragraph 12 of  her
    skeleton argument before the First-tier  Tribunal  which  set  out  her
    claim to be at risk in El-Wak at 12.g, thus:

         "she is woman who would be considered to  have  contravened  Sharia
         law by virtue of (sic) because of having married her third  husband
         when her second husband was still alive unbeknown to her and  would
         also face risk from Islamic militants, including Shabaab."

27. The appellant maintains that this aspect of her claim  remained  to  be
    decided even if it was not accepted that her daughter had  been  killed
    because of her mother's perceived adultery. The First-tier Tribunal was
    therefore in error in [58] and also at [47] in stating that:

         "Because I have not  accepted  that  the  Appellant's  daughter  is
         likely to have been killed  in  the  circumstances  described,  the
         Appellant would at most be facing risks on return to Somalia  as  a
         sole woman of minority claim ethnicity."

28. It was submitted that the claim of risk in her home area also  remained
    to be decided even where the First-tier Tribunal found at [50]-[52] and
    [58] that Al Shabab was no longer active in El Wak. Her argument before
    the First-tier Tribunal was that the risk  arose  not  solely  from  Al
    Shabab but from other pro-Islamic militia and sections  of  society  in
    the context of the disproportionate mistreatment of women in Somalia.

29. This part of  her  claim  also  required  determination  even  if  some
    protection was available from her brothers and her  clan  as  found  at
    [48]-[50] and [58] given the country evidence of a heightened  risk  to
    women and an even higher risk to minority clan women. Her vulnerability
    was shown by the undisputed history of her having been raped  in  front
    of her family in 2001, notwithstanding the presence of her husband  and
    the rape taking place in the area where it is  presumed  she  would  be
    able to access protection from her brothers  and  other  minority  clan
    members. The risk to  her  could  only  be  greater  now,  without  the
    protective presence of a husband and after her perceived adultery.

30. It is not my conclusion  that  the  assessment  of  this  part  of  the
    appellant's claim discloses a material error on a  point  of  law.  The
    claim is that the appellant will be perceived  as  having  transgressed
    Sharia law or Islamic  mores.  The  appellant  may  well  have  such  a
    subjective fear but it is  not  made  out  when  assessed  against  the
    country evidence. The materials before the First-tier Tribunal did  not
    show that Al Shabab or other Islamic militia had a meaningful  presence
    in El Wak or that civilians in the area acted in the manner  feared  by
    the appellant. As the First-tier Tribunal indicated at [45], it is  not
    clear how her history of having married her third  husband  whilst  her
    second husband, unbeknownst to her, was still alive, would become known
    to third parties. Her third husband and his family did not mistreat her
    on this basis but accepted the situation and allowed her to  travel  to
    Ethiopia with the children whose fathers were both from that family.

31. For these reasons I did not find the third ground had merit.

Re-making of the protection claim

32. There was agreement between the parties that the evidence for  the  re-
    making was contained in the documents before me and that there  was  no
    requirement here for a rehearing. The parties made submissions  on  the
    particular points they wished to  highlight  in  the  remaking  of  the
    appeal.

33. I proceeded to remake the decision. As above, the only  aspect  of  the
    clam that must be re-made is an assessment of whether  it  is  possible
    for the appellant to travel from Mogadishu where she would be  at  risk
    to her home area of El Wak where she would not. If she could show  that
    she could not relocate, she would make out a claim to be a  refugee  in
    Mogadishu. If it was reasonable for her to travel to El Wak  she  would
    not have shown that she was in need of international protection.

34. I do not go behind the finding of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the
    appellant could expect some support from her brothers and clan  if  she
    returned to El Wak as it was not subject to challenge. It  remains  the
    case that the appellant has been consistent throughout this claim  from
    her first witness statement that was  before  the  respondent,  in  her
    asylum interview and in her further witness statement produced for  the
    appeal that she was, in effect, regarded as a chattel to  be  used  for
    their own gain by her brothers. The findings of the First-tier Tribunal
    did not indicate otherwise, stating that she would  be  a  position  of
    having to bargain for support on the basis of what she might be able to
    provide from her son in the UK.

35. I considered  this  aspect  of  the  appellant's  profile  against  the
    materials cited above in [12] on the endemic gender-based  violence  in
    Somalia, the degree of risk being heightened for a minority clan woman.
    There is the additional material set out at [17] above on attempting to
    travel in order to relocate giving rise to "real risks of serious harm"
    in general, that risk being heightened for women and still more so  for
    minority clan women.

36. My conclusion is that the country material supports the claim  that  it
    is not sufficiently likely that the  level  of  support  likely  to  be
    available to this particular appellant from her  brothers  or  minority
    clan members from El Wak would not extend to  them  being  prepared  to
    take the risk of travelling to Mogadishu to meet her and accompany  her
    back to El Wak.

37. It is unarguably not reasonable for the appellant to attempt to  return
    to El Wak unaccompanied. She has therefore shown that she is a  refugee
    because of the persecution she would  face  in  Mogadishu  as  a  lone,
    minority clan woman with no protection or connections there at all.

38. The appellant's claim for asylum and under Article 3 succeeds  on  that
    basis, therefore.

Notice of Decision

39. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error on  a  point
    of law and is set aside to be remade.

40. I remake the asylum appeal as allowed.

41. I remake the Article 3 claim as allowed.


Signed   [pic]                      Date: 16 August 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
