
                                    [pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00960/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford by Skype for       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|business                             |                                     |
|On the 19 August 2020                |On 01 September 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     AND

                                     SA
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R. Petterson, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms M. Cleghorn, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
appellant


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:

      1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision
         of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Moran) (hereinafter  referred  to
         as the "FtTJ") who allowed his  protection  appeal  in  a  decision
         promulgated on the 15th March 2020.

      2. Whilst the Secretary of State is the appellant,  for  the  sake  of
         convenience I intend to refer to the parties as  they  were  before
         the First-tier Tribunal.

      3. I make a  direction  regarding  anonymity  under  Rule  14  of  the
         Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal  Rules)  Rules  2008  as  the
         proceedings relate to the  circumstances  of  a  protection  claim.
         Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise  the
         appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him. This  direction  applies
         both to the appellant and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
         with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

      4. The hearing took place on 19 August 2020, by  means  of  Skype  for
         Business. which has been consented to and not objected  to  by  the
         parties. A face to face hearing was not held  because  it  was  not
         practicable, and both parties  agreed  that  all  issues  could  be
         determined in a remote hearing.  I conducted the hearing from court
         at Bradford IAC. The advocates attended remotely via  video.  There
         were no  issues  regarding  sound,  and  no  substantial  technical
         problems were encountered during the hearing  and  I  am  satisfied
         both advocates were able to make  their  respective  cases  by  the
         chosen means. I am grateful to Ms Petterson  and  Ms  Cleghorn  for
         their clear oral submissions.

Background:

      5. The appellant's claim is summarised in the decision of the FtTJ  at
         paragraph 15.   The  appellant  is  an  Iraqi  citizen  of  Kurdish
         ethnicity from Kuz Khurmatu.

      6. Between April - May 2018 he started work in a chicken factory  with
         his cousin. It is stated that members of the militia group  Hash-al
         Shaabi frequently attended the factory,  assaulted  him  and  stole
         chickens.

      7. On a date in November, members  of  the  militia  attended  at  the
         factory in 3-4 vehicles in the early hours of the morning intent on
         stealing more chickens. He remained in the building, but his cousin
         went outside. The appellant saw that they were holding a gun to his
         cousin's head and as the appellant  went  to  go  out,  his  cousin
         shouted at him not to go as he was  opening  the  door.  Then  then
         fired at the door but he was not hit. The appellant fired back some
         shots from the window and then ran away.

      8. Having escaped he tried to  return  home  a  few  hours  later  but
         noticed that the house was surrounded so he went to the home of the
         owner of the factory who informed the appellant that his cousin had
         been killed. He  drove  the  appellant  to  Sulaymaniyah  where  he
         arranged travel with someone  else  and  the  appellant  left  Iraq
         overland via Turkey.

      9. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 28 February 2019 and
         made a claim for asylum on the same day.

     10. His personal documents were left at the factory after he had  left,
         and it was assumed by the appellant that was how the  militia  were
         able to know of his address.

     11. He last had contact with his mother when he was in Turkey  and  she
         told him that they were going to her home and harming  her.  He  is
         not in contact with anyone else in Iraq and has no family or  other
         support network in the IKR. His father died in 1991 and has no male
         relatives. He has approached the Red Cross in an  effort  to  trace
         family members, but they have not been able to do so.

     12. In a decision letter dated 19 January 2020 the  Respondent  refused
         his claim for asylum. It was accepted that he  was  a  national  of
         Iraq and of Kurdish ethnicity.

     13. The decision letter considered that  he  did  not  have  a  genuine
         subjective fear on return to Iraq. As to his claim that he would be
         at risk from the Has Militia the respondent did not accept that  he
         had given a credible or consistent claim.

     14. In summary, whilst it was accepted that the Hashd-al Shaabi  had  a
         presence in Tuz  and  that  there  had  been  external  reports  of
         violations committed in the area, his account of being specifically
         targeted by the militia had  been  inconsistent   and  it  was  not
         accepted that he had been targeted by the militia as claimed.

     15. Consideration was also given to Article 15 (c)  in the light of the
         country  guidance  decision  in    SMO,   KSP   and   IM   (Article
         15(c);identity documents) Iraq  CG  [20199]  UKUT  00400   Specific
         consideration was given to documentation and feasibility of  return
         (excluding the IKR) and internal relocation within  Iraq  including
         the IKR.

     16. His claim was therefore  refused  on  all  grounds.  The  appellant
         lodged grounds of appeal against that decision. The appeal  against
         that decision came before the FtTJ on the 6 March 2020 and  in  the
         decision promulgated on 15 March 2020 his appeal was allowed.

     17. The FtTJ set out his analysis of the evidence and his  findings  of
         fact at paragraphs  15  -  21.  After  considering  the  issues  of
         credibility that had been raised on behalf of  the  respondent  and
         conducting an analysis of the evidence  before  him,  he  concluded
         that he was satisfied that the core of the  appellant's  claim  was
         true. The judge stated that  he  had  given  an  account  that  was
         detailed and consistent with the background  country  evidence  and
         therefore accepted that the appellant would be at risk  of  serious
         harm from the militia if returned to his home area in Iraq. At [21]
         the judge observed that it had not been argued that he could  avoid
         any risk by relying on state protection.

     18. As to the issue of relocation, the FtTJ accepted his evidence  that
         he was not in contact with his family and whilst he  had  attempted
         to locate them via the Red Cross he had not located them. The judge
         also found he had no family or other support  network  in  the  IKR
         region. At [22] the FtTJ considered that he would  be  returned  to
         Baghdad and would have to make his way to the IKR  from  there  but
         would need a CSID or an INID to do so and as he was not in  contact
         with his family they could not  offer  any  assistance  to  him  to
         provide documentation. Having  considered  the  objective  material
         advanced on behalf of the appellant (see paragraph  17)  the  judge
         accepted that the new INID system had been rolled out in  his  home
         area therefore in accordance with the country guidance decision  in
         SMO he would need to be in his home area to provide his  biometrics
         and as he was  not  able  to  get  there  without  the  appropriate
         documentation the judge concluded he could not safely reach the IKR
         to relocate.

     19. At [23] the judge considered that even if he was able to reach  the
         IKR that relocation for the appellant would  be  unduly  harsh.  He
         accepted that the difficulties might  be  eased  by  the  voluntary
         return payment but concluded that this was not a long-term solution
         and as the appellant had  no  other  means  of  support  the  judge
         considered that he would not be able to obtain  employment  in  the
         light of the appellant's  lack  of  any  connections,  his  limited
         skills and the high rate  of  employment  among  IDP's.  The  judge
         considered it was therefore likely that he would have to resort  to
         a critical care shelter and would not have the  means  to  pay  for
         basic necessities as his finding employment would be slim.

     20. The judge therefore allowed his appeal  on  asylum  and  Article  3
         grounds on  the  basis  that  there  was  a  reasonable  degree  of
         likelihood that he would be subjected to persecution if returned to
         Iraq being at risk from the militia and it had been conceded in the
         refusal letter that this amounted to imputed political opinion.

     21. Permission to appeal was issued and on 7 April 2020 permission  was
         refused by FtTJ Nightingale but on reconsideration was  granted  by
         Upper Tribunal Judge Allen on the 11June 2020.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

     22. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
         directions, inter alia, indicating that it was provisionally of the
         view that the error of law issue could be determined without a face
         to face hearing and that this could  take  place  via  Skype.  Both
         parties have indicated that they were content for  the  hearing  to
         proceed by this method. Therefore, the Tribunal listed the  hearing
         to enable oral submissions to be given by each of the parties.

     23. Ms Petterson on behalf of the respondent relied  upon  the  written
         grounds of appeal. There were no  further  written  submissions  on
         behalf of the respondent.  A Rule 24 response was filed  on  behalf
         of the appellant which I have read and taken into account.  I  also
         heard oral submission from the advocates, and  I  am  grateful  for
         their assistance.

Decision on error of law:

     24. It is not necessary to set out  the  submissions  of  each  of  the
         parties in full as I will set out the  relevant  aspects  of  those
         submissions when dealing with the grounds advanced on behalf of the
         Secretary of State and my consideration of those issues.

     25. Ms Petterson relied upon the written grounds.  The  grounds  submit
         that the judge  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons.  In  her  oral
         submissions Ms Petterson submitted that paragraphs 1 and 2  of  the
         grounds sought to challenge the credibility findings of the FtTJ.

     26. At paragraph 1of the written grounds it is  submitted  that  it  is
         clear that the FtTJ had concerns  around  the  credibility  of  the
         Appellant  taking  all   his  forms  of  I.D   (CSID,   Nationality
         Certificate and Passport- Para 15(v)) to a  chicken   factory  (his
         place of employment) as is made clear at Para  16(iv)(v)  and  Para
         20. The FtTJ stating "I bear in mind however that Iraq  is  a  very
         different country where having documentation to hand  may  be  much
         more important than it is in the UK." (Para 16(iv)).  With  respect
         the FTTJ had the benefit of the guidance given in SMO,  KSP  &   IM
         (Article 15(c); identity  documents)  Iraq  CG  [2019]  UKUT  00400
         (IAC); it is clear  that a passport is of little  use  within  Iraq
         (see headnote 11 of 'SMO') as a form of ID   and  it  is  therefore
         unclear why the FTTJ states  "I do not think I  can  safely  reject
         this  explanation"?

     27. At paragraph 2 it is submitted that in light of the  importance  of
         CSID  being  needed  to  navigate  check  points  throughout   Iraq
         (amongst other things) the FtTJ had given no consideration  of  the
         credibility of  the appellant failing to retain  the  CSID  on  his
         person whilst at work. As the guidance in 'SMO' makes clear this is
         a  crucial  document  and  one,  therefore,  that  individuals  can
         reasonably be expected to take steps  to  avoid  losing.  The  FtTJ
         seemingly gave no consideration  to  how  the  appellant  navigated
         checkpoints within Iraq without access to his  CSID?  The  FtTJ  at
         para 20 accepted the evidence set out at para 15 which  was  silent
         on this point?

     28. I am satisfied that  there  is  no  error  of  law  in  the  FtTJ's
         assessment of credibility and his subsequent findings of  fact.  It
         is plain from reading the  decision  that  the  FtTJ  gave  careful
         consideration  to  the  evidence  before  him  and  I  accept   the
         submission made by Ms Cleghorn that  the  FtTJ  correctly  directed
         himself by considering the evidence "in the round".

     29. At paragraph 14 the FtTJ made reference to having "reviewed all the
         evidence" and at paragraph 15 set out a summary of the  appellant's
         evidence taken from his witness statement,  his  asylum  interview,
         and his oral evidence.

     30. It is not the case that the FtTJ failed to address the  credibility
         issues which  had  been  raised  in  the  decision  letter  and  he
         expressly considered those issues at paragraph 16.

     31. In reaching his assessment of the credibility of the appellant  the
         FtTJ  carefully  weighed  the  evidence  taking  into  account  the
         consistency of the evidence. He highlighted a concern at  paragraph
         16 (iv) as to whether he would have his documents with him  at  the
         chicken factory and why he had his passport with him (at  paragraph
         16(v)). However, when making his omnibus credibility assessment  at
         paragraph 20 and having weighed up those points in the  context  of
         the evidence as whole the FtTJ stated "I  have  considered  whether
         these are significant matters to prevent him establishing his  case
         to the lower standard. His account was broadly consistent, detailed
         and consistent with the background country evidence. "

     32. As regards paragraph 1 of the respondent's  grounds,  I  accept  Ms
         Cleghorn's submissions that he weighed up an  inconsistency  as  to
         documents at the chicken farm and against his  consistency  in  the
         rest of  the  account  which  was  broadly  internally  consistent,
         detailed and consistent with  background evidence  and  found  that
         the lower of standard of proof was decisive in this  appeal. It was
         therefore reasonably open to the FtTJ to accept his account that he
         had his documents with him at the chicken farm.

     33. I fail to see how the FtTJ was in error at paragraph  16  (iv)  and
         (v) as asserted in paragraph 1 of the grounds. The FtTJ  considered
         the explanation given by the appellant  for  having  the  documents
         with him  and was entitled to take in to account  that whilst  this
         maybe surprising for someone  to  do  this  in  the  UK,  that  the
         circumstances are to be considered  against  the  backdrop  of  the
         country in question -" I bear in mind that Iraq is a very different
         country where having documentation to hand may  be  more  important
         than  it  is  in  the  UK".  Furthermore,  the  appellant  gave  an
         explanation for having a passport and it was reasonably open to the
         FtTJ to accept the explanation given which  was  reflected  in  his
         assessment at paragraph 16(v) when he stated " I do   not  think  I
         can safely reject this explanation."  As Ms Cleghorn  submits,  the
         explanation given by  the  appellant  has  some  support  from  the
         previous country guidance and that whilst now it may  be  the  case
         that a passport  is  of  little  use,  when  looking  back  at  the
         previous CG decision , it  is clear that historically   a  passport
         could assist with obtaining a  replacement CSID and could  be  used
         for internal travel.

     34. Paragraph 29 of AA (Iraq) states: 29. A CSID, INC  or  passport  is
         required in order to register for these monies.  Cash benefits  are
         only provided to the head of  household  and  family  relationships
         must be documented. In the IKR IDPs need a  copy  of  either  their
         CSID, INC or passport  in  order  to  obtain  a  residency  letter,
         without which the IDP may not be able to register for the monies or
         other services. IDPs are not permitted to  travel  within  the  IKR
         because residency cards are only applicable in the  governorate  of
         issue. All government procedures in the IKR are being  delayed  due
         to the large number of IDPs.

     35. The Tribunal acknowledges in SMO (at para 380) that:

             "We consider the position  in  relation  to  passports  to  be
             equally clear, and we accept the evidence given  by  Dr  Fatah
             that this is perceived as a document  for  international  use,
             rather  than  for  domestic  travel  or   accessing   domestic
             services.   We  recognise  that  this  represents   a   slight
             departure from the extant country guidance, in  which  it  was
             accepted that a passport could be used for internal travel.  "



     36. I am also satisfied that there is no error in the FtTJ's assessment
         of the evidence which concerned the  appellant's  ability  to  pass
         through the checkpoint. The appellant had stated  in  his  evidence
         that he had been able to pass through one checkpoint without  being
         stopped having been " waved through" as he  was  accompanied  by  a
         well-known individual ( see witness statement at paragraphs 32  and
         33 and Q 28  and  51  of  the  interview).  Ms  Cleghorn,  who  had
         represented the appellant  before  the  FtTJ  had  a  note  of  the
         evidence given orally and that he had been asked in evidence  about
         passing through and he had stated that  there  had  been  only  one
         checkpoint which he encountered and that he was waved  through  and
         also that he had avoided other checkpoints by  taking  a  different
         route. I accept the submissions  made   by  Ms  Cleghorn  that  his
         evidence was not an  unreasonable proposition and that  in  the  CG
         decision of AAH it  had been said that particularly in the IKR that
         corruption is rife and that if a person is  well  connected  enough
         they can secure jobs for friends and family members therefore it is
         not unreasonable to expect that is someone as rich and connected as
         the man claimed by the appellant, they are not going  to  face  the
         same  problems as ordinary civilians.

     37. In the light of that evidence, it was reasonably open to  the  FtTJ
         accept the appellant's account (see paragraph 16(viii)).

     38. Consequently, I see no error of law in the FtTJ's assessment of the
         evidence on the basis advanced on behalf of the respondent.

     39. I now turn to the paragraphs which Ms Petterson submitted were  her
         principal grounds namely paragraphs 3 and 4.

     40. At paragraph 3  it is submitted that the FtTJ gave no  reasons  why
         the appellant could not be expected to recall the relevant   volume
         and page reference number within the Family Book such that he could
         obtain  a replacement CSID from an Iraqi Consulate  within  the  UK
         (as per headnote 13 of  'SMO)' and that there is no obvious  reason
         why he would require his family to   remind  him  of  such  crucial
         information (see Para 391 of 'SMO').

     41. Ms Petterson therefore submitted that the appellant would therefore
         be able to obtain a CSID and as paragraph 4   submitted,  the  FtTJ
         materially erred by stating that the Appellant would need to be  in
         Iraq to secure  an ID document  (at  Para  22),  having  failed  to
         adequately explain why a replacement  CSID  could not  be  obtained
         from an Iraqi Consulate within the UK prior to  return  (see   also
         Para 383 of 'SMO'). Once in possession of the CSID from the UK  the
         Appellant would be able to return to Iraq and enrol his  biometrics
         for a new INID card in due course.

     42. Ms Cleghorn submitted that the  Appellant  studied  to  year  5  of
         primary school, he did not have a father (which is also relevant to
         the  ability  to  obtain  replacement  cards  as  it  follows   the
         patrilineal line) and worked as a chicken guard since childhood. If
         he has never had cause  to  travel   around,  or  access  schooling
         beyond  primary  school,   been   to   the   hospital   or   needed
         accommodation, then there is no reason at all that  he  would  have
         learned the details  of his CSID any more than a person in  the  UK
         would know, off the top  of  their   head,  their  driving  license
         number or passport number.

     43. In her written submissions she stated that the Tribunal  in  SMO  -
         other than mere assertion - did not give any reason  for  how  they
         reached the  conclusion that people would be able  to  'recall  the
         relevant volume and page  reference number within the family  book'
         and without more information, in the  body of SMO as  to  how  this
         would be so and how this conclusion was reached so  that  the  FtTJ
         could properly apply this reasoning, it was entirely  open  to  the
         FtTJ to  consider that a person who didn't finish  primary  school,
         without a father, and who  only ever did manual jobs locally, might
         not be able to remember their book number  details.

     44. I have carefully  considered  the  competing  submissions  set  out
         above. In my judgment, whilst the appellant had  little  education,
         part of his account was that he  had  his  CSID  with  him  at  the
         factory because  his  mother  had  advised  him  to  keep  all  his
         important documents with him. Against  that  background,  it  could
         reasonably be inferred that he would know the details of a document
         that he carried around in his possession.

     45. However, that evidence had to be seen in the light of  the  overall
         findings of fact made by the FtTJ  and  that  he  made  an  express
         finding that the appellant was not in contact with his  family  and
         that whilst he had taken steps to locate them via the Red Cross  he
         had not done so. At  paragraph  22  the  FtTJ  properly  took  into
         account that he would need a CSID or an INID in order  to  relocate
         to the IKR (via Baghdad). He stated that "as he is not  in  contact
         with  his  family  they  cannot  offer  any  assistance  with   his
         documents."

     46. In the light of the factual findings made by the FtTJ that  he  had
         no contact with his family and the specific circumstances in  which
         the lack of contact had taken place, the overall assessment of  the
         judge that he would not be able to obtain the necessary documents (
         CSID and ID documents) was one that was open to the judge. This  is
         confirmed by the country guidance decisions before the  FtTJ  which
         refers to  the  requirements  for  family  members  to  assist  the
         appellant in any application made to the Iraqi consulate in the  UK
         .

     47. Whilst the Tribunal in SMO appeared to conclude that  it  is  still
         possible to get a CSID from the embassy  in  London  (at  paragraph
         383), the likelihood of an individual successfully doing so must be
         read in light of Dr Fatah's earlier evidence on the point,  as  set
         out in the earlier country guidance cases.

     48.  The passages in AA to which the Tribunal in SMO refer are set  out
         at paragraphs 173-177:

             "173. As regards those who have an expired  or  current  Iraqi
             passport but no CSID - Dr Fatah identifies in his first report
             that a CSID may be obtained through the "Consular  section  of
             the Iraqi Embassy in London", which will send a request for  a
             replacement or renewed CSID to  the  General  Directorate  for
             Travel and  Nationality  -  Directorate  of  Civil  Status.  A
             request for a replacement  CSID  must  be  accompanied,  inter
             alia, by "any form of official  document  in  support  of  the
             applicant's identity" and the application form must be  signed
             by  "the  head  of  the  family,  or  the  legal  guardian  or
             representative to verify the truth of its contents."  He  also
             added that an applicant must also authorise a person  in  Iraq
             to act as his representative  in  order  for  that  person  to
             "follow up on the progress of the application".

             174. However, Dr Fatah continued  by  explaining  that  if  an
             individual has lost his CSID and does not  know  the  relevant
             page and book number for it, then the Iraq Embassy  in  London
             will not be able to obtain one on his behalf. Instead,  he  or
             she will have to attend the appropriate local office of family
             registration in Iraq or give  a  relative,  friend  or  lawyer
             power of attorney to obtain his or her CSID. The process of  a
             giving power of attorney to a lawyer in  Iraq  to  act  "as  a
             proxy" is commonplace and Dr Fatah had done this  himself.  He
             also explained that the power of attorney  could  be  obtained
             through the Iraq Embassy.

             175. Dr Fatah gave further evidence to the effect that  having
             a marriage certificate may be useful as it would contain  data
             found in the family records. It is, however, not  possible  to
             use a "health card" in order to obtain a CSID because there is
             no primary health care or  GP  system  in  Iraq,  but  instead
             patients attended hospital when they needed to do  so  and  no
             central records are held.

             176. There is a consensus between Dr Fatah's evidence and  the
             following more general  evidence  provided  by  UNHCR-Iraq  in
             April 2015 on the issue of obtaining CSID's from  abroad.  "In
             principle, a failed asylum seeker, or indeed any Iraqi citizen
             abroad, can acquire Iraqi documents  through  Iraqi  embassies
             and consulates. There is a special  authorization  granted  to
             these bodies to provide documents  for  Iraqi  abroad  on  the
             condition that the beneficiaries  should  have  any  available
             documents in order to prove their nationality."

             177. In summary, we conclude that it is possible for an  Iraqi
             national living in  the  UK  to  obtain  a  CSID  through  the
             consular section of the Iraqi Embassy in  London,  if  such  a
             person is able to produce a current or expired passport and/or
             the  book  and  page  number  for  their  family  registration
             details. For persons without  such  a  passport,  or  who  are
             unable to produce the relevant family registration details,  a
             power of attorney can be provided to someone in Iraq  who  can
             thereafter undertake the process of  obtaining  the  CSID  for
             such person from the Civil Status Affairs Office in their home
             governorate.  For  reasons  identified  in  the  section  that
             follows below, at the present time the process of obtaining  a
             CSID from Iraq is likely to be severely hampered if the person
             wishing to obtain the CSID is from an area where Article 15(c)
             serious harm is occurring."

     49. In 2018 Dr Fatah gave further evidence in AAH:

             "26. If applying through a consulate abroad  the  requirements
             are different. Having contacted the consulate in  London,  and
             checked on the website of the  Iraqi  embassy  in  Sweden,  Dr
             Fatah states that the authorities will require  the  applicant
             to first make a statement explaining why he needs a  CSID  and
             attach this to his application form, which must  countersigned
             by the head of the  applicant's  family  and  stamped  by  the
             consulate or embassy; he must then produce his Iraqi  passport
             and proof of status in the country where he is  applying,  the
             name of a representative (proxy) in Iraq, an  additional  form
             completed by the head of the applicant's family verifying that
             the contents of his application form were  true,  four  colour
             copies of his INC, and 10 colour  photographs.  Crucially  the
             applicant  must  be  able  to  produce  something  which   can
             establish the location of his family's details  in  the  civil
             register. This should be a CSID, an INC or birth  certificate.
             If none of these are available to the applicant he must supply
             the identity documents of his  parents.  This  evidence  again
             accords with that of Landinfo  (December  2017)  who  conclude
             that it can be difficult to obtain  replacement  ID  documents
             from an embassy abroad for the individual  who  is  unable  to
             verify his or her identity.

             27. If  you  are  in  Iraq,  and  have  all  of  the  required
             documents,   in   normal   circumstances   the   process    is
             straightforward and quick and should take no more  than  three
             days. Dr Fatah's own daughter was born in the  United  Kingdom
             and he managed to obtain her a CSID in one day from the office
             in Sulaymaniyah, upon payment of a small  fee.  Dr  Fatah  was
             less optimistic about the efficiency of the process if in  the
             United Kingdom. He has regular dealings with the consulate  in
             London and he is not impressed. He said that staff  there  are
             generally very unhelpful."

     50. At paragraph 28 of AAH Dr Fatah is recorded as saying:

             "If some of the documents were missing it might generally take
             you up to a month to collate and replace  them  all.   In  his
             live evidence, when pressed by Mr Singh, Dr Fatah acknowledged
             that it may be possible, when dealing with some officials,  to
             obtain a CSID even if one does not have all of  the  documents
             listed  above.  He  conceded  that  an   official   might   be
             'persuaded' to overlook the official  requirements,  and  that
             there may be some degree of flexibility about the  process  in
             some governates. He maintained however that it would  normally
             be the case that these documents would be  required.  The  key
             piece of information that the individual would however have to
             have would be his family's volume and page reference number in
             the civil  register.  Without  that,  the  individual  "is  in
             trouble".   He could only obtain a new CSID if  the  Registrar
             was prepared to trawl through volume after volume looking  for
             the family record. In his evidence before the Tribunal  in  AA
             (Iraq) Dr Fatah wondered if such an official would be  willing
             to undertake such a task  or  could  be  "made  willing".  The
             Tribunal concluded that this was not likely. The only way that
             a totally  undocumented  Iraqi  could  realistically  hope  to
             obtain a new  CSID  would  be  the  attendance  at  the  civil
             registry of a male family member prepared to vouch for him  or
             her.  The production of a CSID from, for instance,  an  uncle,
             would enable the Registrar to trace back through the record to
             find the individual's father, and in turn him."

     51. It is submitted therefore that he would need  a  male  relative  to
         assist. In any event, as Ms Cleghorn has pointed out,  Dr.  Fatah's
         evidence in SMO, which post-dates AAH, records at (para 366):    Dr
         Fatah did not believe that a CSID could be obtained from abroad any
         more, since it had been replaced  by  the  INID.   At  [968]-[980],
         however, he described how a CSID could have been  obtained  in  the
         past from an embassy.

     52. Thus as confirmed by the country guidance decisions before the FtTJ
         and summarised above, which refer to the  requirements  for  family
         members to assist the appellant in  any  application  made  to  the
         Iraqi consulate, this assistance would not be  forthcoming  in  the
         light of the findings of fact made by the judge as to his  lack  of
         contact with family members.

     53. The grounds at paragraph 5 submit that it is unclear why  the  FtTJ
         accepted that the new INID  card  has  been  'rolled  out'  in  the
         Appellant's  home  area  (see  para  22)  on  the  basis   of   the
         Representatives reliance (para  18) on the SSHD's CPIN of Feb  2019
         (see para 17). It is submitted that this CPIN  predates  'SMO'  and
         the guidance there heard that the roll out of the INID's was behind
         schedule (see paragraph 383 and 389 of SMO).

     54. I am satisfied that there is no  error  in  the  FtTJ's  assessment
         where  he  stated  that  the  INID  had  been  rolled  out  in  the
         appellant's home area.  I accept the submission made by Ms Cleghorn
         that it was reasonably open to  the  FtTJ  in  applying  the  lower
         standard of proof, that the INID card has been rolled  out  to  Tuz
         Khurmatu. It is impossible to say conclusively in which  parts  the
         system has been rolled out to but, it seems clear that the  excerpt
         in the CPIN only reflects part of the document on which it relies.

     55. It appears to be based on a 2017  land  info  report  (excerpts  of
         which            can            be             found             at
         https://www.refworld.org/docid/5aa914a14.html)

             2.1 Roll-out of the Issuance Program

             In correspondence  with  the  Research  Directorate,  a  legal
             counsel from an  Erbil-based  law  firm  that  provides  legal
             services in areas such as  visa,  residency,  and  immigration
             affairs, stated that

             [d]igitization of the National Registry was first commenced in
             Iraq but expanded and  included  the  Kurdistan  Region  since
             March 2016. Every Iraqi citizen now can approach the competent
             issuing authorities and claim for the Unified  Nationality  ID
             card. (Legal Counsel 25 June 2017)

             The 2017 Landinfo report states that,

             [translation]

             [a]ccording to information available on the home pages of  the
             Directorate for a national ID card (as  reported  in  Norway's
             embassy in Amman 2016), the new ID card was  first  issued  on
             September 13, 2015, in Jisr  Dyala  in  Baghdad.  Since  then,
             cards are being issued in most parts of Iraq.

             The Iraqi consulate in Oslo (telephone  conversation  November
             2016) recently informed Landinfo  that  all  Iraqis  will  get
             their own personal number that will be added  to  the  new  ID
             card. This number can be used in every circumstance.

             The consulate further informed us that the new  ID  cards  are
             issued by the same Civil Status Offices or Departments as  the
             old cards. Some of these have still not obtained the equipment
             necessary to issue the new cards, but the equipment  has  been
             distributed to all provinces  with  the  exception  of  Anbar,
             Ninewa and Salah-al-Din,  where  there  are  ongoing  military
             operations. The consulate noted, however, that it may be  that
             new cards are being issued in some peaceful areas of Salah-al-
             Din, such as Tuz Khurmatu.

     56. There is no dispute that the appellant is from  Tuz  Khurmatu.  The
         land info report  was  from  2017  and  in  consideration  of  that
         material it is reasonably likely that the system  has  been  rolled
         out in the Appellant's home area and therefore that was  a  finding
         open to the FtTJ to make.

     57. Even if that were in error, it is not material as  on  the  factual
         findings of the FtTJ which were open to him on the evidence and  in
         the light of the objective material, that the appellant  would  not
         be able to obtain a replacement CSID from abroad and  cannot  exist
         in Baghdad while trying to obtain a replacement CSID ( if  it  were
         possible there) without experiencing Article 3 conditions  for  the
         reasons set out in SMO.

     58. For those reasons, I am not satisfied that it has been demonstrated
         that the decision of the FtTJ did involve the making of an error on
         a point of law. The decision of the FtT shall stand.




         Notice of Decision

         The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making
         of an error on a point of law  and  therefore  the  decision  shall
         stand.

         Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

         Unless and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
         appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him.  This direction  applies
         both to the Appellant and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
         with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




             Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

    Dated   25 August 2020











         NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

         1.   A person seeking permission to appeal  against  this  decision
         must make a written application to the  Upper  Tribunal.  Any  such
         application must be received  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  within  the
         appropriate period after this  decision  was  sent  to  the  person
         making the application. The appropriate period varies, as  follows,
         according to the location of the individual and the  way  in  which
         the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

         2.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in
         the United Kingdom at the time that the application for  permission
         to appeal is made, and is not in detention  under  the  Immigration
         Acts, the appropriate period is 12 working days (10  working  days,
         if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

         3.   Where the person making the application is in detention  under
         the Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working  days  (5
         working days if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

         4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
         outside the United Kingdom at the time  that  the  application  for
         permission to appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10
         working days, if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

         5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,
         Christmas Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.

         6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the
         covering letter or covering email



