
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA008542016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 2nd August 2017                        |On 10th August 2017               |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     KMT
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Gayle of Elder Rahimi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Perry of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (the FtT), promulgated on 16th December 2016.

 2. The Appellant is a male Iraqi citizen of Kurdish ethnicity,  born  [  ]
    1977.  His asylum and human rights claim was refused  on  15th  January
    2016.

 3. The appeal was heard by the FtT on 28th November 2016 and dismissed  on
    all grounds.

 4. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    and permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Southern
    in the following terms;

         "It is clear from the  decision  of  the  judge  that  his  adverse
         credibility findings were driven to a significant extent by adverse
         inferences drawn pursuant to application of section 8 of  the  2004
         Act.  The grounds set out an arguable basis for complaint that  the
         judge fell into error in holding against the Appellant a failure to
         make a protection claim on return from Germany when his account was
         that he reported to the Respondent who refused to accept a  further
         claim.  It is arguable also that the finding of the judge that  the
         arrest warrant would not have survived political  changes  in  Iraq
         was not, as it should have been, informed by country evidence  said
         not to support such a view.

         The grounds identify other asserted difficulties with this decision
         of the judge which, while being commendably succinct, arguably  did
         not engage adequately with all of the evidence relied upon  by  the
         Appellant.

         All of the grounds may be argued".

 5. Following the grant of permission the Respondent submitted  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, contending, in summary, that the FtT had not erred  in  law,  and
    that the grounds amounted to a disagreement with the findings made.

 6. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the  Upper  Tribunal  to  ascertain  whether  the  FtT  decision
    contained an error of law such that it should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 7. At the commencement of the hearing Mrs Aboni indicated that she did not
    rely upon the rule 24 response in its entirety.   Mrs  Aboni  indicated
    that the Respondent conceded that the FtT had materially erred  in  law
    at paragraphs 18 and 19, in relation to feasibility of return, and  not
    making findings as to whether the Appellant has a Civil Status Identity
    Document (CSID) or would be able to obtain one  reasonably  soon  after
    arrival in Iraq.  It was therefore accepted that the  decision  of  the
    FtT needed to be set aside on that point, and  needed  to  be  re-made.
    Mrs Aboni indicated that it was not accepted that the FtT erred in  law
    in relation to the other grounds submitted on behalf of the Appellant.

 8. In making oral submissions Mr Gayle relied upon the  grounds  contained
    within the application for permission  to  appeal,  and  the  grant  of
    permission.  The grounds are not numbered in the application, but in my
    view the Appellant relies upon five grounds which are summarised below.
     In summary the Appellant contends that the  FtT  decision  is  fatally
    undermined by a failure to provide sufficient, or  sustainable  reasons
    for adverse credibility findings, and makes confused and  contradictory
    findings.

 9. The first ground relates to paragraphs 10 and 11 of the  FtT  decision.
    The FtT accepts that the Appellant reported to the  Respondent  on  his
    return from Germany in January 2005, but rejects his assertion that  he
    tried to claim asylum.  It is unclear why this assertion was  rejected.
    Mr Gayle asserted that common sense would dictate  that  the  Appellant
    tried to claim asylum when he contacted the  Respondent,  as  why  else
    would he have contacted the Respondent.

10. The second ground relates to paragraph 13 in which it is contended that
    the FtT places an unreasonable evidential burden upon the Appellant  by
    finding that there is little to link the Appellant to the Zebari  tribe
    or the Ba'ath Party other than his own  assertions.   It  is  contended
    that the FtT erred by failing to make any findings on  the  Appellant's
    evidence that his father  disappeared  very  shortly  after  an  arrest
    warrant was issued.

11. The third ground relates to paragraph 14 of the FtT  decision.   It  is
    contended that the FtT erred in  considering  background  evidence,  in
    that the background evidence relied upon does  not  state  that  arrest
    warrants issued by the National Information and Investigation Agency of
    the Iraqi  Ministry  of  Interior  are  no  longer  enforced.   It  was
    contended that the FtT had ignored evidence submitted by the Appellant,
    this evidence being letters provided from the International  Federation
    of Iraqi Refugees, and the Centre for Observance of People's Rights  in
    Iraq and Kurdistan.

12. The fourth ground relates to paragraph 15 of the FtT decision.  It  was
    contended that the FtT erred by dismissing photographs of the Appellant
    involved in demonstrations in the UK as irrelevant.  These  photographs
    showed the Appellant involved in activities which would  be  considered
    anti-regime by the new government in Iraq, as well as the regime in the
    KRG.  The FtT had found that no dates had been given, and this was  not
    accepted by the Appellant, as it was contended that he  had  explicitly
    stated that one of the demonstrations took place on 3rd August 2016.

13. The fifth ground relates to paragraphs 18 and 19 of the  FtT  decision,
    which relates to feasibility of return and documentation,  and  it  was
    contended that the FtT analysis "does not bear scrutiny".

14. Having conceded a material error of law in relation  to  paragraphs  18
    and 19, Mrs Aboni submitted that the remaining grounds did not disclose
    any material error of law, but simply amounted to a  disagreement  with
    findings properly made by the FtT.

15. In response Mr Gayle had nothing to add to his earlier submissions, but
    submitted that the decision of the FtT  should  be  set  aside  in  its
    entirety, and the appeal remitted to the FtT to be considered afresh.

16. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

17. Dealing with  the  first  ground,  and  paragraphs  10-11  of  the  FtT
    decision, the Respondent's case in the refusal decision (paragraph  51)
    was that the Appellant had made no attempt to regularise his  stay  and
    make an asylum claim until July 2010, having  returned  to  the  UK  in
    January 2005.  The Appellant's case was  that  he  attempted  to  claim
    asylum when he returned to the UK in January 2005 but his claim was not
    accepted.

18. The FtT found that the Appellant did contact the  Respondent  upon  his
    return in January 2005 as claimed,  noting  that  reporting  conditions
    were imposed at that time.  The FtT found that the  Appellant  did  not
    claim asylum, and subsequently  made  an  adverse  credibility  finding
    because of the subsequent delay in claiming asylum.  The FtT  therefore
    preferred the Respondent's account that no asylum claim had been  made,
    but in my view fails to adequately reason  this  finding.   I  set  out
    below the head note to Budhathoki (reasons for  decision)  [2014]  UKUT
    00341 (IAC) which provides guidance upon adequacy of reasoning;

         "It is generally unnecessary and unhelpful for First-tier  Tribunal
         judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised in a case.  This
         leads to judgments becoming overly long and confused and is  not  a
         proportionate  approach  to  deciding  cases.   It   is,   however,
         necessary for judges to identify and resolve key conflicts  in  the
         evidence and explain in clear and brief  terms  their  reasons,  so
         that the parties can understand why they have won or lost."

19. The losing party on this issue is the Appellant.  It is not  clear  why
    the FtT accepts that he reported to the Respondent upon his  return  to
    the UK in January 2005,  but  made  no  attempt  to  claim  asylum.   I
    conclude that this is an error of law.

20. The second ground relates to paragraph 13 of the FtT  decision.   I  do
    not find that the FtT imposed an unreasonable  evidential  burden  upon
    the Appellant.  However, I accept that no finding was made by  the  FtT
    on the Appellant's claim in the addendum to his witness statement, that
    his father was arrested and disappeared very shortly  after  an  arrest
    warrant was issued.  The failure to make a finding on evidence which  a
    party contends is material, is an error of law.

21. The third ground relates to paragraph 14 of the  FtT  decision,  and  I
    cannot see that it is specifically stated in  the  background  evidence
    that arrest warrants issued before the change of government,  would  no
    longer be enforced after the change of government in Iraq.  I find that
    the error is a failure to make a finding on evidence  provided  by  the
    Appellant, that being a letter dated 26th July 2016 from the Centre for
    Observance of People's Rights, and a letter dated 18th July  2016  from
    the International Federation of Iraqi Refugees.  This is evidence which
    the Appellant contended was material, and a failure to make  a  finding
    upon it, and a failure to explain why no weight  was  attached,  is  an
    error of law.

22. The fourth ground relates to paragraph 15 of the FtT  decision,  but  I
    find no error of law on this point.  In my view the FtT was entitled to
    find that evidence had not been provided relating to the purpose of the
    demonstrations said to be shown in the photographs,  nor  was  evidence
    given as to why the Appellant  would  come  to  the  attention  of  the
    government in Iraq as a result of his participation.

23. The fifth ground relates to paragraphs 18 and 19 of the  FtT  decision,
    in which the FtT correctly  referred  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  country
    guidance in force at the  date  of  the  FtT  decision.   That  country
    guidance was found to be incorrect by the Court of Appeal, in  relation
    to the issue of feasibility on return and consideration of  whether  an
    Appellant has a CSID or can be expected to obtain one after arrival  in
    Iraq.  The Court of Appeal decision is AA (Iraq) [2017]  EWCA  Civ  944
    and was published on 11th July 2017.  The FtT did not  err  in  relying
    upon country guidance, but it is an error of law to rely  upon  country
    guidance subsequently found by the Court of Appeal to be  incorrect  in
    law.  The correct position is that regardless  of  the  feasibility  of
    return, it will be necessary to decide whether an Appellant has a CSID,
    or will be to obtain one, reasonably soon after arrival in Iraq.

24. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the FtT  materially  erred
    in law, and therefore the decision must be set aside.  No findings  are
    preserved.

25. I have taken into account  paragraph  7.2  of  the  Senior  President's
    Practice Statements, and find it is appropriate to remit this appeal to
    the FtT to be decided afresh, as there is substantial  fact-finding  to
    be undertaken.

26. The parties will be advised of the time and date of the hearing in  due
    course.  The appeal is to be heard by an FtT  Judge  other  than  Judge
    Perry.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that it  is  remitted  to
the FtT with no findings of fact preserved.

Anonymity

The FtT made an anonymity direction which I continue.  Unless  and  until  a
Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellant  is  granted  anonymity.
No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him  or
any member of his family.  This direction applies both to the Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.  This direction is made pursuant to  rule  14
of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed                              Date         8th August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is made by the Upper Tribunal.  The  issue  of  any  fee  award
will need to be considered by the FtT.







Signed                              Date         8th August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

