
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-     -V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00782/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 January 2017                   |On 17 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     MD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting officer
For the Respondent:    Ms H Foot, counsel instructed by Tower Hamlets Law
Centre


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Andonian, promulgated on 7 November  2016.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Page on 24 November 2016.




Anonymity

   2. A direction has been made previously, and this is repeated below.

Background

 3. It is the respondent's account  that  he  and  his  two  brothers  were
    brought to live in the United Kingdom during 1997 by  his  father.  The
    respondent's presence in the United Kingdom came to  light  on  18  May
    2003 when he was arrested  for  an  offence.  Shortly  thereafter,  the
    respondent made a human  rights  application  which  was  refused.  His
    appeal against that decision was dismissed on 21 April 2006.

 4. On 16 November 2010, the  respondent  was  convicted  of  two  offences
    related to fraud and  sentenced  to  20  months'  imprisonment.  On  22
    December 2011, he was convicted of intending to pervert the  course  of
    justice, six counts of false representations and sentenced to a further
    20 months' imprisonment.

 5. The Secretary of State advised  the  respondent  of  his  liability  to
    deportation on 19 December 2011. The deportation order was signed on 15
    May 2013. The appellant's  appeal  against  deportation  was  dismissed
    following a hearing on 27  September  2013.   His  appeal  rights  were
    exhausted on 13 January 2014.

 6. The respondent then made an application for  a  residence  card  as  an
    extended family member of  a  European  Economic  Area  national.  That
    application was refused on 22 January 2014. A  further  application  on
    the same basis was refused on 20 February 2014 with a right  of  appeal
    which the respondent exercised. The decision of 20  February  2014  was
    withdrawn and following reconsideration, the Secretary of State refused
    the application again on 11 April 2014 with no right of appeal.

 7. On 17 February 2014, the respondent applied for  asylum  on  the  basis
    that he feared persecution on religious grounds. On 26  February  2014,
    the respondent amended  the  basis  of  his  claim  to  include  sexual
    orientation as well as to include a human rights claim.

 8. The Secretary of State, on 2 September 2014,  refused  the  claims  and
    certified them under section 96 of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002. Ultimately, those claims were reconsidered and refused
    on 5 August 2015, with an in-country right of appeal. Essentially,  the
    Secretary of State did not accept that the respondent  was  a  bisexual
    man or would be treated as such in Ghana owing to the lack of detail or
    evidence to support his claims. Nor was it accepted that there was  any
    evidence that he would face persecution as  a  Nyahbinghi  Rastafarian,
    which it was accepted he was. In relation to the respondent's Article 8
    claim, it was not accepted that he was  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with his claimed partner,  HW  principally  owing  to  the
    respondent's failure to mention her previously. Alternatively,  it  was
    not considered to be unduly harsh for HW to accompany the respondent to
    Ghana or remain in the United Kingdom without  him.  The  Secretary  of
    State was of the view that the respondent did not meet the requirements
    of paragraph 399A of the Rules in relation  to  his  private  life  and
    there were no very  compelling  circumstances  to  outweigh  the  clear
    public interest in his deportation.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 9. At the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  respondent,  his
    siblings, friends and a previous partner (MK) gave evidence. There  was
    also  expert   evidence   from   an   anthropologist   and   consultant
    psychiatrist. The judge concluded that  the  respondent  was  bisexual;
    that he had a well-founded fear of persecution in Ghana on  that  basis
    and allowed the appeal on refugee grounds.

The grounds of appeal

10. There were two grounds of appeal in support of the Secretary of State's
    application. Firstly, that the judge failed to give any or any adequate
    reasons for his findings as to  the  respondent's  sexual  orientation.
    Secondly, it was argued that the judge failed to resolve  conflicts  of
    fact or opinion in relation to the respondent's sexuality and failed to
    take into  account  his  convictions  for  fraud  and  dishonesty,  his
    immigration history and the late disclosure of his sexuality.

11. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis sought.

12. The respondent's Rule 24 response, received on 5 January  2017,  argued
    that the grounds of appeal amounted to no more than a disagreement with
    the judge's factual findings. Otherwise, in essence, it was argued that
    the judge gave "cogent and discernible" reasons for  finding  that  the
    respondent was bisexual; the respondent's case was supported by witness
    evidence and that the  Secretary  of  State's  representative  did  not
    challenge the respondent's credibility, other than by  relying  on  the
    refusal  letter.  It  was  contended  that  the  judge  considered  the
    respondent's offending behaviour  and  his  submissions  regarding  the
    delay in disclosure.

The hearing

13. Mr Avery submitted that the Secretary of State's challenge was  founded
    on a lack of reasoning  and  a  failure  by  the  judge  to  take  into
    consideration the respondent's history in relation to the key issue  of
    his sexuality. The judge heard evidence from witnesses at  the  hearing
    and in a short determination said no more  than  that.  He  reached  no
    conclusions regarding the  credibility  of  those  witnesses;  gave  no
    reasons for accepting the respondent's sexuality, or why  would  be  at
    risk on return to Ghana. What the judge said at [20]  of  his  decision
    and reasons was all that he said about the nature of the  evidence.  He
    gave very little reasoning for finding the respondent credible.

14. Mr Avery referred to the  grounds  of  appeal  where  the  respondent's
    criminal history, previous appeal hearings and the very late  claim  to
    be bisexual were set out at 1(f). None of these matters  were  factored
    into the judge's credibility findings as far  as  it  was  possible  to
    tell. Mr Avery accepted that a judge does not  have  to  explain  every
    issue, however the respondent's sexuality was the key  issue  and  some
    reasoning was required.

15. Ms Foot accepted that it was a relatively brief determination,  not  as
    detailed as many but she argued that it did not meet the threshold  for
    a reasons challenge. She relied on VV  (grounds  of  appeal)  Lithuania
    [2016] UKUT 00053 (IAC).  Ms Foot argued that the  Secretary  of  State
    must establish that the judge's reasons were so unclear that it is  not
    possible to discern what they were or that they were  irrational  which
    was not the case here.

16. Ms Foot referred to the volume of evidence before the  judge  including
    the respondent's witness statement setting out his sexual identity  and
    behaviour plus traumatic experiences including a homophobic attack  and
    rape when in prison. There was  a  psychiatric  report  from  Professor
    Katona  mentioning  that  the  respondent's  symptoms  of   depression,
    anxiety,  suicidal  ideation  were  consistent  with  his  account.  In
    addition, there were several witnesses, including  a  current  partner,
    previous partner, a bisexual friend and a sibling.  Ms Foot argued that
    it was clear that the judge accepted that evidence  as  credible.  With
    reference to [20] Ms Foot contended that if the judge had rejected  the
    evidence, only then would it have been necessary to give more  reasons.
    It was sufficient for the judge to describe it  as  it  was  given  the
    volume of evidence. At  [24]  the  judge  referred  to  a  plethora  of
    evidence. Ms Foot, who was before the judge, stated that the Presenting
    Officer said nothing by way of submissions other than that the  reasons
    for refusal letter was relied on. The main issue before the  judge  was
    whether the respondent would be discreet on return to  Ghana.  At  this
    point, Mr Avery stated that the Presenting Officer's note said nothing,
    one way or the other, regarding what submissions  were  made.  Ms  Foot
    continued, stating that the  respondent's  past  criminal  history  was
    clearly and expressly taken into account at [25]; the only relevance of
    these document offences were that it may impact on credibility, but  it
    was not  a  deportation  appeal.   The  decision  in  the  respondent's
    previous appeal (P1 of the Secretary of  State's  bundle)  had  limited
    relevance  as  sexuality  was  not  raised  before  and  there  was  no
    credibility challenge.

17. With regard to delay, Ms Foot argued that it was not unusual for  there
    to be such in disclosure of sexual orientation. She conceded  that  the
    judge did not expressly deal with delay but argued that one could infer
    that delay was not significant and that he had  addressed  one  of  the
    credibility issues made in the reasons for refusal letter at [14

18. In reply, Mr Avery asked me to note that it was argued that  the  judge
    accepted the  credibility  of  the  witnesses,  however  there  was  no
    evidence of this. Nor was there any evidence the  judge  addressed  the
    late disclosure. He argued that the judge should have dealt with  these
    points which were relevant in view of the respondent's previous  record
    of dishonestly. What the judge said at [20] was wholly  inadequate.  Mr
    Avery stood by the grounds of appeal.



Decision on error of law

19. The judge made a material error owing to  providing  no  or  inadequate
    reasons for his positive credibility findings.

20. Ms Foot relied upon the decision in VV. The headnote at  (1)  reads  as
    follows;

         An  application  for  permission  to  appeal  on  the  grounds   of
         inadequacy of reasoning in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
         must  generally  demonstrate  by  reference  to  the  material  and
         arguments placed before that Tribunal that (a) the matter  involved
         a substantial issue between the parties at first instance  and  (b)
         that the Tribunal either failed to deal with that matter at all, or
         gave reasons on that point which are so unclear that they may  well
         conceal an error of law.


21. The judge's decision and reasons was particularly  brief,  at  some  26
    paragraphs over around 4 pages, given  that  it  was  an  asylum  claim
    relating to a  person  with  a  19-year  complex  immigration  history,
    significant offending and two previous  determinations  and  where  the
    credibility of his account was in dispute.

22. The key issue was of course whether the respondent to this  appeal  was
    bisexual. Paragraphs 23 to 33 of the reasons for  refusal  letter  went
    into some detail in rejecting this aspect  of  the  respondent's  claim
    owing to the lack of detail given by him when interviewed and the  lack
    of supporting evidence. At [33] it was noted  that  he  was  in  5-year
    relationship with a female and he would not be perceived  as  gay  were
    his partner to accompany him to Ghana. In addition, the respondent  had
    a deportation appeal dismissed in 2013 in which it was  noted  that  he
    was known by at least seven aliases; that the judge at  his  sentencing
    hearing  on  16  November  2010  remarked  that  he  was  part   of   a
    sophisticated operation to defraud the banking system and the judge  at
    his sentencing hearing on 22 December 2011 noted that over  many  years
    he had adopted false identities and used  them  to  his  own  financial
    advantage.  The  most  recent  offences  including   submitting   false
    documents to the Department of Work and Pensions.  There  is  also  the
    very late stage  at  which  the  respondent  raised  his  claim  to  be
    bisexual.  The judge had the following to say about the credibility  of
    the respondent's claim to be bisexual at [20];

         "The appellant had put forward a consistent and  plausible  account
         of his sexual orientation was supported  by  third  party  evidence
         form(sic) former partners and siblings. One of his former  partners
         had also attended and gave evidence. His name was (MK) and  details
         have been given above."


23.  The  above  paragraph  is  devoid  of  adequate   reasoning   in   the
    circumstances of this case. As conceded by Ms Foot, the judge  did  not
    address the issue of delay at all. Nor  did  the  judge  make  anything
    other than a passing reference to the respondent's  offending  history.
    At [25] he merely notes that there were  several  criminal  convictions
    and the use of aliases. There was no discussion of the nature of  these
    convictions  in  relation  to  the  credibility  of  the   respondent's
    protection claim.





24. Only at [14] is there a glimmer of a reason for a positive  credibility
    finding, where the judge states that it could  not  be  said  that  the
    respondent gave no details or that no supporting evidence was supplied.
    Indeed, as the judge notes there was a plethora of documentary evidence
    before him. Unfortunately, the judge failed to  assess  that  evidence,
    give  reasons  why  he  found  the  witnesses  credible  or   why   the
    respondent's  offending  and  immigration  history  was  held  not   to
    adversely affect the credibility of his claims. Therefore,  both  limbs
    of 1) in VV are satisfied; in that the  respondent's  sexuality  was  a
    substantial issue and the judge's  reasons  failed  to  deal  with  the
    respondent's concerns as to the credibility of that account.



Conclusions

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Taylor House, with a time estimate of one day by any judge except  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Andonian, KR Moore & Colyer.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant MD  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 23 June 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

