
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number PA/00812/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Birmingham    Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 4th September 2019  On 12th September 2019


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                                     SSM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Fraczyk (Counsel, instructed by UK & Co,
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant's appeal against the refusal of his asylum claim was
    dismissed for the reasons given in the decision of First-tier Tribunal
    Judge French promulgated on the 4th of April 2019. The reasons for the
    decision are given in paragraphs 5 to 9 and involve the rejection the
    Appellant's credibility on the basis of implausibility of various
    aspects of the account and inconsistencies. The parties submissions are
    set out in the Record of Proceedings.

 2. The grounds take issue on a number of points. Firstly it was argued
    that the Judge had found that ISIS had not been present, there was
    evidence of sleeper cells and it was not clear why the Judge found that
    ISIS would not be capable of recruiting the Appellant's brother. This
    is a misreading of the decision the Judge's observation that ISIS was
    not present was related to the Appellant's inability to explain why he
    would be targeted, not to the question of recruitment, sleeper cells by
    their nature would not be known about.

 3. The grounds do not address the clear implication that it was not
    credibe that his brother would not know where the Appellant's father-in-
    law's house was given the close knit nature of the community. The
    Appellant's point in submissions that the Peshmerga could have obtained
    information quite late leading to their seeking out the Appellant
    involved speculation. Besides their ability to find the Appellant's in-
    laws' house when they were not related reinforced the point that it was
    incredible that his own brother would not know where that was. The
    explanation that the Appellant's brother had not visited after a move
    was not explicitly addressed by the Judge.

 4. The second point raised was with regard to the sale of his house and
    the knowledge of others about his brother joining ISIS and the
    Appellant's inability to explain why his brother joined. ISIS would not
    necessarily have needed to be in the area for someone to hear about
    them and decide to join. It does not follow that the Appellant would
    know why his brother joined although it would be surprising if his
    brother had not said why he did. The assertion that the it was unlikely
    that a person described as being mild mannered would join is difficult
    to follow.

 5. It is difficult to see why others would know his brother had joined the
    group. The sale of the house in 10 days is said to be implausible, the
    Judge did not explain why that was so. As was observed in submissions
    there would no reason to suppose that house sales proceed in the same
    way as in the UK and a forced sale in the circumstances claimed by the
    Appellant could proceed differently and speedily.

 6. The third point related to the Appellant's supporting witnesses and the
    Judge had not rejected their credibility but had found that the
    information they related was likely to be unreliable. I would accept
    that the statement that their information would be unreliable is
    unreasoned. Clearly they could be honestly recounting what they had
    heard but as it stands the finding rests on a bald assertion.

 7. In the grant of permission there is a suggestion that the Judge
    appeared to have failed to consider other aspects of the Appellant's
    case such as the availability of documentation and any article 8 claim.
    The latter point is an error by the Judge granting permission as the
    Judge expressly considered the medical position of the Appellant's son
    and article 8 in paragraphs 8 and 9.

 8. There are positive aspects to the decision. For example the Appellant's
    failure to claim on route given his previous experience of claiming
    asylum would be relevant was a factor that would count against him.
    Similarly the fact that the Appellant's credibility had been rejected
    previously would also be a relevant factor for the Judge to take into
    consideration.

 9. At the hearing it was accepted by the Home Office that the Judge had
    not addressed the mechanics of return for the Appellant and the family.
    If that were the only issue I would have remitted the decision for the
    Judge to address that point but with the observation that having
    rejected the core credibility of the Appellant's account there would be
    no foundation for finding that the Appellant did not have a CSID or
    access to one.

10. What does not help is the Judge's repeated reference to evidence being
    implausible. The Court of Appeal has repeatedly warned against using
    plausibility as a yard stick to assess the credibility of claims being
    made and that leaves the impression that the Appellant's case has not
    been assessed with sufficient objectivity.

11. While there are factors that the Judge was entitled to take into
    account against the Appellant there are a number of findings central to
    the case which involve a simple rejection of the facts claimed without
    explanation or reference to evidence that might support the view taken.
    The decision has to be read as a whole and in the circumstances when
    that is done the critical factors outweigh the positive and the
    decision cannot be maintained.



CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making
of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing with no
findings preserved. It is not to be heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge
French.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.)

Fee Award

In allowing this appeal and remitting it to the First-tier Tribunal for re-
hearing I make no fee award which remains an issue for the First-tier
Tribunal at the conclusion of the remitted hearing and dependent on the
findings made.

Signed:[pic]

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 5th September 2019
