
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/00913/2017
                                                               PA/00883/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 March 2019                      |On 12 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     MTR
                                     ZFT
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Packer, counsel, Duncan Lewis & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    O'Garro, promulgated on 15 November  2018.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey on 28 January 2019.

Anonymity

   2. An anonymity direction is made,  as  set  out  at  the  foot  of  this
      decision.

Background

 3. The first appellant entered the United Kingdom on 2 October  2009  with
    entry clearance as a Tier 4 migrant.  The  second  appellant  became  a
    dependent partner on the first appellant's claim following  their  2014
    marriage. Their leave to remain was extended in the same capacity until
    30 October 2015. A  subsequent  application  for  leave  to  remain  on
    private life grounds was refused on  8  July  2016  with  no  right  of
    appeal. The appellants applied for asylum on 6 July 2016.

 4. The basis of the first appellant's protection claim was  that  that  he
    was an active member of the student  wing  of  the  BNP  and  had  been
    suspected of belonging to an armed group. He feared his  wife's  family
    who objected to their marriage and also his involvement with  the  BNP.
    The second appellant's claim is based  on  her  relationship  with  the
    first appellant, whom she was secretly seeing in  Bangladesh  prior  to
    their marriage. She claimed to fear her family who had  wanted  her  to
    marry someone else.

 5.  The  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  claims,  accepting  only  the
    appellant's nationalities and identities. The appellants' experience of
    a still-birth and the effect of that on the second  appellant's  mental
    health was considered  under  exceptional  circumstances  however,  the
    respondent did not accept that her condition  met  the  high  threshold
    required for a breach of Article 3 ECHR.

 6. The appellants appealed the decision. Their appeal was heard by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge SL Farmer and dismissed in a  decision  promulgated
    on 1 March 2017. That decision was set aside following a hearing at the
    Upper Tribunal on 23 May 2017.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 7. At the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal,  both  appellants  gave
    evidence as did three witnesses. The protection claims  were  dismissed
    as the judge did not find them to be  credible  witnesses  whereas  the
    human rights claims were dismissed as the judge considered  the  public
    interest concerns to carry the most weight.

The grounds of appeal

 8.  Permission to appeal was granted on the basis  that  it  was  arguable
    that the judge failed to look at the evidence in the round  and  having
    rejected the appellant's credibility failed to have  proper  regard  to
    the evidence of two witnesses and an expert opinion.

The hearing

 9. As a preliminary point, it was agreed by both parties that all  grounds
    may be argued, notwithstanding the indication that permission had  only
    been  granted  on  the  grounds  set  out  in  paragraphs  4-8  of  the
    application for permission to appeal.

10. Mr Packer argued, firstly, that had the First-tier  Tribunals  concerns
    with her mother's ability to fund the second appellant's travel to  the
    United Kingdom been raised at the hearing, evidence could have been led
    on the issue. This point had never been raised  by  the  respondent  or
    when the appeal was heard previously. While the judge had found aspects
    of the appellants' account implausible,  on  this  issue  she  entirely
    rejected their  account  and  concluded  that  the  second  appellant's
    brothers were responsible for funding her travel. This  amounted  to  a
    procedural irregularity, MM (unfairness; E&R) Sudan [2014]  UKUT  00105
    applied. With permission, Mr Packer adduced evidence in the form of  an
    original agreement for the sale of land  and translations, showing  the
    second appellant's mother was sole owner of land and she  had  disposed
    of it.

11. The second ground argued on behalf of the appellants was that the judge
    wrongly  approached  the  evidence  contained  in  the  affidavits  and
    expert's report. What she had done was  to  make  negative  credibility
    findings in relation to the appellants'  account  and  use  that  as  a
    reason for dismissing the remainder of the evidence. The judge had been
    wrong to  state  that  the  expert's  conclusions  were  based  on  the
    appellants' account being believed.  Thirdly, the appellants'  previous
    appeal had been remitted for a fresh hearing solely on the basis of the
    judge's error in relation to the timing  of  their  asylum  claims  and
    subsequent negative credibility findings. Mr  Packer  argued  that  the
    judge had made the same error, in that she had not appreciated that the
    asylum claims had been made prior to the refusal of their human  rights
    claim.

12. Ms Cunha argued that the fact that  the  judge  was  unaware  that  the
    second appellant's mother sold her  land  to  pay  for  her  daughter's
    travel would have made no difference to the outcome of the appeal.  She
    contended that there was no  risk  to  the  appellants  as  her  mother
    supported the marriage, was head of the household and would have  power
    over her sons. As for the expert evidence, Ms Cunha stressed  that  the
    judge had said that she had considered it in  the  round  and  she  was
    right to say the questions put to the expert were all on the  basis  of
    positive credibility findings.  The mistake as to  the  chronology  did
    not alter the point made by the  judge  as  to  the  delay  in  seeking
    asylum.

13. In reply, Mr Packer noted that  the  judge  had  stated  there  was  no
    evidence regarding how the authorities would know  that  the  appellant
    had attended BNP meetings in the United  Kingdom  but  the  expert  had
    dealt with this issue. The expert  had  also  explained  why  elopement
    causes irreparable damage to the reputation of a family. Finally,  that
    the second appellant's mother owned land did not  overturn  the  entire
    patriarchal structure.

14. At the end of the hearing, I reserved my decision.

Decision on error of law

15. The judge stated in equivocal terms that it was plausible [46] that the
    first appellant had twice been  assaulted  by  the  second  appellant's
    brothers who objected to their relationship. She unequivocally rejected
    the  claim  that  the  second  appellant's  family   maintained   their
    opposition to the marriage. I conclude that the following errors of law
    were made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  without  which  a  different
    conclusion could have been reached.

16. The judge at [52] found that contrary to the appellants' evidence,  the
    second appellant's family reversed their view of the marriage and  that
    her  brothers  had  provided  the  money  for  the  second  appellant's
    departure from Bangladesh, via the latter's mother.

17. Unbeknown to the judge, the second appellant  had  provided,  with  her
    Tier 4 dependent application, evidence  of  an  agreement  between  her
    mother and a friend for the sale of land. That document was not  before
    the judge because the respondent  had  not  raised  the  issue  in  the
    refusal letter. Nor had it been raised during the  hearing.  While  the
    judge cannot be criticised for being unaware of the existence  of  this
    document, the consequences of her finding that the funds came from  the
    second appellant's brothers, led to unfairness owing to  a  failure  to
    put the point to the appellants. Headnote 2 in  MM makes the point that
    an error of law can arise through no fault of the judge, where material
    evidence was not considered and which resulted in unfairness.  Had  the
    agreement for the sale of the mother's land  been  provided,  it  could
    have led to a different conclusion being reached as to the attitude  of
    the male members of the second appellant's family to her marriage.

18. There is merit in Mr Packer's arguments regarding the judge's treatment
    of  the  report  of  Dr  Ashraf-ul  Hoque.  While  the  judge   stated,
    repeatedly, that she had looked at all the evidence in the round,  when
    the decision is analysed it is only after rejecting the majority of the
    appellants' claims that she briefly commented on  the  expert  opinion.
    She found that the report was of no assistance because the  conclusions
    therein were "based upon a positive finding of credibility which is not
    in line with the findings I have reached."

19. The dozen questions posed by  Duncan  Lewis  to  the  expert  sought  a
    response  regarding  the  plausibility  of  various  aspects   of   the
    appellants' claims and in  addressing  those  questions,  Dr  Ashraf-ul
    Hoque's provided a wealth of information and opinion, with  references,
    set out over 31 pages and 98 paragraphs. At no stage did he comment  on
    the credibility of the appellants' claims.   As  well  as  setting  out
    highly  detailed   and   relevant   evidence   regarding   Bangladesh's
    patriarchal  society  and  marriages  which  crossed  caste  and  class
    boundaries, the expert addressed the importance of student politics  in
    Bangladesh and the issue of the monitoring of political  activities  in
    the United Kingdom by the Bangladeshi authorities. That the judge found
    there was no evidence of  the  latter  at  [61]  suggests  that  little
    consideration was given to the report.

20. The evidence  contained  in  affidavits  from  two  witnesses  received
    similar treatment to that of the expert. The judge does not engage with
    the contents of the  affidavits  and  nor  are  the  contents  set  out
    elsewhere. At [56], she simply concludes, "In view of my findings about
    the appellants' credibility, I will place no evidential weight on  (the
    affidavits)."

21. The judge accordingly erred in  concluding  her  consideration  of  the
    credibility of the appellants' account and then going on to reject  the
    expert and supporting affidavit evidence on the basis  of  her  earlier
    negative credibility findings.

22. The judge set out the background to the appeals at [3] of the  decision
    and  reasons.  There  it  states  that  the  appellants'  human  rights
    application was refused on "18 July 2016" and that it was on  "18  July
    2018" that they claimed asylum.

23. There are two errors with the summary of the immigration  history.  The
    first is that the asylum application was made as late as 2018  and  the
    second was the judge's understanding that the  appellants  only  sought
    asylum after they had been notified that their human rights  claim  was
    refused.

24. At  [64],  the  judge  refers  to  the  appellants'  failure  to  raise
    protection issues with their representative and delay in  making  their
    claims. Whereas, the real position  was  that  the  appellants  claimed
    asylum on 6 July 2016, prior to the decision on the human rights claims
    on 18 July 2016. There is a significant difference between  a  two-year
    delay in seeking asylum after the last  negative  decision  and  having
    sought asylum prior to a decision on the  previous  application.  There
    was also a failure  by  the  judge  to  engage  with  the  reasons  the
    appellants' gave as to why they did not apply for asylum at an  earlier
    stage, that being that they initially planned to pursue  settlement  on
    the grounds of long residence and were later advised against mentioning
    protection issues in their private life applications.

25. As  the  appeal  mainly  concerns  fears  of  family  members,  I  have
    considered whether the errors above are material. It is the appellants'
    case that the second appellant's relatives are influential  within  the
    Awami League and Bangladeshi government. Evidence said  to  corroborate
    those claims was before the judge, however there was no reference to it
    or an indication whether or not it was accepted. Thus it cannot be said
    at this stage  whether  or  not  the  appellants  could  reasonably  be
    expected to seek national protection or internal relocation in order to
    avoid harm at the hands of the second  appellant's  male  relatives.  I
    conclude that the judge failed to afford anxious scrutiny to the claims
    and made material errors of law. The decision  is  unsafe  and  is  set
    aside in its entirety, with no findings preserved.

26. Mr Packer strongly urged that this matter be remitted to the First-tier
    Tribunal for a de novo hearing, arguing that the  appellants  had  been
    deprived of a fair hearing. Mindful of the fact that  this  matter  has
    already been heard twice by the First-tier Tribunal,  I  was  initially
    disinclined to remit.  Having considered paragraph 7.2  of  the  Senior
    President's Practice Statement, I find that the circumstances  of  this
    appeal satisfy both of the alternative limbs for remittal. Firstly, the
    appellants have been deprived of a fair hearing on  several  bases  and
    secondly, there are no preserved findings,  there  are  at  least  five
    witnesses and substantial quantities of supporting and expert  evidence
    which require detailed and extensive judicial fact-finding. I have  had
    regard to the overriding objective in Rule 2 of the procedure Rules but
    conclude, reluctantly, that remittal is the correct course.



Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside,  with  no  findings
preserved.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Hatton Cross, with a time estimate of one day by any judge except  First-
tier Tribunal Judge O'Garro.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 24 April 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
