
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00753/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons sent out on       |
|On 23 May 2019                       |On 16 June 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                                     RJE
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Moriarty, Counsel, instructed by Luqmani
                    Thompson & Partners Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, who was born in May 1983, is a national of Jamaica.   He
    entered this country in April 2001 as a visitor  with  entry  clearance
    valid until three weeks later.  A day before  that  leave  was  due  to
    expire, an application was made on his  behalf  for  further  leave  to
    remain as a visitor until October of that year.  This  application  was
    refused on 29  May  2001  and  an  appeal  against  this  decision  was
    dismissed in May 2002.  Although the appellant sought leave  to  remain
    thereafter as a student on the basis of his  rights  under  Article  8,
    these applications were refused and he was appeal rights  exhausted  in
    2002.  Since then, he has remained as an overstayer.


 2. Since arriving in this country, and despite having no leave to be  here
    since shortly after his arrival, the appellant has  been  convicted  of
    numerous criminal offences, of increasing  seriousness.   He  has  been
    convicted on seven occasions for a total of twenty known offences.  His
    first conviction was on 3 March 2003 for being concerned in the  supply
    of  controlled  Class  A  drugs  and  handling  stolen  goods,  driving
    otherwise than in accordance with a licence and using a  vehicle  while
    uninsured.  For these  offence  he  was  sentenced  to  twelve  months'
    imprisonment at a Young Offenders Institution.  On the same occasion he
    was  also  convicted  of  supplying  a  controlled  Class  A  drug  and
    possessing a controlled drug with intent to supply, for which  offences
    he was  sentenced  to  two  concurrent  sentences  of  imprisonment  of
    eighteen months, but these sentences were  consecutive  to  the  twelve
    month sentence received in respect of the offences previously  referred
    to.  He was also  convicted  of  possession  of  ammunition  without  a
    certificate for which  he  was  sentenced  to  a  further  three  month
    imprisonment, to be served concurrently.  His total  sentence  for  all
    these offences was two years and six months' imprisonment.


 3. In October 2003 the appellant was convicted  of  a  lesser  offence  of
    possessing a controlled Class B drug, for which he was fined  �100  and
    ordered to pay �50 costs.  A year  later,  in  November  2004,  he  was
    convicted of fraudulently using a vehicle without a licence, driving  a
    vehicle otherwise than in accordance with  a  licence  and  also  being
    uninsured while driving this vehicle.  He was fined in respect of these
    offences.


 4. In August 2009, the appellant was  convicted  of  again  driving  while
    uninsured and otherwise than in accordance with the licence, for  which
    he was also fined.


 5. The following year, in April  2010,  the  appellant  was  convicted  of
    having an article with a blade in a  public  place  for  which  he  was
    sentenced to six weeks' imprisonment, but this sentence  was  suspended
    for twelve months.  During the period of this  suspension  in  November
    2010 he was again convicted of having in his  possession  a  controlled
    Class B drug for which he was fined; on  the  same  date  he  was  also
    convicted of using a vehicle (yet again while uninsured)  and  also  of
    having committed a further offence during the operational period  of  a
    suspended sentence order, resulting from  the  original  conviction  in
    April 2010, for which he was fined �400.


 6. Not very long afterwards, on 31 May 2011, the appellant  was  convicted
    of two counts of possession of a Class A controlled drug with intent to
    supply, the drugs being heroin  and  crack  cocaine,  together  with  a
    failure to comply  with  the  community  requirements  of  a  suspended
    sentence order.  For these very  serious  offences  the  appellant  was
    sentenced to two concurrent terms  of  six  years'  imprisonment.   The
    appellant had been stopped by police in the street in August 2010 (that
    is under four months after the suspended sentence was imposed in  April
    2010) when he was found to be in possession of 2.48 grams of heroin and
    1.66 grams of crack cocaine, which drugs were hidden down his  trousers
    in a net bag.  He did not cooperate  during  interview,  answering  "no
    comment" to all the questions and he put forward a  prepared  statement
    which he relied on at his trial, but he was  disbelieved  by  the  jury
    which  rejected  his  claim  that  the  drugs  were  for  his  personal
    consumption.  This was the third time the appellant had been  convicted
    of either supplying or being in possession with intent to supply  Class
    A drugs and the length of the sentence imposed  reflected  the  judge's
    view of the seriousness of such offences.


The appellant's subsequent immigration history


 7. Following this conviction, on 12 July 2011, the  respondent  served  on
    the appellant a notice of liability to automatic deportation, dated  12
    July 2011.


 8. On 27 August 2013 the appellant claimed asylum, the basis of this claim
    being that he feared being the  victim  of  gang  violence  in  Jamaica
    because of actions done by a cousin.  He was then served with a further
    notice of liability to automatic deportation, dated 20  September  2013
    and he had a substantive asylum interview in August 2014.   His  asylum
    claim was refused on 22 June 2015.  That claim was also certified under
    Section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  On  15
    July 2015 a decision was made to deport the appellant and to refuse his
    human rights claim.


The appellant's appeal


 9. The appellant appealed against this decision and his appeal  was  heard
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford, sitting  at  Birmingham,  on  29
    April and 7 November 2016, but in a Decision and Reasons promulgated on
    1 December 2016 Judge Ford dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  on  all
    grounds, being asylum  grounds,  humanitarian  protection  grounds  and
    human rights grounds.  So far as  the  asylum/Article  3  grounds  were
    concerned, Judge Ford analysed the appellant's claim  in  some  detail,
    finding at paragraph 50 of her Decision that "I do not find his account
    to be credible even to the lower standard of proof applicable", and she
    gave detailed reasons justifying her  decision  on  this  point.   That
    aspect of Judge Ford's decision has not been challenged subsequently.


10. The appellant's Article 8 claim was founded on  his  relationship  with
    his current partner and (at the time) three children in the  UK,  which
    will be considered below.


The appellant's appeal against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal


11. The appellant appealed against Judge Ford's  decision  and  his  appeal
    came before UTJ Blum, who in a decision promulgated on 24  March  2017,
    identified what he regarded as material errors of law in  Judge  Ford's
    decision such that there needed to be a  re-hearing.   Judge  Blum  had
    noted (and this is referred to in  his  subsequent  Decision  to  which
    reference is made below) that there had  been  no  challenge  to  Judge
    Ford's  decision  dismissing  the  appellant's   appeal   against   the
    respondent's Decision to refuse his asylum/Article 3 claim.








The re-hearing


12. Judge Blum re-heard the appeal  on  3  May  2017  and  promulgated  his
    Decision shortly after on 19 May  2017.   He  considered  the  evidence
    before him with exemplary care and made findings of fact with regard to
    the family life enjoyed by the appellant in this country which findings
    will be referred to below and are not to any  material  degree  now  in
    dispute between the parties, save that it is now asserted on behalf  of
    the appellant that his ties with his children have become "stronger  in
    the  period  that  has  elapsed  since  Judge   Blum's   decision   was
    promulgated".  He has also had another child.


Key findings


13. Having set out the evidence, Judge  Blum  made  certain  findings.   In
    particular, at paragraph 26, he was satisfied that the appellant had  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with his current partner  and  that
    he had a genuine parental relationship with his three daughters (two at
    that time by his current partner and one by another lady after  a  "one
    night stand").  He accepted that it was "clear from the totality of the
    evidence that the appellant has a strong bond with  all  three  of  his
    daughters" (at paragraph 26).  He also accepted that the appellant  "is
    a good and committed father" and "that it is in the best  interests  of
    all the appellant's daughters for him to remain in the UK".


14. So far as the risk of reoffending was concerned, at paragraph 31, Judge
    Blum found as follows:-


         "31. I  am  satisfied,  based  on  the  above  evidence,  that  the
             appellant has genuinely addressed  his  drug  misuse  and  has
             taken active steps to rehabilitate himself and to remain drug-
             free.  Despite the  conclusions  of  the  OASys  report  I  am
             satisfied that the appellant is at low risk of causing serious
             harm to the public and that he is at low risk of reoffending."


15. Judge Blum rightly set out at paragraph 24 of his Decision that it  was
    "not in dispute" that "under the Immigration Rules (paragraphs 398, 399
    and 399A), the public interest in his deportation is only outweighed by
    other factors if there are  "very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
    above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A", which mirror what is
    set out in Section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002 (introduced by the Immigration Act 2014).


16. Section 117C of Part 5A of the 2002 Act provides as follows:


         "117C Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
         foreign criminals


         (1)   The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.


         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
             the greater is the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
             criminal.


         (3)  In the case of a foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.


         (4)  Exception 1 applies where-


             (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the  United  Kingdom  for
                  most of C's life,


             (b)  C is socially and culturally  integrated  in  the  United
                  Kingdom, and


             (c)   there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to  be
                  deported.


         (5)  Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.


         (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to  a
             period of imprisonment of at  least  four  years,  the  public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2."


17. In this case, it is not disputed that Exception 1 cannot apply, because
    this appellant has only been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom
    for a very short period indeed.  Judge Blum accordingly approached  the
    appeal on the basis that even though he had found  that  the  appellant
    had a genuine and subsisting relationship with his current partner  and
    also a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  his  children
    (who  are  all  qualifying  children,  being  British   citizens)   the
    appellant's appeal could still only succeed if he was able to establish
    first that the effect of his deportation on either his partner  or  any
    one of his children could be shown to be "unduly harsh".  Also, because
    this appellant had been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  over
    four years, it would be necessary for him  to  establish  further  that
    there  were  very  compelling  circumstances  "over  and  above"  those
    described in the Exceptions.


18. Judge Blum analysed the evidence  very  carefully  and  considered  the
    position of the appellant's partner and children separately.   He  took
    account in particular of the statements and evidence  provided  by  the
    various  witnesses,  including  the  medical  evidence  regarding   the
    appellant's partner and also  the  lengthy  independent  social  worker
    report of Christine Brown, Judge Blum having accepted (at paragraph 42)
    "that Ms Brown is suitably qualified  and  experienced  to  provide  an
    expert opinion on  the  effect  on  the  children  of  the  appellant's
    deportation".


19. Having considered all of this evidence very carefully, Judge Blum found
    that the effect of the appellant's  deportation  would  not  be  unduly
    harsh on either his partner or his children, and he accordingly did not
    need to go on to find whether there were compelling circumstances  over
    and above the Exceptions, because the appellant had not got  over  even
    the first hurdle.


20. It is not necessary for me set out in full Judge Blum's reasoning which
    led him to make the findings he did, because, as appears below, I  will
    have to make my own individual assessment of this evidence.


21. At the time of the hearing before Judge Blum, he was bound by the Court
    of Appeal decision in MM (Uganda) [2016] EWCA Civ 450,  as  he  stated,
    clearly and at the time correctly, at paragraph 27 of his decision,  as
    follows:


         "27. In order  to  determine  whether  there  are  very  compelling
             circumstances "over and above" an unduly harsh impact on  [the
             appellant's  partner]  as  a   result   of   the   appellant's
             deportation, I must first determine whether the effect on  her
             would be unduly harsh.  I will focus my attention  on  whether
             it would be unduly harsh  for  [the  appellant's  partner]  to
             remain in  the  UK  without  the  appellant.   In  determining
             whether the appellant's deportation would be unduly  harsh,  I
             am bound by the Court of Appeal decision in MM (Uganda) [2016]
             EWCA   Civ   450   (holding   that   wider   public   interest
             considerations must be taken into account  when  applying  the
             "unduly harsh" criteria)."


22. Judge Blum's finding that the effect on the appellant's  partner  would
    not be "unduly harsh" took into account these  factors,  including  the
    seriousness of the appellant's offending, as he made clear at paragraph
    39, as follows:


         "39. In light of the above assessment, including the various public
             interests  identified,  the  seriousness  of  the  appellant's
             offending, the appellant's  rehabilitation,  the  respondent's
             delay, and the possibility of [the appellant's partner]  being
             unable to continue her studies or find employment,  I  am  not
             satisfied that the effect of the  appellant's  deportation  on
             the [the appellant's partner] would be unduly harsh."


23. Judge Blum also took account of  the  seriousness  of  the  appellant's
    offending when  finding  at  paragraph  52,  that  the  effect  of  the
    appellant's deportation on his children, would not  be  "unduly  harsh"
    either, as follows:


         "...  having  considered  all  the  factors  that  weigh   in   the
         appellant's favour, and balancing those against the  strong  public
         interest factors that I  have  already  identified,  including  the
         nature and seriousness of the appellant's offending [my  emphasis],
         I find that the impact on the appellant's  children  would  not  be
         unduly harsh."


24. As I have already indicated, at the time  he  heard  this  appeal,  and
    promulgated his Decision, Judge Blum was indeed bound by the  Court  of
    Appeal authority to have regard to the  seriousness  of  the  offending
    when considering or not whether the effect on the  appellant's  partner
    and/or children could properly be said to be "unduly harsh".


25. In light of  the  subsequent  decision  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  KO
    (Nigeria) & Others v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53, which was handed down  on  24
    October 2018, Judge Blum had as a matter of  law  been  wrong  to  have
    regard to the seriousness of the appellant's offending when considering
    whether the effect on his partner or children could properly be said to
    be "unduly harsh".  The Supreme Court decided that the issue of whether
    or not the effect on either a partner or child  could  be  said  to  be
    "unduly harsh", while undoubtedly a high hurdle to be overcome, had  to
    be evaluated with regard solely to the effect on the partner or  child,
    and without regard to the nature of the offending.


26. For this  reason,  on  the  appellant's  appeal  against  Judge  Blum's
    Decision, the appeal having initially been stayed pending the  decision
    of the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria), following that decision  and  the
    parties having agreed that this would be the  appropriate  course,  the
    Court of Appeal ordered that the appeal should be re-heard in the Upper
    Tribunal.


Hearing on 10 April 2019


27. The appeal was then listed before me for a full  hearing  on  10  April
    2019.


28. It was only on receiving notice of this hearing  that  the  appellant's
    solicitors wrote to the Tribunal indicating that further evidence would
    be necessary and for this reason they requested an adjournment.


29. I reluctantly agreed to convert the  hearing  into  a  Case  Management
    hearing and gave a Note of Hearing and further  directions  immediately
    following the hearing.  Having noted that it had been agreed  that  the
    appeal be re-heard in the Upper Tribunal, at paragraph 3 of my Note  of
    Hearing I set out what the parameters of the re-hearing  would  be,  as
    follows:


         "3.  It was in the judgement of this Tribunal clear that  would  be
             required at the re-hearing would be for the Upper Tribunal  to
             consider as at the date of the hearing first whether Exception
             2  set  out  within  Section  117C(5)  of   the   Nationality,
             Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  would  be  satisfied,  having
             regard to the guidance given by the Supreme Court in  KO,  but
             also, if it was, whether [pursuant to Section  117C(6)]  there
             were very compelling circumstances over and above Exception  2
             such as to outweigh the  public  interest  in  deporting  this
             appellant.  This is because this appellant had been  convicted
             and sentenced to  a  period  of  six  years'  imprisonment  in
             respect of serious drug offences.  Pursuant to Section 117C(6)
             it would only  be  in  circumstances  where  there  were  very
             compelling reasons over and above Exception 2 that the  public
             interest in his  deportation  could  arguably  be  outweighed.
             This Tribunal would  also  have  to  consider  the  effect  of
             Section 117C(2) in these  circumstances  (that  is,  where  an
             appellant has been sentenced to a period  of  imprisonment  of
             over four years) which provides that  "the  more  serious  the
             offence committed by a foreign criminal, the  greater  is  the
             public interest in deportation of the criminal"."


30. I also noted that because the Decision would have to be taken in  light
    of the circumstances as they were at  the  time  of  the  hearing,  the
    Tribunal would have to have regard to any relevant matters which  there
    might now be indicative of there being  such  very  compelling  reasons
    which may or may not have been in existence at the time of the original
    decision.  Accordingly, it ought to have been clear to the  appellant's
    solicitors that there might well be a need to adduce  further  evidence
    in order that the Tribunal when it re-heard the appeal would  be  in  a
    position to have regard to  matters  which  had  not  been  before  the
    Tribunal at that earlier stage.  That is, of  course,  provided  within
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008  at  Rule  15(2A),
    pursuant to which the  appellant's  solicitors  ought  to  have  served
    notice to the Tribunal and the respondent indicating the nature of  the
    evidence, explaining why it had not been submitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (which in the circumstances of this case would not  have  been
    very difficult, because it would have post-dated that hearing) and  the
    Tribunal would then have to consider whether or  not  there  have  been
    unreasonable delay in producing the evidence.


31. I considered that it was obviously in the interest of justice to  allow
    further evidence to be adduced so that  the  Tribunal  would  be  in  a
    position to consider the position as at the date of  the  hearing,  and
    accordingly gave directions as to the service of further evidence.


32. At paragraph 14 of my Note of Hearing I recorded as follows:


         "14. Following discussion it was agreed between  the  parties  that
             while such findings of fact as were made by Judge  Blum  would
             be the staring point of the appeal,  the  appellant  would  be
             permitted to adduce such further evidence as he was advised to
             adduce with a view to enabling the Tribunal to have up-to-date
             information  as  to  his  circumstances   such   that   proper
             consideration could be given to whether or not at the date  of
             the  hearing  the  appellant  was  able  to   establish   such
             compelling circumstances over and above Exception 2  as  would
             make his  deportation  unlawful,  notwithstanding  the  public
             interest in deporting persons convicted  of  serious  criminal
             offences."


33. Amongst the directions which I gave was the following, at (4):


         "(4) It is the Tribunal's intention that the starting  point  would
             be the findings previously made  by  UTJ  Blum  and  that  the
             purpose of the  evidence  to  be  adduced  is  to  enable  the
             Tribunal to consider  whether  or  not  at  the  time  of  the
             hearing:


             (i)  Exception  2  set  out  within  Section  117C(5)  of  the
                  Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  would  be
                  satisfied (having regard to the decision  of  the  Supreme
                  Court in KO), and


             (ii) If it would, whether (pursuant to Section  117C(6)  there
                  are very compelling circumstances over and above Exception
                  2 such as to outweigh the public interest in deporting the
                  appellant."


The Hearing of 23 May 2019 - delay in giving this Decision


34. Whatever criticisms I may have had previously regarding the preparation
    of this appeal, the preparation  for  this  hearing  was  excellent  on
    behalf of both parties.  Both Mr  Moriarty,  who  had  represented  the
    appellant throughout these proceedings, from before the hearing  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford and Mr Steven Whitwell,  the  Presenting
    Officer originally instructed on behalf of the respondent, had prepared
    skeleton arguments, which set out the parties'  respective  cases  with
    precision and clarity.  In accordance with the directions  that  I  had
    previously given, the appellant's solicitors prepared a bundle for  the
    hearing containing  all  the  relevant  material.   This  included  the
    relevant evidence which had previously been before Judge Blum, as  well
    as more recent statements from the appellant, his current  partner  and
    the mother of his oldest daughter, together with the birth  certificate
    of his fourth daughter, born since the previous proceedings in  October
    2018  and  supporting  evidence  from  his   daughters'   school,   the
    appellant's probation officer and a record producer who  believes  that
    the appellant "has the potential of  international  success".   At  the
    hearing, a further letter was submitted from  the  appellant's  father,
    who had previously given a witness statement in support of his son, who
    stated in his letter that he intended to employ his son as a driver  in
    his family business  importing  Caribbean  produce  from  abroad.   The
    appellant and his partner, as well as his former partner (the mother of
    his oldest child) gave oral evidence and I heard submissions on  behalf
    of both parties.


35. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my Decision, and  within  a
    matter of days, having given anxious scrutiny to the submissions  which
    had been made, the evidence I had heard and all  the  documents  within
    the file, I had reached my Decision.  I had not found this a  difficult
    decision to make, for the reasons  which  I  now  set  out  below,  but
    regrettably the file was then mislaid  and  the  promulgation  of  this
    Decision was overlooked and  for  this  reason  the  Decision  was  not
    finalised or promulgated when it should and but for  the  mislaying  of
    the file would have been.  No communication was  received  from  either
    party with regard to the delay in promulgating a Decision until the end
    of January, when the  appellant's  solicitors  wrote  to  the  Tribunal
    asking if the Tribunal staff could check whether  there  had  been  any
    oversight or whether the Decision  was  still  outstanding.   Following
    this request, the file was  found,  but  just  before  I  was  able  to
    finalise my Decision the court was locked down which has  occasioned  a
    further delay.  Although the Decision which I am  now  promulgating  is
    the  one  which  I  had  originally  intended  to  give,  the  Tribunal
    apologises to the parties for the delay.


The appellant's case


36. The appellant's  case  is  summarised  concisely  and  clearly  in  the
    skeleton argument prepared for this hearing.  Mr Moriarty relies on the
    findings made by UTJ Blum referred to above which are not  in  dispute,
    that the appellant is the primary carer for his two daughters with  his
    current partner, that he is a "good and committed father" who shares "a
    strong bond with all three of his daughters" and that  his  deportation
    would also have a "significantly detrimental impact" on his partner who
    would lose  "the  direct  emotional  and  practical  support"  that  he
    provides.  Mr Moriarty also relies on the finding  that  the  appellant
    has a "strong parental relationship" with his  daughters  and  that  it
    would be in their best interests for him to remain in the UK.


37. The appellant has also subsequently had a third  daughter,  the  fourth
    qualifying child (being also a British citizen) and  his  case  is  now
    stronger than it was at the time of his earlier appeal.


38. It is submitted on the appellant's behalf that had Judge Blum  not  had
    regard to seriousness of the  appellant's  offending  when  considering
    whether or not the effect of his deportation  on  his  daughters  could
    properly be said to be "unduly harsh", "he might well  have  reached  a
    different conclusion", which he might have done had the Supreme Court's
    subsequent Decision in KO  (Nigeria)  been  available  to  him  at  the
    relevant time.  It is noted that  Judge  Blum  appeared  to  accept  at
    paragraph 40 of his Decision that it would be unduly  harsh  to  expect
    the appellant's daughters to relocate with him to Jamaica  in  all  the
    circumstances and assessed the issue of undue harshness on the basis of
    whether it would be unduly harsh for them to remain in the  UK  without
    him.


39. Mr Moriarty refers to the  level  of  reliance  which  the  appellant's
    daughters place on their father, the impact on their personal education
    and development of his removal and that he has  been  "a  constant  and
    hugely significant part of  their  lives,  particularly  following  his
    release from detention five years ago" which all tend to show that  the
    effect of his removal could properly be said to be "unduly harsh".   It
    is submitted that the practical reality is that  if  the  appellant  is
    deported, the effect  of  that  deportation  "would  be  an  indefinite
    separation from all four of his  daughters".   This  would  "inevitably
    have a significantly detrimental - and therefore unduly harsh -  impact
    on [the appellant's partner] and his daughters".


40. As he did before Judge Blum, Mr  Moriarty  continues  to  rely  on  the
    independent social worker report of Ms Brown, dated 3 March 2016 (which
    has not been updated, but which I accept  would  be  unlikely  to  have
    changed) the conclusions of which included that the damage to his  then
    7 year old daughter "may well prove  irreparable",  that  even  in  the
    "unlikely event" that any of his  daughters  were  able  to  visit  the
    appellant in Jamaica,  such  visits  could  be  "devastating"  for  the
    children and that his removal would have a "devastating impact" on  his
    current partner, their children and "various other  parties,  including
    his partner's mother".


41. Although it is appreciated that the appellant needs to show that  there
    are very compelling circumstances  over  and  above  the  unduly  harsh
    consequence on the appellant's children and his current partner  it  is
    submitted (at paragraph 15 of the skeleton argument) that the  Tribunal
    should consider "the cumulatively harsh impact that it would have on up
    to four British citizen children and their mothers,  when  the  correct
    legal test is applied".  This cumulative impact is said to be such that
    on the facts of the present case they are "sufficiently  compelling  to
    outweigh the public interest" in the appellant's deportation.


42. Mr Moriarty asks the Tribunal  to  take  into  consideration  that  the
    appellant has been rehabilitated  since  his  offending  and  also  (at
    paragraph 20) that while the  appellant's  offending  "was  undoubtedly
    serious in nature, it is noted that he received a significant custodial
    sentence for what the Sentencing Judge  described  as  "quite  a  small
    quantity of drugs"."  Mr Moriarty also refers to Judge  Blum's  finding
    that the appellant's  response  to  his  custodial  sentence  had  been
    described as "exemplary" and that he had "genuinely addressed his  drug
    misuse" such that "he now poses a low risk of serious harm  and  a  low
    risk of reoffending".  I note that in the most recent  report  prepared
    for this hearing by the appellant's probation officer (at B17 and 18 of
    the  bundle)  it  is  considered  that  "the  current  static  risk  of
    likelihood of serious reoffending (Risk of  Serious  Recidivism),  over
    two years, is assessed as low, calculated as 1.4%" which assessment  of
    risk "is based entirely on statistical evidence and  does  not  include
    any clinical factors".


43. Essentially, therefore, the appellant's case is that he is  a  reformed
    character, who now poses a very low risk indeed of reoffending, he  has
    very close ties  in  this  country,  the  effect  on  his  children  in
    particular would be severe and weighing all these factors together,  it
    can properly be said that the cumulative effect  of  these  factors  is
    that there are very compelling reasons over and above the unduly  harsh
    consequences which his removal would have on his children  such  as  to
    outweigh the public interest in his removal.


The respondent's case


44. Mr Lindsay relied on the skeleton argument prepared by Mr Whitwell  for
    this hearing, referring initially to the lengthy procedural history and
    setting out the basis upon which this appeal had been sent back to  the
    Upper Tribunal by the  Court  of  Appeal.   At  paragraph  8,  of  this
    skeleton argument, it was noted that the appeal  had  been  allowed  by
    consent in the following terms:


         "Permission to  appeal  be  granted  and  the  appeal  against  the
         decision of the Upper Tribunal be allowed to the  extent  that  the
         decision of the Upper Tribunal is set aside and the matter remitted
         to  the  Upper  Tribunal  for  determination"  the  parties  having
         previously agreed  that  "...  the  Upper  Tribunal  erred  in  its
         assessment of whether  removal  would  be  "unduly  harsh"  on  the
         appellant's child under s.117C(5) of the  Nationality,  Immigration
         and Asylum Act 2002 as it took into account the seriousness of  the
         appellant's offending as part of that assessment, which is  not  in
         accordance with the approach now set out in KO.  Although this  was
         a  case  where  there  was  a  requirement  for  "very   compelling
         circumstances" to justify a decision not to deport, that assessment
         required consideration through  the  lens  of  the  "unduly  harsh"
         test."


45. It was the respondent's case (and this was not disputed  on  behalf  of
    the appellant) that the hearing before me  was  a  resumed  substantive
    hearing "limited to the issue as to whether the  decision  of  15  July
    2015 to remove the appellant from the United Kingdom would be  unlawful
    under s.6 of the Human Rights Act 1998".


46. The skeleton argument then (at paragraph 2 of the Submissions) set  out
    the facts which were not in dispute, which included:


    (a)  Other than his original stay in 2001, the appellant  had  remained
         unlawfully as an overstayer;


    (b)  the appellant was properly to be defined as a  "foreign  criminal"
         who had been sentenced to a period of  imprisonment  of  over  four
         years;


    (c)  he had been convicted on seven occasions spanning twenty offences,
         which had culminated in the most  recent  serious  convictions  for
         possession of Class A drugs with intent to supply;


    (d)  that  the  public  interests  required  the  deportation  of  this
         appellant and would only be outweighed by other  factors  if  there
         were  "very  compelling  circumstances"  over   and   above   those
         proscribed in paragraphs 399 and 399A of the immigration  rules  as
         now enacted in sub-sections 117C (4) and (5)  of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002;


    (e)  the respondent accepted that  the  appellant  had  a  genuine  and
         subsisting relationship with his current partner and a genuine  and
         subsisting parental relationship with his daughters,  who  are  all
         British nationals;


    ...


    (g)  the respondent also accepted that it was in the best interests  of
         the appellant's three older children  (the  position  of  the  most
         recently  born  child  was  not  considered  within  this  skeleton
         argument) that the appellant should remain in the UK  in  order  to
         "retain the continuity of the parental relationship".


47. It followed that the task for the Tribunal would be to  consider  first
    whether it would be unduly harsh for the appellant's partner and/or his
    children to remain in the UK without the appellant, but even if it was,
    the appellant would still have  to  establish  that  there  were  "very
    compelling circumstances" over and above this as to outweigh the public
    interest in deportation.


48. With regard to the appellant's partner, the respondent noted  that  she
    had been aware that he had had no status to remain in the  UK  but  had
    "proceeded to solidify their family  life  nonetheless"  (as  had  been
    found in the First-tier Tribunal), that she had coped during  the  long
    period during which the appellant had been  imprisoned,  that  she  was
    able to rely on assistance from the  appellant's  extended  family  and
    also a wide circle of friends and family in Birmingham, that she had  a
    good employment history and that there was no medical evidence that she
    had any mental or physical health issues.


49. With regard to the appellant's daughters, it was noted that  they  will
    continue to go to the same school, live in the same  homes  and  retain
    the same circle of "friends, neighbours and  acquaintances"  (again  as
    found in the First-tier Tribunal), that none of them had any mental  or
    physical health issues such as to make them particularly vulnerable  as
    a result of separation from the appellant,  that  the  appellant's  two
    younger children (not including the recent arrival) the children of the
    appellant's current partner could  still  rely  on  their  mother,  who
    remains their primary carer; they could also  rely  on  their  extended
    family being their grandfather, two great aunts in Birmingham  and  one
    in London, and second cousins.   The  appellant's  oldest  child  would
    continue to rely on her mother, who remained her primary carer and  she
    lived very close to the  appellant's  current  partner.   That  child's
    grandparents and three aunts  and  uncles  also  lived  in  Birmingham.
    Insofar as contact between the half siblings was concerned, even if the
    respective  mothers  of  the  appellant's  daughters  might  find  this
    difficult to maintain, it  could  be  facilitated  by  the  appellant's
    father.  (I note at this point that the  reason  why  full  cooperation
    between the respective mothers might be difficult  is  because  of  the
    circumstances of the  oldest  child's  birth,  she   having  been  born
    following what the appellant has described as a "one-night stand"  with
    this child's mother at a time when  he  was  living  with  his  current
    partner.)


50. Mr Whitwell in  the  skeleton  argument  relied  upon  by  Mr  Lindsay,
    referred to the guidance which  had  been  given  by  the  Presidential
    Tribunal in MK (Sierra Leone) v SSHD [2015] UKUT 223, referred to  with
    approval in KO at paragraph 27, in which it is made clear that the test
    of what is meant by "unduly harsh" is an extremely high  one.   Further
    reference will  be  made  to  this  guidance  below.   It  was  further
    submitted that the test in Section 117C(6) that there had to  be  "very
    compelling circumstances, over and above those described in  Exceptions
    1 and 2" "is extremely demanding".  It was also submitted that (as  had
    been agreed by consent in the Court of Appeal) if the Tribunal  had  to
    consider this aspect  of  the  case,  "at  this  point  as  opposed  to
    considering the test of undue harshness within Section 117C(4) or  (5),
    a Tribunal is required to  engage  in  a  wide-ranging  proportionality
    exercise, balancing the weight that appropriately falls to be given  to
    factors on the proposed deportee's side  of  the  balance  against  the
    weight of the public interest".  This was  common  ground  between  the
    parties.


51. At the time the skeleton argument was prepared, the OASys report, which
    had been before Judge Blum, had presented the appellant  as  a  "medium
    risk to the public and the community and otherwise a low risk" but as I
    have noted above, a more recent report was submitted to the Tribunal.


52. Mr Lindsay, relying on Mr Whitwell's skeleton  argument,  continued  to
    rely on the submission  that  no  material  weight  was  added  by  the
    appellant having not committed further offences, first because that was
    what would be expected of him by society and secondly in  circumstances
    where the consequence or consequences of further offending would be his
    almost certain deportation, this would be an artificial assessment.


53. Insofar as delay was said to have a bearing on the assessment of  "very
    compelling circumstances", the delay factors fell largely  outside  the
    control of the respondent.  The appellant had been in prison until  May
    2014, and had then claimed asylum which claim had  been  found  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal to be fabricated (and, as I have noted above, there
    was no challenge to this aspect of the First-tier Tribunal's Decision).
     Subsequently, the appellant could not be removed until  the  statutory
    appeals process had been completed.


54. In summary, therefore, the respondent's position  was  first  that  the
    effect on neither the appellant's current  partner  nor  his  daughters
    would be unduly harsh and secondly even if it was, having regard to all
    the circumstances, there could not on any view  be  said  to  be  "very
    compelling circumstances" over and above the effect on the  appellant's
    wife and daughters such as to  "conceivably  outweigh  the  very  large
    public interest in deporting him".


The evidence


55. I do not propose to set out  all  the  evidence  contained  within  the
    bundle, but I have had regard to all of it.  As already  indicated,  in
    addition to the evidence which had been before Judge Blum,  there  were
    further witness statements from the appellant, his current partner, and
    the mother of his oldest daughter, who were  all  tendered  for  cross-
    examination.


56. The appellant and the respective mothers of his daughters confirmed the
    evidence I had been given previously which was to the effect  that  the
    appellant and his daughters and the appellant's current  partner  would
    all be devastated were he to be deported, because  the  most  important
    thing in his life was his daughters, and he was very important in terms
    of the care and love he provided to them all.  The appellant's  partner
    continued to insist when questioned that the appellant had not known he
    did not have leave to be in this country although this  was  challenged
    on behalf of the respondent.


57. In cross-examination,  the  mother  of  the  appellant's  oldest  child
    confirmed that her current partner assisted her with the upbringing  of
    his own children, and agreed that it was fair to say that if  that  was
    needed he could help with the parenting of all her children.  They  had
    been together now for six years.


58. So far as the appellant's youngest daughter was concerned, she had been
    born in September 2018.


59. In cross-examination, when asked why the Tribunal  should  believe  the
    appellant now in light of his previous history, the  appellant  replied
    that after his second child had been born, while he was in custody,  he
    had realised that he needed to be a father to his children and that  he
    had to be there for her and not "on the wrong side  of  the  law".   He
    said this had made him realise how important it was and so he had  made
    a promise to himself.


60. When Mr Lindsay pointed out to the appellant that he had been found  by
    a judge to have fabricated a claim for asylum,  the  appellant  replied
    that he "wouldn't say this was a lie" because "I was in  danger  then".
    He claimed that he needed to see his children on a daily basis  and  if
    he did not it would break both him and them as well.


61. As I have already  indicated,  the  social  worker's  report  was  very
    positive and the appellant's close relationship with his daughters  was
    noted in letters from his daughters' school as well.


Closing submissions


62. On behalf of the respondent, Mr  Lindsay  noted  that  aspects  of  the
    factual matrix remained the same as they had been  before  Judge  Blum,
    although he accepted that the Tribunal had to look at the situation  as
    it was now.  However, it remained the case that for almost  the  entire
    period the appellant had been in the UK he had been without leave, that
    his offending had escalated and that possession  of  heroin  and  crack
    cocaine with intent to supply, during the  currency  of  a  supervision
    order were extremely serious offences, as reflected in  the  length  of
    sentence  received.   In  view  of  the  appalling  offending  history,
    committed while the appellant had no right to be in this country, these
    were factors which were relevant if the Tribunal got to  the  stage  of
    considering whether there were very compelling reasons "over and above"
    the Exceptions.  On the facts of this case, even if the effect  on  the
    appellant's current partner or children could  be  said  to  be  unduly
    harsh (which was not accepted) this appeal could not succeed.


63. Notwithstanding the appellant's claim to have become more mature and so
    on, such that he was confident he would not reoffend, it  remained  the
    case that he was prepared to lie in order to attempt to remain  in  the
    UK, and no credence should be given to his bare assertion that he would
    remain out of trouble.  With regard to the appellant's current partner,
    the claim that neither she nor the appellant  himself  had  been  aware
    that he was unlawfully present in the UK was clearly false.  This was a
    transparently dishonest attempt to improve the appellant's position.


64. So far as the mother of the appellant's oldest child is concerned,  she
    had eventually accepted in evidence that  the  father  of  her  younger
    children could assist her if necessary.


65. With regard to the possible argument that unless the appellant  was  to
    be allowed to remain, his daughters (the half siblings) would  not  see
    each other, Mr Lindsay referred the Tribunal to Judge Blum's finding at
    paragraph 47 (which it was agreed  was  the  starting  point  for  this
    Tribunal) that the appellant's father would be capable of "facilitating
    communication and interaction between the appellant's three daughters".




66.  Mr  Lindsay's  primary  submission  was  that  in  light  of   current
    jurisprudence, the effect on neither the  appellant's  current  partner
    nor his daughters of his deportation  could  properly  be  said  to  be
    "unduly harsh", but even if it was, just, the requirement to  establish
    that there were "very compelling circumstances  over  and  above"  this
    Exception could not possibly be satisfied.  There  was  nothing  relied
    upon by the appellant other than those difficulties which all  families
    in these circumstances would undoubtedly face.  There  was  nothing  so
    exceptional or compelling about the circumstances  in  this  case  that
    could possibly meet the further elevated threshold.


67. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Moriarty repeated an argument  which  he
    had made before Judge Blum (which Judge Blum rejected) that "on  lesser
    facts" than those in this case, undue harshness had been found by other
    courts.  He expanded on the submission which had been contained in  the
    skeleton argument to the effect that if the Tribunal was to  find  that
    the effect of more than one of the appellant's partner or children  was
    "unduly harsh" the Tribunal could look at the cumulative effect of  his
    deportation on all of these people.  That is that the cumulative effect
    on more than one  would  be  over  and  above  what  was  necessary  to
    establish that the effect was "unduly harsh".


68. So far as the respondent's suggestion  that  the  Tribunal  should  not
    accept at face value the appellant's  "bare  assertion  that  he  is  a
    reformed man" because he had previously been found to  have  fabricated
    an asylum claim, there was a wealth of evidence  in  support  of  this,
    which is contained within the bundle.  Reliance was particularly placed
    on the most recent report from his probation officer at B17 and 18.  It
    was submitted that part of the "very compelling circumstances" in  this
    case was that the appellant had turned his life around.


69. Following the primary submissions made on behalf of both parties, there
    was further discussion as to the authorities, and in particular to  the
    Decision of the Presidential Tribunal (the President, Mr Justice  Lane,
    UTJ Gill and UTJ Coker) which had been reported as RA (s.117C:  "unduly
    harsh"; offence: seriousness) Iraq [2019] UKUT 00123,  which  had  been
    promulgated just two months before this hearing, on 4 March 2019.


My assessment


70. As already indicated above, the issues I have to  determine  are  in  a
    very  narrow  compass.   It  is  effectively  accepted  both  that  the
    appellant  has  a  genuine  parental  relationship  with  all  of   his
    daughters, who are qualifying children and also that  his  relationship
    with his partner is genuine and subsisting.  As provided within Section
    117C of the 2002 Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act,  the  public
    interest requires his deportation "unless  there  are  very  compelling
    circumstances, over and above those described in Exception ... 2", that
    Exception being that the effect on any one of his partner  or  children
    would be "unduly harsh".


71. The starting point for consideration of whether the effect on a partner
    or child can properly be said to be "unduly harsh"  (which  has  to  be
    considered  independently  of  the  circumstances  of  the  appellant's
    offending or immigration history) must be the Supreme Court's  adoption
    at paragraph 27 of KO of the  guidance  given  by  the  Upper  Tribunal
    (McCloskey J President and UTJ Perkins) in MK (Sierra  Leone)  v  SSHD.
    At paragraph 27 of KO, giving the judgment of the court, Lord  Carnwath
    stated as follows:


         "The earlier cases


         27.  Authoritative guidance as to the meaning of "unduly harsh"  in
             this context was given by the Upper Tribunal ... in MK (Sierra
             Leone) v SSHD [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC), ... a decision  given  on
             15 April 2015.  They referred to the  "evaluative  assessment"
             required of the Tribunal:


                  "By way of self-direction, we  are  mindful  that  'unduly
                  harsh' does not equate with  uncomfortable,  inconvenient,
                  undesirable or  merely  difficult.   Rather,  it  poses  a
                  considerably more  elevated  threshold.  'Harsh'  in  this
                  context, denotes something severe, or bleak.   It  is  the
                  antithesis of pleasant or comfortable.   Furthermore,  the
                  addition of the adverb 'unduly' raises an already elevated
                  standard still higher.""


72. As Lord Carnwath went on to note, that definition "did  not  apparently
    depend on any view of the relative severity of the particular offence".




73.  When  considering  "the  standard  that  needed  to  be  applied  when
    considering the meaning of "unduly harsh"  ",  at  paragraph  35,  Lord
    Carnwath stated further as follows:


         "35. Miss Giovanetti for the Secretary of State  takes  issue  with
             that alternative reasoning, [suggested by the  Upper  Tribunal
             in KO], which she criticises as applying too low  a  standard.
             I agree.  The alternative seems to me to treat "unduly  harsh"
             as meaning no more than undesirable.  Contrary to  the  stated
             intention it does not in fact give effect to the much stronger
             emphasis of the words "unduly harsh" as approved  and  applied
             in both MK and MAB."


74. In other words, the test is an extremely high one.


75. As stated not only within the text but also within the head note of RA,
    the decision made most recently before this hearing by the Presidential
    Tribunal, rehabilitation  of  an  offender  will  not  ordinarily  bear
    material weight in favour of a foreign criminal.  At  paragraph  22  of
    RA, the Tribunal found as follows:


         "22. It is important to keep in  mind  that  the  test  in  Section
             117C(6) is extremely demanding.  The fact that, at this point,
             a  Tribunal  is  required  to   engage   in   a   wide-ranging
             proportionality   exercise,   balancing   the   weight    that
             appropriately falls to be given to  factors  on  the  proposed
             deportee's side of the  balance  against  the  weight  of  the
             public interest, does not in any sense permit the Tribunal  to
             engage in the sort of exercise that would  be  appropriate  in
             the case of someone who is not within  the  ambit  of  Section
             117C.  Not only must regard be had to the factors set  out  in
             Section 117B, such as giving little weight to  a  relationship
             formed with a qualifying partner that is established when  the
             proposed deportee was in the United  Kingdom  unlawfully,  the
             public interest in the deportation of a  foreign  criminal  is
             high; and even higher for a person sentenced  to  imprisonment
             of at least four years."


76. An important finding in RA was  that  the  way  in  which  a  court  or
    tribunal should approach Section 117C remains, post-KO, as set  out  in
    the judgment of Jackson LJ in NA (Pakistan) &  Another  v  SSHD  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 662.  At paragraph 23 of RA, the Tribunal set out what Jackson
    LJ had stated at paragraphs 33 and 34 of NA (Pakistan) as follows:


         "33.  Although  there  is  no  'exceptionality'   requirement,   it
             inexorably follows from the statutory scheme that the cases in
             which circumstances are sufficiently  compelling  to  outweigh
             the high public interest in deportation  will  be  rare.   The
             commonplace incidents of family life, such as  ageing  parents
             in poor  health  or  the  natural  love  between  parents  and
             children, will not be sufficient.






         34.  The best interests of children certainly carry  great  weight,
             ...  Nevertheless, it is a  consequence  of  criminal  conduct
             that offenders may be separated from their children  for  many
             years, contrary to the best interests of those children.   The
             desirability  of  children  being  with  both  parents  is   a
             commonplace  of  family  life.   That   is   not   usually   a
             sufficiently compelling  circumstance  to  outweigh  the  high
             public interest in deporting foreign criminals.   As  Rafferty
             LJ observed in SSHD v CT (Vietnam)  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  488  at
             [38]:


                  "Neither  the  British  nationality  of  the  respondent's
                  children nor their likely separation from their father for
                  a long time are exceptional circumstances  which  outweigh
                  the public interest in his deportation"."


77. I also must have in mind the often repeated dictum of Sedley LJ  in  AD
    Lee v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 248, in which he stated as follows:


         "The tragic consequence is that this family, short-lived as it  has
         been, will be broken up for ever, because of  the  appellant's  bad
         behaviour.  That is what deportation does."


78. It is in the light of this guidance which has been repeatedly given  by
    the higher courts, that I have to consider first whether the effect  on
    the appellant's current partner or children could properly be  said  to
    be not just "severe" or "bleak" but so beyond severe or bleak as  could
    properly be said, in light of judicial guidance to be  "unduly  harsh".
    Even if I were to find that it could be so described, I would then have
    to find that the circumstances of this case  were  so  compelling  that
    despite the seriousness of the appellant's offending (and I would  have
    to give full account to this, in particular that he was convicted of an
    offence that did not just merit a  sentence  of  imprisonment  of  four
    years, but a higher sentence, because he  had  been  in  possession  of
    Class A drugs with intent to supply) such as to outweigh the very large
    public interest in his deportation.


79. In my judgement, the appellant has not come close to establishing  that
    the effect on either his partner or his  daughters  could  properly  be
    described as "unduly harsh" in the sense of those words posited by  the
    former president of this Tribunal in MK.  While it is accepted that the
    children and the appellant's partner have a genuine  relationship  with
    him, in essence, there is little about  their  circumstances  as  would
    make their case any more severe or bleak than that  of  other  families
    whose parents or partner are to be deported.  Neither the children  nor
    the appellant's partner have any particular vulnerabilities,  and  will
    have the assistance of an extended family as well as school friends and
    other friends within the community.  They will all undoubtedly miss the
    appellant considerably, and their lives will be poorer because  of  his
    absence.  However, the effect on the children (who are  blameless)  and
    his partner (who I did not believe when she said that neither  she  nor
    the appellant appreciated that  he  was  in  this  country  unlawfully)
    cannot, in my judgement, be truly said to be more severe or bleak  than
    in hundreds or thousands of other deportation cases where the effect of
    deportation is to split up a loving family.   As  Sedley  LJ  remarked,
    sadly "that is what deportation does".


80. On these facts, not only do I find that the effect on  the  appellant's
    partner and his daughters cannot properly be said to be "unduly harsh",
    but I do not consider that it would be open  to  any  judge,  on  these
    facts, so to find.


81. Even were it to be just arguable on these  facts  that  a  judge  could
    properly find the effect on the children to be so severe or bleak as to
    cross the  threshold  of  a  standard  even  higher  than  an  elevated
    standard, I would need to go  beyond  this  and  find  very  compelling
    circumstances  beyond  the  unduly  harsh   effect   this   appellant's
    deportation would have on his partner and/or children.  When looking at
    this aspect of the case, as agreed by the parties before the  Court  of
    Appeal, I would have to have regard to the seriousness of the offending
    when conducting the overall proportionality exercise, and I would  have
    to find that not only was the effect on any one of the children or  the
    appellant's partner "unduly harsh" but also the circumstances  were  so
    compelling that notwithstanding  the  very  great  public  interest  in
    deporting someone with a long criminal record which has  culminated  in
    convictions for possessing with intent  to  supply  crack  cocaine  and
    heroin, offences furthermore committed whilst the appellant was subject
    to supervision from his previous offending, this  public  interest  was
    outweighed by the "very" compelling circumstances.   On  the  facts  of
    this case, that is a conclusion which, in  my  judgement,  no  Tribunal
    could reach.


82. It follows that this appeal must again be dismissed, and I so find.





Decision


The appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision to  deport  him  is
dismissed, under Article 8, his appeal on other  grounds  having  previously
been dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008


Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed:
                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Dated:   22 May 2020


