
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00731/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 23rd May 2017                          |On 12th June 2017                 |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                           Mr ZINABU TESFAY HAILE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms O T Taiwo (LR)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Butler, promulgated on 22nd August 2016, following a  hearing  at
    Birmingham Sheldon Court on 22nd July 2016.  In the determination,  the
    judge dismissed the appeal of the Appellant,  whereupon  the  Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, and claims to have been a national of Eritrea,
    who was born on 2nd September 1978.  He appealed against a decision  of
    the Respondent Secretary of State refusing his  asylum  claim  and  his
    claim for humanitarian protection under paragraph 339C of HC  395,  the
    decision being dated 7th August 2015.

The Judge's Findings

 3. IJ Butler did not find the Appellant to be credible, did not  find  him
    to have been a national of Eritrea as he claimed, but of Ethiopia,  and
    most importantly did not find him to  have  suffered  ill-treatment  on
    account of an arrest  warrant  which  he  submitted,  which  IJ  Butler
    translated as having been issued eight years before the Appellant  left
    his country to come to the UK seeking asylum.  The judge also  did  not
    find the Appellant to be a regular churchgoer at the Pentecostal Church
    in the UK as claimed or, that there was evidence  before  the  Tribunal
    that the Appellant was HIV positive such as to not be  able  to  return
    back to his own country.

Grounds of Application

 4. The grounds of application state that  the  judge  had  fallen  into  a
    factual error to the extent of erring in law by basing a finding  on  a
    misapprehension of fact.  This was to do with the purported warrant  of
    arrest relied upon by the Appellant, as  being  issued  in  June  2007,
    according  to  the  Gregorian  calendar,  a   date   which   would   be
    substantially inconsistent with the Appellant's  account.   The  dates,
    however, on the original document, and on the translation, are given in
    the Ethiopian calendar without conversion.  Had  there  been  a  proper
    conversion of the date, it would have shown the arrest  warrant  to  be
    dated March 2015, a date that  would  have  been  consistent  with  the
    Appellant's account.  On 10th October 2016, permission  to  appeal  was
    given by the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. By determination promulgated on 13th April  2017,  the  Upper  Tribunal
    under DUTJ Jordan, made  findings  of  an  error  of  law.   The  Upper
    Tribunal accepted that the translation of the arrest  warrant  properly
    fell to be construed as being in March 2015, rather  than  eight  years
    prior to the Appellant leaving his country to seek sanctuary in the UK.
     However, the Tribunal held that the re-making of the decision  permits
    the Tribunal not to re-open the First-tier Tribunal Judge's findings on
    whether the Appellant had established he was an Eritrean  national,  so
    that the finding on his being an Ethiopian national  stood  as  it  was
    found by the judge at first instance.  This is  because  the  Appellant
    had offered insufficient evidence on that issue.

 6. Secondly, the Appellant's claim to  be  a  Pentecostal  Christian  also
    could not be re-opened as the judge below had already  found  that  the
    Appellant's claim was not credible in the  respect  alleged.   However,
    permission was now given to amend the  Grounds  of  Appeal  to  include
    raising an issue (if supported by appropriate medical evidence)  as  to
    the impact of the Appellant's claim to be suffering  from  HIV/AIDS  to
    which the First-tier Tribunal Judge made no reference.  It is in  these
    circumstances that this matter comes  before  me  today  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

The Hearing

 7. At the hearing before me on 23rd May 2017, it was agreed that the  only
    evidence now put forward before this Tribunal, postdated  the  decision
    of IJ Butler,  and  consisted  of  essentially  two  letters  from  the
    University Hospitals of Leicester NHS Trust.  The first  of  these  was
    dated 2nd November 2016 and the second was  dated  19th  January  2017.
    Both were signed off by  Dr  Sahota  ,  the  consultant  in  infectious
    diseases  at  the  University  Hospitals   of   Leicester,   and   were
    substantially the same.  Ms Taiwo, made the following submissions.

 8. First, that at paragraph 68 IJ Butler had stated that no  evidence  had
    been submitted in relation to the Appellant suffering from AIDS/HIV but
    this was incorrect.  Furthermore, reliance had been placed by the judge
    upon the old authority of N v SSHD [2005] UKHL 31 (see paragraph 57  of
    the refusal letter), but that decision had been now superseded  by  the
    Grand Chamber judgment in Paposhvili v Belgium - 41738/10  (Merits  and
    Just Satisfaction) [2016] ECHR 1113 (13 December 2016).

 9. Second, in accordance with the direction given by UTJ Jordan, there was
    to be produced fresh evidence for consideration by this Tribunal.

10. Third, this evidence,  from  the  Leicester  University  Hospitals,  is
    compelling that the Appellant has chronic HIV and is under treatment.

11. Fourth, the  Grand  Chamber  decision  in  Paposhvili  now  requires  a
    decision maker to look at the evidence in  the  receiving  country  and
    also consider whether the government in  the  receiving  country  would
    withhold treatment, and in this case, given that the Appellant had fled
    that country, there was  every  reason  that  the  treatment  would  be
    withheld.  Finally, if the Appellant had actually fled from his country
    then he would not find it easy at all to access HIV treatment,  whether
    that be in Eritrea or in  Ethiopia,  as  against  the  availability  of
    treatment to him in this country which he was already receiving.

12. For his part, Mr Armstrong submitted that this appeal could not succeed
    for the following  reasons.   First,  there  was  simply  no  objective
    evidence that the Appellant would not be able to access HIV  treatment,
    given that he had been diagnosed with HIV in Ethiopia  itself  as  long
    ago as 2010.  Second, at paragraph 68 of the determination,  the  judge
    had observed that the Appellant had obtained free medical treatment for
    his condition in Ethiopia.  Third, the two reports by Dr Sahota do  not
    suggest that the Appellant should not be removed.   Fourth,  Article  3
    was still a high threshold, even if Paposhvili were to be applied,  and
    nothing had been said  to  show  that  this  high  threshold  could  be
    circumvented.  Fifth, the findings of Judge Butler in relation  to  the
    Appellant's credibility were  preserved  intact,  and  if  he  was  not
    believable on the other issues, he  would  not  be  believable  on  the
    suggestion that he could  not  access  treatment  in  Ethiopia  either.
    Sixth, the arrest warrant was just one part of the whole evidence  that
    the Appellant had submitted, and none of that was found to be  credible
    by the judge below.  Finally, at paragraph  26  the  judge  had  stated
    that, "he had said in his screening interview he had  no  knowledge  of
    any arrest warrants and this account was simply  not  credible".   This
    showed that, even if the arrest warrant had been wrongly translated, it
    still remained of dubious value  because  the  Appellant,  by  his  own
    admission, had stated that he had no knowledge of  the  arrest  warrant
    against him.

13. For her part, and to Ms Taiwo's great credit, she admitted that she had
    no evidence showing that the Appellant could not  access  treatment  in
    Ethiopia or Eritrea.  The best she could do was to lay emphasis on  his
    current medical condition as documented in the reports of Dr Sahota.

Re-making the Decision

14. I have re-made the decision  on  the  basis  of  the  findings  of  the
    original judge, the evidence before IJ Butler, and the evidence that  I
    have had put before me today, together with  the  submissions  of  both
    representatives in this matter.  I am dismissing this  appeal  for  the
    following reasons.  First, this is a case where,  as  Dr  Sahota  makes
    clear in both his reports, the Appellant was  actually  diagnosed  with
    HIV "in 2010 in Ethiopia".  Second, the evidence that  the  judge  gave
    before IJ Butler was that he "has stated that he received free  medical
    treatment for  the  condition  in  Ethiopia"  (paragraph  68).   Third,
    notwithstanding Paposhvili, it is well established  that  in  order  to
    succeed on health grounds under Article 3, a claimant  is  required  to
    surmount a particularly high hurdle, and in  this  case  the  Appellant
    simply has not succeeded in doing so.  Not only  was  he  diagnosed  in
    2010 with HIV in Ethiopia but he even received  free  medical  care  in
    Ethiopia for his condition, and if his credibility is  damaged  in  the
    way that has been indicated by the Tribunals before now, then there  is
    no reason why upon return, he cannot continue to access such treatment.
     Nor was there any reason for suggesting that such treatment  would  be
    withheld.  Finally, in point of fact, no evidence to  this  effect  has
    actually been put  before  this  Tribunal  by  those  representing  the
    Appellant.  All in all, accordingly, this appeal cannot succeed.

Notice of Decision

15. I dismiss the appeal.

16. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 10th June 2017
