
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/00833/2018
     PA/00844/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 April 2019                             |On 3 May 2019                 |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                    FA-W
                                     EFS
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr. G. O'Ceallaigh, Counsel instructed by Duncan
Lewis & Co.
For the Respondent:    Mr. S. Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellants against a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge O'Hagan, promulgated on 23 January  2019,  in  which  he
    dismissed the Appellants' appeals against the Respondent's decision  to
    refuse to grant asylum.


 2. Given that these are asylum appeals, I make an anonymity direction.


 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:

         "I believe that the grounds raise issues that  should  properly  be
         considered by the Upper Tribunal given that the Italian authorities
         accepted responsibility for the appellants' claims some three years
         ago and that the deadline for their removal expired in 2016.   Both
         challenges may be argued."

 4. The Appellants attended the hearing.  In preliminary  discussions,  Mr.
    Walker noted that this was an unusual case, and accepted that,  on  the
    evidence before the Tribunal, the Appellants could not  be  removed  to
    Italy.  It had  already  been  accepted  by  the  Respondent  that  the
    Appellants could not return to  Eritrea  or  Ethiopia.   Therefore  the
    ultimate conclusion had to be that  the  Appellants  should  have  been
    granted asylum, and that the decision involved the making of a material
    error of law.


 5. Accordingly, given this concession, I stated  that  I  found  that  the
    decision involved the making of material  error  of  law.   I  set  the
    decision aside, and allowed the Appellants' appeals on asylum  grounds.



Error of law

 6. Ground 1 refers to the approach taken by the Judge when considering the
    risk posed to the Appellants on return to Italy.  However, given that I
    find that ground 2 is made out, I do not need to consider ground 1.


 7. Ground 2 states:

         "The FTT erred in failing to consider whether the Appellants  could
         lawfully be returned to  Italy  at  all,  considering  the  Italian
         authorities accepted responsibility for  their  claims  some  three
         years ago and the deadline for their removal expired in 2016."

 8. The Judge refers at [10] to the fact that the first Appellant had  been
    granted refugee status in Italy valid  until  25  November  2018.   The
    hearing took  place  on  2  January  2019,  by  which  time  the  first
    Appellant's refugee status in Italy had  expired.   Therefore,  on  the
    evidence before the  Judge,  the  first  Appellant  did  not  have  the
    documentation which would enable her to return to Italy.  However,  the
    Judge gave no consideration to this.  He proceeded  on  the  assumption
    that she would be able to return to Italy, without considering how  she
    would be able to do this.

 9. Ground 2 submits that the Appellants are unable to return to  Italy  at
    all as the  transfer  under  the  Dublin  III  Regulation  should  have
    occurred within six months of the acceptance  of  the  request  by  the
    United Kingdom for Italy to take responsibility for the Appellants.  It
    is accepted that this issue was not before the Judge, but that  it  was
    "Robinson obvious" ([1997] 3 WLR 1162).  However, while  it  might  not
    have been argued in this way, as I have set out at [8] above, the Judge
    was aware that the first Appellant's Italian documentation had  expired
    by the date of the hearing.

10. It is clear from evidence in the Respondent's bundle that a request was
    made by the United Kingdom to Italy  for  the  first  Appellant  to  be
    readmitted to Italy on the basis that  she  had  been  granted  refugee
    status by  the  Italian  authorities.   The  letter  from  the  Italian
    authorities is at E1, and a translation is at E2.  It states:

         "We would like to inform you that the request for the  re-admission
         of the aforementioned Eritrean national has been accepted and  that
         we authorise his (sic) re-entry in Italy.


         Please kindly send information  relative  to  the  date,  time  and
         flight on which the transfers will be made."

11. The details are given as "Alemu Frutta, born 25/02/1992".   The  letter
    is dated 10 August 2015.  The Respondent was aware that he had  made  a
    request to Italy to readmit the first Appellant.   He  was  aware  that
    this request had been made in August 2015, and that Italy had  accepted
    responsibility for her.


12. The grounds of appeal quote Article 29(1) of the Dublin III  Regulation
    which provides that transfer should  happen  "as  soon  as  practically
    possible, and at the latest within six  months  of  acceptance  of  the
    request by another Member State".  Article 29(2) provides:

          "Where the transfer does not take place  within  the  six  months'
         time limit, the Member State responsible shall be relieved  of  its
         obligations to take charge or to take back the person concerned and
         responsibility shall then be transferred to the  requesting  Member
         State."

13. On the evidence provided by the Respondent in his bundle to the  First-
    tier Tribunal, the request had been made in August 2015.  The six month
    time period had therefore expired in February 2016,  almost  two  years
    before the decision was made.  Despite this,  the  Respondent  gave  no
    consideration  to  this  issue  in  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter.
    Although  these  submissions  were  not  made  before  the   First-tier
    Tribunal, the Judge gave no consideration at all to the  practicalities
    of return to Italy, although he was aware that the evidence before  him
    indicated that the first Appellant's Italian documentation had  already
    expired by the date of the hearing.


14. In failing to consider how the Appellants would be able  to  return  to
    Italy, the Judge made a material error of law.  On the evidence  before
    me, which was provided to the First-tier Tribunal  by  the  Respondent,
    responsibility had transferred from Italy to the United Kingdom.  Given
    that it was accepted by the Respondent that the  Appellants  could  not
    return to Eritrea or Ethiopia, I  find  that  the  Appellants'  appeals
    succeed on asylum grounds.

15. I thank Mr. Walker for his approach to the Appellants' appeals.

Decision

16. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involves  the  making  of  a
    material error of law and I set the decision aside.

17. I remake the  decision  allowing  the  Appellants'  appeals  on  asylum
    grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 1 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

There was no indication that a fee had been  paid  and  so  I  make  no  fee
award.


Signed                                  Date 1 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
