
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00466/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 26th September 2016                    |On 14th October 2016              |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                    [A C]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Ferguson (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, is a male, a citizen of Pakistan, who was born on  [  ].
    He appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  a  decision  of  the
    Respondent dated 4th January 2016, refusing his  application  to  grant
    him  asylum  or  any  other  form  of  international  protection  under
    paragraph 336 HC 395.

 2. The Appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Miles who
    noted the Appellant's claim at the outset as one of having worked for a
    man by the name of [MA], and the ISI, which  claim  was  not  accepted.
    This matter, together with the fact that the Appellant last entered the
    United Kingdom in  December  2005,  but  did  not  claim  asylum  until
    December 2015, had been arrested as an  overstayer  in  May  2007,  was
    taken, as the judge observed,  as  having  undermined  the  Appellant's
    credibility (see paragraph 10.2).

 3. Judge Miles noted that on the Appellant's own account,  "he  has  never
    suffered any physical assault in Pakistan; indeed, the only assault  he
    has suffered has taken place in the United  Kingdom"  (10.2).   Second,
    Judge Miles observed that the other fact of significance here was  that
    "the Appellant is asserting that he and his family are at real risk  in
    Pakistan on the basis of events which concluded in  2005,  some  eleven
    years ago" and that, "there is  simply  no  evidence  that  [MA]  still
    involved in the ISI in Pakistan or that he is still  a  person  of  any
    significance or influence or even that he is  still  alive"  (paragraph
    10.12).  Finally, the judge noted that there was  "simply  no  evidence
    whatsoever over and above the Appellant's assertion that either  he  or
    any member of his family is at real risk in Pakistan from [MA]  or  the
    government authorities in the guise of ISI" (paragraph 10.13).

 4. The appeal was dismissed.

 5. At the hearing before me on 26th September 2016, Mr Ferguson, appearing
    on behalf of the Appellant, made submissions, based upon the grounds of
    application.  First, he submitted that there had been a failure to give
    adequate reasons or a failure to make material findings of fact.   This
    was important because there had been a positive credibility finding (at
    paragraph 10.11) where the  judge  had  said  that  "his  account  does
    satisfy the low threshold  test  and  accordingly  I  make  a  positive
    credibility finding in his favour.  From that account it is very  clear
    that he has a strong  subjective  fear  of  persecution  on  return  to
    Pakistan" (paragraph 10.11).  What was important, was  that  the  judge
    had completely failed to address  the  crucial  issue  as  to  how  the
    Appellant would act on return to Pakistan.  He detested  the  Pakistani
    authorities.  He detested the army and intelligence services.  They had
    ruined his life.  Therefore, if he expressed anti-government views  and
    anti-army views then he was bound to  attract  adverse  attention  that
    would lead to his ill-treatment.  This had not been  addressed  by  the
    judge.

 6. Second, such findings as were made were  perverse  and  irrational,  in
    that the suggestion that the Appellant had not been harmed in Pakistan,
    could not stand because at paragraph 10.12, the judge  had  found  that
    one of the reasons that the Appellant was not  believed  was  that  his
    family had not been harmed.  However, it was not the  Appellant's  case
    that his family would definitely be harmed.  His  case  was  that  they
    would not be so harmed if he left Pakistan which was the reason that he
    did in fact do so.

 7. Third, the judge failed to give adequate reasons for finding this on  a
    material matter, such as having speculated as  to  the  murder  charge.
    The judge said (at paragraph 10.12) that the  murder  charge  was  "not
    manufactured against the Appellant by [MA]  but  arose  in  some  other
    way".   However,  if  the  Appellant's  general  credibility  had  been
    accepted (at paragraph 10.11) then this finding did not sit  well  with
    that suggestion.

 8. Fourth, the judge failed to give adequate reasons as to why [MA]  would
    want to indefinitely detain the applicant, rather than silence  him  by
    removing him from Pakistan.  The Appellant had  a  previous  friendship
    with [MA].

 9. For his part, Mr Tufan, appearing on behalf of the Secretary of  State,
    submitted that the Appellant arrived in  2005.   He  did  not  make  an
    asylum application until 2015.  In fact, he went back to  Pakistan  for
    eighteen days.  He maintains he was mistreated.  He  maintains  he  was
    mistreated even in the UK.  However, there is police evidence available
    showing that the Appellant had been drunk and disorderly and  had  been
    arrested by the Metropolitan Police in London itself.  The reality  was
    that the judge had been very lenient towards the  Appellant  given  his
    own conduct here.  The CMC Report confirms his drunkenness in  the  UK.
    Just because the judge had accepted that the Appellant had a subjective
    fear (at paragraph 10.12) did not mean to say now that he would face  a
    real risk of persecution upon return, as that was an issue that went to
    "objective fear" and the judge was not satisfied that such a  state  of
    affairs would eventuate.

10. In reply, Mr Ferguson submitted that the Appellant did not claim asylum
    earlier because he was afraid for his family and he had  the  money  to
    live upon in the UK.

No Error of Law

11. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside  the  decision.   In  R  (Iran)
    [2005] EWCA Civ 982, Lord Justice Brooke made it  clear  that,  "it  is
    well known that  'perversity'  represents  a  very  high  hurdle'"  (at
    paragraph 11).  His lordship stated that, "far too often  practitioners
    use the  word  'irrational'  or  'perverse'  when  these  epithets  are
    completely inappropriate" (paragraph 12).  This is  a  case  where  the
    judge has rightly observed that the Appellant has  never  suffered  any
    physical assault in Pakistan.  His only assault is the one he  suffered
    in the UK and there is no evidence whatsoever as  to  those  assailants
    being people who had been set upon the Appellant by the authorities  in
    Pakistan or by [MA] himself.

12. As the  judge  observed,  the  assertion  that  "[MA]  must  have  been
    responsible for the initial accusation" was one which  "is  speculative
    and is not supported by any objective evidence" (paragraph 10.12).  The
    judge also observed that if [MA]  was  as  powerful  as  the  Appellant
    claims him to be then he would have had sufficient connections to  have
    had the Appellant arrested and detained for an indefinite period,  "yet
    he chose not to do so despite the deterioration in  their  relationship
    and the number of occasions on which  he  had  been  denounced  by  the
    Appellant in social gatherings" (paragraph 10.12).

13. These are findings of fact that were perfectly open to the judge on the
    evidence before him.  The findings do not show such conclusions to have
    been perverse or to have been irrational.  Furthermore, the judge  also
    noted that the Appellant was now claiming to have a fear in relation to
    events that occurred eleven years ago and this too  was  improbable  in
    the light of the evidence (paragraph 10.12).  Much has been said  about
    the Appellant's  "subjective  fear".   However,  the  judge  eventually
    concluded (at paragraph 10.13) that, "I am not satisfied  that  he  has
    established that his subjective fear on  that  account  is  objectively
    well-founded".

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 12th October 2016




