
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00614/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 6 July 2017                       |on 11 July 2017                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                      B
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Darvishzadeh, of Ethnic Minorities Law
Centre, Edinburgh
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a decision by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Bradshaw, promulgated on 19 April 2017, dismissing her  appeal  against
    refusal of asylum.

 2. The case was based on risk arising from insult to the royal  family,  a
    matter taken very seriously by the authorities and by many  members  of
    the public in Thailand.  The judge accepted  the  appellant's  account,
    but did not find her experiences to amount  to  persecution.   He  held
    that the authorities had not gone beyond, and were  not  likely  to  go
    beyond, intimidation tactics.

 3. The appellant sought permission  to  appeal  to  the  UT  on  extensive
    grounds,  but  on  the  bulk  of  them  permission  was  not   granted;
    unsurprisingly, as the decision is plainly  fair,  thorough,  and  well
    considered.

 4. Permission was granted due  to  one  omission.   The  judge  noted  and
    accepted evidence of threats from non-state actors, but made no finding
    about risk from such actors.

 5. Mr Matthews correctly accepted that there was an omission.   He  argued
    that it was immaterial, because the evidence did  not  support  such  a
    risk, so that the decision should not be set aside; alternatively,  for
    the same reasons, remaking should have the same outcome.

 6. Miss Darvishzadeh founded on two points in the summary  of  conclusions
    in Bagdanavicius v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 1605:
         "(5)     The effectiveness of the system provided is to  be  judged
         normally by its systemic ability to deter and / or to  prevent  the
         form of persecution of which there is a risk, not  just  punishment
         of it after the event ...
         (6)      Notwithstanding systemic sufficiency of  state  protection
         in the receiving state, a claimant may still  have  a  well-founded
         fear of persecution if he can show that  its  authorities  know  or
         ought to know of circumstances particular to his case  giving  rise
         to his fear, but are unlikely to provide the additional  protection
         his particular circumstances reasonably require ..."

 7. Miss Darvishzadeh referred to online threats,  to  reports  of  popular
    vigilantism against anti-monarchists, and to a  news  report  that  the
    justice minister said that those insulting the monarchy should best  be
    punished by being "socially sanctioned", but vowed to pursue people who
    violate the law (p. 227, appellant's FtT bundle).  She  said  that  the
    reports  showed  that  such  vigilantism  was  against  the  law,   but
    encouraged rather than discouraged by the authorities,  and  that  they
    would not enforce the law, particularly to protect  a  person  of  high
    profile whom they had already targeted in this context, even if not  to
    the extent of past persecution.

 8. Mr Matthews submitted that online  threats  were  only  empty  bombast;
    there was nothing to show  that  perpetrators  might  act  against  the
    appellant; such threats did not materialise during the time  she  spent
    in Thailand; reports of vigilantism were from the  time  when  feelings
    were high soon after the death  of  the  king;  reports  from  official
    sources were to the effect that they would act against vigilantism, not
    to the contrary; and the evidence did not reach the  level  of  a  real
    risk, or show lack of legal protection.

 9. I reserved my decision.

10. I find that the error by way of omission does require the  decision  to
    be set aside.  A significant part of  the  appellant's  case  was  left
    unresolved, when there  was  material  on  which  it  might  have  been
    resolved either way.

11. It is not an issue to be decided, but is relevant, that the appellants'
    husband would clearly be at risk of he were to re-enter Thailand, based
    on risk arising from insult to the royal family, from  the  authorities
    and from non-state actors.

12. The appellant does not have nearly as high a profile  as  her  husband,
    but she does have a quite significant profile by association, which was
    well publicised during  the  difficulties  she  encountered.   Although
    reports  also  show  that  her  husband  disassociated  her  from   his
    publications, that does not clear away all risk  of  prejudice  against
    her.

13. The appellant apprehends the consequences of returning to Thailand,  to
    the extent of a genuine subjective fear (as Mr Matthews was prepared to
    accept).  I note that she has leave to remain and a clear  likely  path
    to maintaining such leave,  based  on  her  relationship  with  her  UK
    citizen husband and child (although that is not a factor which helps to
    prove objective risk).

14. There was some force in the arguments for the respondent.  Although the
    official attitude is very pro-monarchy, and against any  expression  of
    criticism, I do not read the minister's pronouncements  as  encouraging
    vigilantism, but rather to the contrary.

15. If the appellant were to re-enter Thailand, the evidence  supports  the
    proposition of  a  risk  from  vigilantes.   The  appellant's  fear  is
    objectively more than fanciful; she has sensible reasons to be  afraid.
    Given her relatively high profile, I find  that  the  possibility  that
    some fanatic might identify and target her is not remote, but real.

16. I think  that  the  government  of  Thailand,  despite  its  entrenched
    attitudes towards criticism of the monarchy, would  not  be  likely  to
    condone such behaviour, and would be likely to take  action,  including
    prosecution, if it occurred.

  17. Applying Bagdanavicius  to  the  evidence:  The  evidence  shows  that
      punishment might follow after the event.  It falls short  of  systemic
      ability to deter or prevent the form of persecution of which there  is
      a risk.  The authorities know  the  circumstances  particular  to  the
      appellant's case giving rise to her fear.  Those  circumstances  would
      reasonably  call  for  additional  protection.   Although  their  past
      behaviour amounted to intimidation but not to persecution, it is  less
      than likely, against that background,  that  they  would  provide  the
      additional  protection  which  her  particular   circumstances   would
      reasonably require, were she to re-enter Thailand.

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set  aside.   The  following
    decision is substituted: the appeal on asylum  grounds,  as  originally
    brought to the FtT, is allowed.

19. An anonymity direction was  made  in  the  FtT.   The  matter  was  not
    addressed in the UT, so anonymity is preserved herein.




           [pic]
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


           7 July 2017
