
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00562/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard Remotely by Teams via Field House|Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 15th June 2021                      |On 24th June 2021              |
|                                       |                               |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                                     BP
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Jones, of Counsel, instructed by Farani Taylor
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Interpretation:        Ms S Dutta in the Hindi language


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    Introduction

   1. The appellant is a citizen of India born in 1970. She arrived  in  the
      UK as a visitor in June 2006, and overstayed when her leave  to  enter
      expired in December 2006. She made an asylum application to regularise
      her stay in June 2012,  this  was  certified  and  refused.  She  made
      further representations in June 2012, and July 2013 which were refused
      as a fresh claim in November 2017. A judicial review of that  decision
      resulted in it being withdrawn and  a  new  asylum  and  human  rights
      decision was made dated 26th November 2018.  This  appeal  is  against
      this  decision  refusing  the  appellant's  asylum  and  human  rights
      application. The appeal was dismissed on all grounds in a decision  of
      the First-tier Tribunal Judge PB Conrath dated 24th February 2020

   2. Permission to appeal was granted  and  I  found  that  the  First-tier
      Tribunal had erred in law for the reasons set out in my decision to be
      found at Annex A to this decision.

   3. The matter comes before me now to remake the appeal. In my decision on
      error of law I preserved the findings at paragraphs  27,  28,  29  and
      part of paragraph 36 of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  which
      concern the violent  history  of  the  appellant's  separated  husband
      against her, his threats to his children, his visit to  them  and  the
      fact that he would not pose a threat to her outside of her home  area.
      The rest of the findings in the conclusion section at paragraphs 26 to
      44 of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal were set aside.

   4. This appeal starts from the position that the appellant  has  shown  a
      real risk of serious harm in her home area of  the  state  of  Gujarat
      (which includes the village of Undhela in Matar  where  her  separated
      husband lives and the city of Ahmedabad in Bapunagar where her parents
      and siblings lived) as conceded for the respondent at the error of law
      hearing, but not outside that area. The parties agreed before me  that
      the issue which  is  determinative  of  this  appeal  is  whether  the
      appellant can reasonably be expected  to  find  safety  by  internally
      relocating within India or whether this would be unduly harsh.

   5. Further it was conceded by Mr Clarke that it would be unduly harsh for
      the appellant to have to relocate alone outside of her home  area  due
      to her being a woman with a history of being a victim of violence, her
      age, health, lack of education and any work experience outside of  the
      home. As a result the only factual issue to be determined was  whether
      the appellant's adult son, all other relevant  male  relatives  having
      passed away, would assist her by relocating with her to another  place
      in India such as Mumbai or Bangalore. Ms Jones confirmed that this was
      the only issue remaining  in  the  appeal  in  light  of  Mr  Clarke's
      position, and that she did not argue that the appeal could succeed  on
      Article 3 ECHR medical grounds or separately on Article 8 ECHR grounds
      related to the situation of the appellant in the UK.

   6. It is clear from the decision of the First-tier Tribunal at  paragraph
      24 that this appeal is not advanced under the Refugee Convention,  due
      to the lack of a Convention reason, but is a protection claim advanced
      claiming humanitarian protection and Article 3 ECHR protection on  the
      basis of a real risk of serious harm to the appellant as a  result  of
      the criminal behaviour of a non-state actor,  namely  the  appellant's
      husband. Nothing was said by Ms Jones, who was also counsel before the
      First-tier Tribunal, that led me to believe  that  this  position  had
      changed.

   7. The hearing was held via a remote Teams hearing in light of  the  need
      to reduce the transmission of the Covid-19 virus, and in light of this
      being found to be acceptable by both parties, and  being  a  means  by
      which the appeal could be fairly and  justly  determined.  There  were
      difficulties for Ms Jones and the interpreter in joining  the  hearing
      and generally in obtaining good visual reception at first, but by  the
      time the hearing commenced properly with the appellant's oral evidence
      these difficulties had been resolved. There was a short adjournment at
      the start of the hearing to enable  Mr  Clarke  to  read  the  witness
      statements and expert report  that  had  been  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal which he had been unable to access prior  to  that  time.  He
      confirmed that he was ready to proceed after this adjournment.

Evidence & Submissions - Remaking

   8. The key evidence  of  the  appellant  from  her  statements  and  oral
      evidence in relation  to  the  issue  of  internal  relocation  is  as
      follows. She left school with no  qualifications  at  the  age  of  16
      years. She is now 51 year old. She has never  worked  outside  of  the
      home and has no skills to do so. Her father and two brothers are dead,
      as evidenced by their death  certificates  with  translations  in  the
      bundle, and so her only male relative in India is her son  who  is  28
      years old.

   9. With respect to her son her evidence in her witness statement of  19th
      November 2019 and the supplementary witness statement prepared for the
      hearing in the First-tier Tribunal is that he refused to  contact  her
      or have any sort of relationship with her. She also says that she  had
      been getting information from both of her children that she should not
      return to India due to the threats to her life  from  her  husband  by
      telephone and knew that her husband had  recently  got  her  telephone
      number by beating and terrorising her son.

  10. In her statement for the hearing before the Upper Tribunal dated  June
      2021 and in oral evidence,  the  appellant  says  that  she  last  had
      contact with her son 6 or 7 months  ago  when  she  rang  him  from  a
      neighbour/friend's phone.  In this call he again made it clear  he  is
      unwilling to help her and wants her to stop bothering him, and that he
      is of the opinion that there is no relationship  between  them.  After
      communicating this her son ended the call. She did not ask him  for  a
      statement to confirm this as he disconnected  the  call.  She  accepts
      that his attitude has changed since he made his statement in 2012 when
      he said he missed her and was afraid for  her  safety.  She  does  not
      really know why but she believes that her husband  has  intervened  to
      turn him against helping her and that her son is now afraid to  do  so
      as he is afraid of his father. Her son lives in the  same  village  as
      his father, Undhela in Gujarat. She believes that he  works  but  does
      not know what type of job he does. She believes that he  was  educated
      until the age of 21  or  22  years  in  the  city  of  Ahmedabad.  Her
      recollection is that she last saw her son when he was 10 or  11  years
      old, and his upbringing up until that  age  had  been  shared  between
      herself and her parents/ his maternal  grandparents,  and  after  that
      time he lived with his maternal grandparents full time.

  11. The appellant says she feels she would vulnerable and her  life  would
      be at risk if she were to internally relocate  in  India  because  she
      would be a lone woman with no male family member.  She  says  that  it
      would further not be reasonable for her to have relocate  because  she
      would have no accommodation or ability to work to  pay  rent,  and  is
      very unwell and takes a large number of medications for  a  number  of
      physical and mental health  conditions  including  depression,  kidney
      disease, respiratory problems, hypertension, and TB which is currently
      being treated with antibiotics. These conditions are  corroborated  by
      her GP notes and medical letters in the bundle.

  12. In a statement dated 14th August 2012 the appellant's son who, at that
      time, lived in Ahmedabad in Gujarat with his grandparents, sister  and
      orphaned nieces explains that he had also suffered  domestic  violence
      in the form of threats to kill and beatings from his father. He states
      that he is afraid that his father would cause his mother serious  harm
      or death and although he misses her very much he understands that  she
      cannot return to India, and asks that she  be  granted  permission  to
      stay in the UK.

  13. Mr Clarke for the respondent relied upon the reasons for refusal  that
      the appellant could find safety in India by internally relocating away
      from her violent separated husband to a large city such as  Mumbai  or
      Bangalore. He accepts  that  the  suggestion  that  she  could  access
      shelters for victims of domestic violence is not reasonably  supported
      by the country of origin materials. Instead Mr Clarke submits that the
      appellant could internally relocate by moving away from her home  area
      with her son, who is now 28 years old. It is  not  therefore  accepted
      that the appellant would not have male support if she were  to  return
      to India. Mr Clarke accepted that without her son it would  be  unduly
      harsh for the appellant to internally relocate, but submitted that  it
      was not credible that her son was not willing to assist her. This  was
      because there was no evidence from him or  credible  explanation  from
      the appellant as to why her son  had  changed  from  the  position  he
      expressed in 2012, some 9 years ago, of support and missing his mother
      to now being unwilling to assist her in any way. It was  not  credible
      he was taking his father's side as only 7 or 8  months  prior  to  the
      hearing in the First-tier  Tribunal  in  November  2019  he  had  been
      violent to him and demanded money from him. India is a vast country of
      29  states  and  1.3  billion  people  and  it  is  not  credible  the
      appellant's son would be afraid of  his  father  in  another  part  of
      India, particularly  as  the  preserved  findings  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal include that there is no risk to the  appellant  outside  her
      home area. The expert  report  states  that  the  appellant's  son  is
      unlikely to relocate with the appellant, but this is  speculative  and
      unreasoned. As the supposed change in  the  son's  position  makes  no
      sense, and there is no statement from him to support it, I should find
      that it is a fabrication. There is further no evidence that  he  would
      not be able to work and earn money outside the appellant's home  area,
      and thus that it would be  unduly  harsh  for  the  both  of  them  to
      relocate to another large city in India.

  14. Ms A Jones for the appellant  argues,  in  summary,  as  follows.  The
      appellant could not reasonably relocate in India to another large city
      such as Mumbai with her  adult  son  because  he  is  not  willing  to
      accompany  her  to  provide  practical,  moral,  social  and  economic
      support. It was not argued in the reasons for refusal letter that  the
      appellant could reasonably relocate within India with  the  assistance
      of her son, instead reference was made to  shelters  which  Mr  Clarke
      concedes now it would not be reasonable for her to have to rely  upon.
      The argument that the appellant's son would  relocate  with  her  only
      arose as an argument before the First-tier  Tribunal,  and  so  it  is
      significant that in the 2019 witness statements, made before the First-
      tier Tribunal hearing, that  the  appellant  said  that  her  son  was
      refusing to have any contact with her and wanted no relationship  with
      her. This position has thus been consistently  maintained  since  this
      time by the appellant.

  15. Ms Jones submits that it is plausible that the appellant's  son  would
      take this position as he has had no functional family  life  with  his
      mother, the appellant, due to the domestic violence she  had  suffered
      since before his birth. The appellant  had  had  numerous  splits  and
      reconciliations with her husband due to the violence, and her son  has
      had an unstable early life, alternating spending time with his parents
      and his grandparents. When the appellant left India  he  was  just  13
      years old and went to live permanently with his grandparents,  and  he
      is now 28 years old. In 2012 in his statement, when he  was  20  years
      old, he said he gave a statement in support of his mother, and said he
      missed her, but he did not say he was prepared to move from  his  home
      in Gujarat and become responsible for  upkeep  and  care.  Nine  years
      later it is plausible given the poor relationship from  childhood  and
      the long separation that he wants nothing further to do with  her.  It
      is clear from the appellant's evidence that to speak to him she had to
      call on a neighbour's phone as her son  does  not  want  to  take  her
      calls.  In light of the fragile relationship between the two  of  them
      the appellant's evidence is credible that her son will not assist her.
      As moving with her son is the only way in  which  internal  relocation
      would not be unduly harsh for the appellant, and  given  the  credible
      evidence that he is not  willing  to  assist  her  in  this  way,  the
      appellant is entitled to succeed in her appeal.

  16. At the end of the hearing I reserved my determination of  the  appeal.



Conclusions - Remaking

  17. It is a preserved  finding  from  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the
      appellant has suffered serious harm and it is accepted  by  Mr  Clarke
      that the appellant is at real  risk  of  serious  harm  from  domestic
      violence from her separated husband in  her  home  area.  The  parties
      agreed that the only issue to be determined is whether  the  appellant
      could reasonably be expected to relocate internally in India. In  this
      connection Mr Clarke concedes that it would be unduly  harsh  for  the
      appellant to have relocate  as  a  lone  woman  given  her  particular
      circumstances which include the history of domestic violence, her age,
      her lack of education, her lack of ever having worked outside  of  the
      home and her state  of  physical  and  mental  ill-health.  He  argues
      however that she could be reasonably expected to  relocate  away  from
      Gujarat to another large city such as Mumbai or Bangalore with her son
      who is now 28 years old. To determine this  appeal  I  must  therefore
      determine the credibility of the appellant's claim that her son is not
      willing to assist her in this way.

  18. In determining this issue I am guided by what is  said  in  the  Upper
      Tribunal decision of AS (Safety of Kabul)  Afghanistan  CG  UKUT  2020
      130, particularly at paragraph 44 of that decision with respect to the
      application of Article 8 of the Qualification Directive as  reproduced
      at Rule 339O(i) of the Immigration Rules. In summary the assessment of
      whether someone seeking protection can find safety as it is reasonable
      for them to internally relocat is a holistic one and a test  of  great
      generality, with no factor having inherent priority over another.  The
      task is to assess whether the appellant could lead a relatively normal
      life without undue hardship in the context of the  country  concerned.
      As set out at paragraph 48 of that decision the burden of proof is  on
      the appellant to prove that relocation to the  destination  identified
      by the respondent is unduly  harsh.  The  standard  of  proof  is,  of
      course, the lower civil standard, sometimes  expressed  as  a  serious
      possibility.

  19. I find that the appellant's relationship  with  her  son  is  properly
      described as highly disrupted by the violence of his father.  For  the
      first thirteen years of her son's life he moved back and forth  living
      with her parents/his grandparents and then returning to live with  the
      appellant and her husband/his father who violently beat both  her  and
      her son, and in addition during this first  period  of  his  life  the
      appellant  spent five months without him  with  relatives  in  the  UK
      trying to get respite from her life of abuse in India. After this time
      the appellant's son lived with  his  grandparents  in  Ahmedabad  with
      regular, if unwelcome due to their threats and violence,  visits  from
      his father at least until he finished his education there when he  was
      21 or 22 years old.

  20. In 2012 her son, was aged 20 and a student in the city  of  Ahmedabad.
      At this point he  said  in  his  statement  prepared  to  support  the
      appellant's asylum application that he missed her a lot but  requested
      that she be allowed to remain in the UK so she could be safe. In  2019
      the appellant said in her witness statements prepared for  the  First-
      tier Tribunal, and thus prior to that hearing, that her son no  longer
      had a relationship with her and wanted her to stop bothering  him.  As
      Ms Jones has submitted this evidence was not submitted in response  to
      a direct contention from the respondent that she could rely  upon  her
      son to relocate internally within  India  as  the  most  said  in  the
      reasons for refusal letter was that he was part of her family support.
      The appellant's evidence has remained consistent since that  time,  in
      her oral evidence and updating witness statement.

  21. The appellant attributes her son's decision to want nothing to do with
      her as being based on the influence of her husband, and  perhaps  fear
      of what his father might do  if  it  had  become  known  that  he  had
      assisted her. It is clear that the appellant's  son  has  now  chosen,
      perhaps in part at least for work as the appellant has given  evidence
      that he is working, to live in  the  same  village,  Undhela,  as  his
      father where his father makes a living from farming.  I  do  not  find
      that the shift in attitude of the appellant's son is implausible.  His
      father is a violent man who abuses alcohol but he has been a  constant
      in his son's life and now, unlikely in 2012, they are  living  in  the
      same village and her son is an independent working adult. As Ms  Jones
      has submitted at no point in his 2012 statement  did  the  appellant's
      son say that he would assist his mother beyond confirming her  history
      of violence and danger as truthful, and I find it plausible after nine
      years that he might wish no longer to remain in contact with a  mother
      who had left him age 13 years and failed, of course through  no  fault
      of her own, to protect him from violence from his father when he was a
      child, and might side with his father, whom the evidence  is  that  he
      has continued to permit to visit him  as  an  adult  despite  his  bad
      behaviour and violence. It is a sad truth that those  subjected  to  a
      life of violence from a parent may come to  see  this  as  part  of  a
      parental relationship that they should accept.

  22. In considering the credibility of the appellant's  evidence  that  her
      son wants nothing to do with her, in addition to the  consistency  and
      plausibility of the history as noted above, I note that the  appellant
      gave what was potentially unhelpful (to her) evidence about her  son's
      level of education and employment: if she had  wanted  to  dishonestly
      embellish her claim with respect to the help that her son could  offer
      she would perhaps not have done this, and instead might have  said  he
      was uneducated and unemployed. The appellant was also cautious in  her
      evidence: saying that he did not know  why  her  son  wanted  no  more
      contact, but it might be because of the influence of  his  father  and
      out of fear of him. These are explanation  which  make  sense  in  the
      context of her experience of living in the same village,  and  in  her
      case house, as her husband, and her  own  genuine  and  understandable
      fear of the man. As Ms Jones has submitted it adds to the  credibility
      of the history that if her son was avoiding contact with the appellant
      that she had her last conversation with him on a neighbour's phone  so
      he could not simply recognise the number and refuse the call.  If  the
      son truly wants nothing more to do with the appellant then he might be
      likely to refuse to provide a witness statement saying this, and  thus
      it makes sense that the appellant did  not  think  to  ring  back  and
      request this when he terminated their last call.  In any case if  such
      a statement had been produced it might well  have  been  said  by  the
      respondent to be self-serving or worthy of little weight.

  23. This is an appellant whose history of ill-treatment and  serious  harm
      has been believed: it has been found that she has told  the  truth  in
      relation to key issues in this appeal. This, of course, does not  mean
      she is necessarily telling the truth about everything  in  her  claim,
      however it is a consideration in her favour. Ultimately when  weighing
      all of the evidence, and considering the lower civil standard of proof
      to be applied, I am satisfied, when the issue  is  considered  in  the
      round, that the appellant has given truthful  credible  evidence  that
      her son will not assist her to internally relocate within India  given
      the consistency and plausibility of her evidence, and indications that
      she has not sought to embellish the picture of her son's life so as to
      indicate he could not assist  for  practical  reasons  and  given  the
      finding that she has given truthful evidence about the  real  risk  of
      serious harm she faces in her home area.

  24. It follows that the appellant therefore is at  real  risk  of  serious
      harm if returned to India, and that she  cannot  avoid  this  harm  by
      internal relocation within India by relying upon the assistance of her
      son and that she cannot relocate alone as  this  is  accepted  by  the
      respondent as being unduly harsh, and thus that  she  is  entitled  to
      humanitarian protection and not to be returned to India as it would be
      a breach of her rights as protected under Article 3 ECHR.




    Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  the
      appeal.

   3. I re-make the appeal by allowing it on Humanitarian Protection and  on
      Human Rights Grounds.


Signed:     Fiona Lindsley   Date: 16th June 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

Annex A: Error of Law Decision


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

   1. The appellant is a citizen of India born in February 1970. She arrived
      in the UK as a visitor in June 2006, and overstayed when her leave  to
      enter expired in December 2006. She  made  an  asylum  application  to
      regularise her stay in June 2012, this was certified and refused.  She
      made further representations in June 2012, and July  2013  which  were
      refused as a fresh claim in November 2017. A judicial review  of  that
      decision resulted in it being withdrawn and a  new  asylum  and  human
      rights decision was made dated 26th  November  2018.  This  appeal  is
      against this decision refusing the appellant's asylum and human rights
      application. The appeal was dismissed on all grounds in a decision  of
      the First-tier Tribunal Judge PB Conrath dated 24th February 2020

   2. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Foudy on the 29th April 2020 on the basis that it  was  arguable  that
      the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law in finding that the appellant
      would have sufficiency of protection from the  Indian  justice  system
      when there was expert evidence to the contrary and without  sufficient
      reasoning to explain why that expert evidence was  not  accepted,  and
      further by finding that the appellant's adult son  would  locate  away
      from his father so that the appellant would not be returning to  India
      as a lone woman and thus could reasonably be expected to  find  safety
      by way of internal relocation.

   3. The matter came before me to determine whether the First-tier Tribunal
      had erred in law. The hearing was held at a remote Skype for  Business
      hearing in light of the need to reduce the transmission of the  Covid-
      19 virus, and in light of this being found to be  acceptable  by  both
      parties, and being a means by which the appeal  could  be  fairly  and
      justly determined. Unfortunately, the previous hearing overran so this
      hearing commenced late. There were then  some  issues  with  Ms  Jones
      connecting to the hearing and with me entering  the  hearing,  causing
      some further  delay,  perhaps  caused  by  the  initial  delay  in  it
      commencing.  Once  the  hearing  started  there  were  no  significant
      problems with connectivity or of any other type.

Submissions - Error of Law

   4. In grounds of appeal, drafted by Ms A Jones for the appellant,  it  is
      argued, in summary, as follows. The First-tier Tribunal accepted  that
      the appellant had suffered domestic  violence  from  her  husband  and
      therefore persecution from a non-state actor. It was accepted that the
      appellant's husband was a violent man who threatened his  family,  and
      that he had married a second time, and his second wife had  also  left
      him due to domestic violence. Further it was accepted that there was a
      considerable amount of domestic violence in India particularly by  men
      against their wives. However, it was not accepted that  the  appellant
      was at real risk of serious harm on return to India. This was  because
      the appellant's husband had once been arrested and  detained  for  one
      day for his violent conduct, and  as such it was found that there  was
      sufficiency of protection and further it was found that the  appellant
      could relocate in India as her adult son now lived independently  from
      his father so she could reasonably go and live with  him.  The  First-
      tier Tribunal did not, therefore, give weight to the conclusion of the
      expert, Dr Tran, that she would be at real risk  of  serious  harm  on
      return to India.

   5. It is argued that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law by irrationally
      and/ or without sufficient reasoning concluding that the fact that the
      appellant's husband was arrested and detained for  one  day  and  then
      released without charge sufficed to show  sufficiency  of  protection,
      and discounting the expert evidence and that  of her son that  he  did
      not report his father as he  did  not  believe  the  police  would  do
      anything.

   6. It is also argued that it was irrational/ insufficiently  reasoned  to
      conclude that the appellant would not be returning to India as a  lone
      woman because she could live with her 27 year old son.  The  appellant
      left India when her son was 13 years old and he has  on-going  contact
      with his father who periodically comes to stay with him, and there  is
      no evidence/ reasoning as to why he would  move  to  another  area  of
      India to protect his mother given this background.

   7. Ms Cunha accepted that there was limited reference to the report of Dr
      Tran in the decision and that there was limited reasoning with respect
      to the appellant's son, although this might be explained by the First-
      tier Tribunal not being provided with much information about him.  She
      argued that if the errors contended for with respect to the  reasoning
      regarding sufficiency of protection and internal relocation were found
      to be such that the decision should be set aside and  remade  that  it
      would be appropriate to preserve all of the rest of the  findings  and
      remake the matter with submissions only in  the  Upper  Tribunal.  She
      indicated that Ms Jones had agreed with this approach in the event the
      First-tier Tribunal was found to have erred in law.

Conclusions - Error of Law

   8. The respondent conceded that the appellant had a fear  of  persecution
      on account of domestic violence from her separated  husband  (she  has
      never formally divorced) but argued that the appellant did not qualify
      for international protection as she could relocate internally in India
      and had sufficiency of protection in that country, see paragraph 7  of
      the decision. The First-tier Tribunal concludes  that  it  is  correct
      that she has suffered serious domestic violence and thus  persecution,
      as set out at paragraph 26 of the  decision.  It  was  agreed  by  the
      parties, as I specifically sought their views so this matter was clear
      for any remaking hearing, that the position of the First-tier Tribunal
      was therefore that it was accepted that the appellant was at real risk
      of further domestic violence, and thus serious harm, from her  husband
      in her home area.

   9.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  finds  that  the  appellant   would   have
      sufficiency of protection however, notwithstanding the  conclusion  to
      the contrary of the expert Dr Tran, because the CPIN sets out that the
      situation in India had improved considerably since the appellant  came
      to the UK in 2006 in this respect, with new laws with tough  penalties
      for domestic violence, and particularly with a new criminal law act in
      2013 which provided for new offences and tougher sanctions.  The  CPIN
      concludes, as set out at paragraph 25 of the decision, that  generally
      there is sufficiency of protection in India in such circumstances  but
      that an individualised assessment was required to come to a conclusion
      on the particular facts of any case. It is in this  context  that  the
      First-tier Tribunal concludes that the fact that  when  the  appellant
      did seek protection from the police on one occasion  and  her  husband
      was detained, albeit only for a day, showed  that  in  her  particular
      case it was right to conclude that sufficiency of protection  existed.
      I find that this conclusion is  insufficiently  reasoned  particularly
      because as the report of Dr Tran deals with issues of effectiveness of
       this "new" law citing the CPIN at paragraph 2.5.6 which  sets  out  a
      conviction rate of 18.9% in crimes against women compared  to  one  of
      74% in the UK which is attributed  to  deeply  intrenched  patriarchal
      attitudes held by police, lawyers and judicial officers. The  decision
      needed to engage further with the reasoning of Dr Tran and explain why
      his conclusion was not accepted  particularly  as  he  clearly  was  a
      suitable expert and had consider the CPIN evidence.

  10. The conclusion that the appellant could  also  be  safe  by  means  of
      internal relocation is based on the fact that it is found by the First-
      tier Tribunal that there is insufficient  evidence  that  her  husband
      would be interested  enough  to  come  looking  for  her  as  he  last
      contacted her on the phone 5 or 6 years ago,  and  India  is  a  large
      country and she had not shown he had criminal connections  that  would
      enable him to find her anywhere in that vast country. It is also found
      that internal relocation would not be unreasonable as she would not be
      a "lone woman" as she could live with her son.  I  find  however  that
      there is insufficient reasoning at paragraphs 38 of the decision as to
      how the appellant could reasonably internally relocate to safety  away
      from her violent husband with her son as there seems to be no findings
      as to where precisely her son  lives  in  relation  to  her  separated
      husband, and of  the  practicalities  of  her  son  having  sufficient
      willingness and wherewithal to accommodate  her  and  relocating  away
      from his father, particularly as the evidence indicated that he  lives
      near to his father in the home area and he accepts it when his  father
      turns up at his home to visit him, and also  the  appellant  does  not
      have a close relationship with her  son.  As  such  I  find  that  the
      conclusion that she would not be returning to India as a  lone  woman,
      at paragraph 38 of the decision, is insufficiently  reasoned,  and  in
      turn it is therefore insufficiently reasoned that the appellant  could
      reasonably be expected to relocate within India.

  11. I preserve the findings at paragraphs 27, 28, 29 and the  part  of  36
      which  concern  the  violent  history  of  the  appellant's  separated
      husband, his threats to his children, his visit to them and  the  fact
      that he would not pose a threat to her outside of her home  area.  The
      rest of the findings in the conclusion section at paragraphs 26 to  44
      are set aside.




    Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  the
      appeal but preserve some findings as indicated at paragraph 11 above.

   3. I adjourn the re-making of the appeal.




    Directions

        i) The remaking hearing will consist of oral submissions only via a
           Skype for Business hearing on the issues  of  whether  there  is
           sufficiency of protection in India for the appellant and whether
           it would be reasonable  for  the  appellant  to  finding  safety
           through internal relocation.

       ii) Any further documentary evidence relied upon should be filed and
           served ten days prior to the remaking hearing.

    The time estimate is 2 hours.



Signed:     Fiona Lindsley   Date: 8th September 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

