
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00807/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 October 2016                   |On 1 November 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                ABUBAKER [A]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr A J Bradley, of Peter G Farrell, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a determination by Designated  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald, promulgated on 5 April  2016,  dismissing
    his appeal against deportation.

 2. The appellant's case was that he is gay,  and  thereby  protected  from
    removal to Somalia.

 3. The grounds assert that the judge overlooked evidence which was  before
    him.  The judge implied that the claim to be gay was "cooked up at  the
    last minute for the purposes of the appeal", but did not note that  the
    appellant had been charged with domestic  assault  and  breach  of  the
    peace in relation to his partner, who was  a  man.   This  person  gave
    evidence of a relationship in the past.  This showed that  contrary  to
    this  state  of  affairs  occurring  "at  the  last  minute  before   a
    deportation hearing in 2016... some  2  years  earlier  the  Procurator
    Fiscal viewed the relationship as sufficient in nature to conclude that
    the appellant and [JD]  were  partners  and  the  appellant  should  be
    charged with domestic abuse."

 4. Mr Bradley relied  on  the  grounds,  and  said  that  the  appellant's
    argument was based on the one clear issue.

 5.  Mr Matthews submitted as follows.  The complaint was  dropped.   There
    was no information as to why  the  Procurator  Fiscal  decided  not  to
    proceed.  The existence and terms of  the  complaint  established  very
    little.  This feature of the  case  showed  no  error  in  the  judge's
    carefully nuanced reasoning, leading to the conclusion that even if the
    appellant had a short homosexual relationship,  the  evidence  did  not
    disclose that he is a gay man.

 6. Mr Bradley in response said that while  the  decision  gave  apparently
    sensible reasons, they did not withstand reference to the  evidence  in
    the criminal complaint.  At paragraphs 56 and 57 the judge  upheld  the
    respondent's argument that the claim to be homosexual was a last  ditch
    invention, which if true would have emerged much earlier,  particularly
    as the appellant had numerous earlier opportunities to state  it.   The
    significance of the criminal  complaint  was  that  the  appellant  had
    identified himself as gay in quite another context, over a year  before
    he had the motivation of avoiding deportation, and that undermined  the
    judge's reasoning on a crucial issue.

 7. I reserved my decision.

 8. I think that the appellant's grounds rather overplay  the  significance
    which might reasonably attach to the criminal complaint.  It  does  not
    imply that the Procurator Fiscal  must  have  reached  a  view  on  the
    appellant's general sexual orientation or on the degree  of  permanence
    of any same-sex partnership.  The apparent fact of a  gay  relationship
    was only an additional item in a charge, and the case did  not  proceed
    to court.

 9. The grounds suggest that the judge may not have been referred  directly
    to the copy of the criminal complaint at the hearing, which would  have
    alerted him to the fact that the allegation  was  a  domestic  assault.
    (The appellant at the time had the same representatives.)

10. The judge's final conclusion might have been the same, even if  he  had
    specifically alluded to this point.

11. Nevertheless, I find substance in the ground that it was  an  important
    aspect of the judge's thinking that the claim to be homosexual was only
    an invention when faced with deportation, and that the existence of the
    complaint  was  an  indication  that  the  appellant   acknowledged   a
    homosexual  identity,  at  least  to  some  extent,  well  before  that
    incentive existed.

12. The point does not appear to have been put to the judge as  clearly  as
    it might have been, but the evidence was there.  I  am  persuaded  that
    the absence of reference to this item is a significant enough  omission
    to require the decision to be set aside.

13. Although the refusal letter held that the appellant  would  not  be  at
    risk, even if he is a gay man, the judge did not deal with the case  on
    that alternative.

14. The decision of the first-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  its
    findings are to stand. The nature of  the  case  is  such  that  it  is
    appropriate in terms of section 12(2)(b)(i) of  the  2007  Act  and  of
    Practice Statement 7.2 to remit the case to the first-tier Tribunal for
    an entirely fresh hearing.

15. The member(s) of the first-tier Tribunal chosen to  consider  the  case
    are not to include Designated Judge Macdonald.

16. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.



            [pic]


            31 October 2016
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




