
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00950/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28th July 2016                    |On 30th September 2016               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     MA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Pipe, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
Appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply  with  the  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


 1. The parties before the Tribunal both agreed that an anonymity direction
    should be made as the appeal concerned protection issues.

 2. The Appellant, with permission, appeals the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Pacey) who, in  a  determination  promulgated  on  21st
    March 2016, dismissed his appeal against the decision of the Respondent
    for his deportation pursuant to Section 32(5) of  the  UK  Borders  Act
    2007.

 3. The Appellant's immigration history can be summarised as follows.   The
    Appellant claims to have entered the UK on 4th October 2000 and made an
    asylum claim on the same day.  His claim was refused by  the  Secretary
    of State on 8th February 2001 and refused again, on reconsideration, on
    13th July 2001.  The Appellant appealed that decision which  was  heard
    by the First-tier Tribunal but his appeal  was  dismissed  on  in  July
    2002.  There is a copy of that decision in the Respondent's  bundle  at
    G1.  The basis of  the  Appellant's  claim  related  to  his  political
    opinion and his membership and activity for a political party which was
    part of the monarchist movement.  The  judge  considered  the  evidence
    that had been given  by  the  Appellant  relating  to  events  in  Iran
    including his arrest, detention and ill-treatment and  escape  but  for
    the reasons given in that determination he did not find the Appellant's
    account to be credible and rejected the factual  basis  of  his  claim.
    The judge reached the conclusion that the Appellant had not come to the
    attention of the authorities and that he would not be at risk  of  harm
    on return.

 4. Following that decision, the Appellant remained in the United  Kingdom.
    During the Appellant's residence in the United Kingdom he has  received
    a number of criminal convictions which have been summarised within  the
    papers as having  received  26  convictions  for  43  offences.   Those
    offences are set out in the refusal letter and a risk assessment report
    provided on behalf of the Appellant.  The most recent  conviction  took
    place in November 2014.

 5. On 15th January 2015, the Appellant was informed of  his  liability  to
    deportation and on 6th February 2015 representations were submitted  on
    his behalf setting out the reasons why he should not be  deported  (see
    M2).  They included further representations relating  to  a  protection
    claim (based on his political opinion and past history) and reliance on
    his circumstances in the UK (including his length of residence and  his
    relationship with a British citizen and their family life).

 6. On 12th June 2015 a deportation order was made and on 21st August  2015
    the Respondent made a decision refusing a protection claim and a  claim
    on human rights grounds (Article 8).  The  Appellant  appealed  against
    that decision and the appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal on 7th
    March 2016.

 7. The basis upon which the Appellant's case was advanced was set  out  by
    the judge within the determination.  The Appellant  feared  persecution
    on return as a result of his support for a  political  party  which  he
    referred to  as  "Azadi"  and  that  this  was  part  of  the  royalist
    (monarchist) movement.  He had joined the party in 1997 (see  paragraph
    [3] of original FtT determination).  He set out his activities for that
    group, namely that  he  was  distributing  leaflets  and  spraying  the
    political emblem of the movement on the streets.  He maintained that he
    was detained, questioned, beaten and tortured but had escaped from Iran
    when a nurse in the hospital he was in confided to him  about  his  own
    opposition to the regime  and  helped  him  escape.   In  essence,  the
    Appellant relied upon the same factual background that  had  previously
    been relied upon when making his original  asylum  claim  in  the  year
    2000.  As the First-tier Tribunal Judge observed at paragraph  [8]  the
    previous judge had not accepted the account  given  and  in  particular
    that he did not accept that the Appellant had  escaped  from  detention
    and neither did he believe that he had been arrested  and  detained  in
    the first place.  Thus as the judge  recorded  at  [9]  the  Appellant,
    within the deportation proceedings, sought to re-open the asylum  claim
    based on fresh evidence which was the provision of an expert report.

 8. As to his Article 8 claim, the Appellant  relied  upon  his  length  of
    residence and the private life he has established in the United Kingdom
    since his arrival in or about October 2000 and  also  relied  upon  the
    establishment of a family life with his partner.  It was  not  disputed
    by the Respondent that he was in a relationship, nor that the Appellant
    had established a private and family life.  The Appellant  also  relied
    upon evidence  relevant  to  his  criminal  offending,  namely  a  risk
    assessment which concluded that he represented only a low risk of  harm
    to others and that there was a low risk  of  re-offending.   There  was
    also evidence he relied upon which demonstrated that he was now free of
    drug addiction.

 9. As to the relationship between the Appellant and his  partner,  it  was
    accepted by the Respondent that she could not go with him to  Iran  for
    the reasons set out at [12].  Evidence was given in relation  to  their
    business and  the  effects  upon  his  partner  if  the  Appellant  was
    deported.   It  was  noted  that  there  were  no  children   of   that
    relationship.

10. The judge heard evidence from the Appellant and his  partner  and  took
    into account the bundles of documentation provided  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant and the material provided on behalf of the Respondent.

11. In a determination promulgated on 29th June 2015  the  judge  dismissed
    his appeal on protection and human rights grounds  and  thus  dismissed
    his appeal under the UK Borders Act 2007.

12. The judge's findings can be summarised as follows.  In relation to  his
    protection claim, the judge applied the principles set out in the  case
    of Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702 and that the  first  determination  of
    the Tribunal promulgated in July 2002 was the starting point  but  that
    the Appellant relied upon new evidence  which  entitled  the  judge  to
    "reassess the asylum claim" (see paragraph [19]).  The judge considered
    the expert report and its contents which referred to a risk  on  return
    if he were to engage in political activity with the relevant party.  In
    particular, the judge made reference to paragraph [144] of  the  report
    where objective evidence suggested  that  activists  did  come  to  the
    attention of the  authorities.   The  judge  found  that  she  was  not
    concerned with "activists" in general but members of the group that the
    Appellant claimed to be a member of.  The judge noted that  the  author
    of the report had no details of the group that the Appellant claimed to
    be a member of and that whilst the expert report at paragraphs [139] to
    [143] gave examples of persecution of activists, the judge  found  that
    the Appellant fell within a very different category from most of  those
    referred to, namely that he had not taken part in any protests  against
    the re-election of the president, he did not take up arms  against  the
    Islamic system, and that none of those referred  to  in  the  objective
    evidence set out by the expert appeared to have  been  members  of  the
    group which the Appellant claimed he was a member of.

13. The judge also took into account that the expert report  recorded  that
    Iranian royalist/monarchist opposition is  not  currently  active,  and
    further found on the evidence that the Appellant during his time in the
    United Kingdom (the past sixteen years) did not claim to  have  engaged
    in any monarchist political activities in the United Kingdom.

14. The judge considered the evidence relating  to  the  existence  of  the
    political group that the Appellant claimed to  be  a  member  of.   The
    judge found that having  considered  the  evidence  within  the  expert
    report, the author could find no evidence that such  a  group  existed.
    Thus the judge found that  if  that  was  the  case,  he  could  hardly
    continue to be a member of such a group, even if it were accepted  that
    he had been a member  at  any  material  time.   The  judge  sought  to
    distinguish the examples of  ill-treatment  of  individuals  affiliated
    with pro-monarchist groups on the basis that they were not  members  of
    the Azadi.  Thus the judge found after consideration of the report that
    the evidence did not show that this Azadi Party  existed  or  that  its
    members came to the adverse attention of the authorities.

15. The judge at [23] also considered the risk of harm to the Appellant  on
    return based on his past drug convictions.  The  judge  considered  the
    expert evidence but found that it  referred  to  punishment  for  those
    involved in drug trafficking and drug offences  referring  to  offences
    committed in Iran.  The report also made reference to drug addiction as
    a crime in Iran, however  the  judge  found  at  [23]  that  it  was  a
    significant part of the Appellant's case that  he  is  now,  and  would
    remain, drug free.  The judge distinguished paragraph  [213]  from  the
    present case on the basis that the Appellant was not in  any  of  those
    categories given that his account was that he was drug free.  The judge
    found that the report  focused  upon  punishments  for  those  who  had
    committed drug related offences and it did not clearly set out what the
    attitude of the authorities is to those  who  had  convictions  abroad.
    The judge also found that it was  not  clear  whether  the  authorities
    would be in any event aware of the convictions of the  Appellant.   For
    the reasons given, the judge attached  minimal  weight  to  the  expert
    report and thus did not find that there was any reason to  depart  from
    the earlier findings made of the First-tier Tribunal.

16. As to Article 8, the judge found that there  was  clear  evidence  from
    both the Appellant and his partner that shortly after the  relationship
    began and when it started to become more serious,  that  the  Appellant
    made his partner aware of his precarious immigration  status  but  they
    went on nonetheless to establish their family  life.   The  judge  also
    found that the Appellant was not in the UK lawfully.  At [30]  attached
    minimal weight to the Appellant's partner's evidence that her  presence
    in the UK was necessary because of her parents and their  health.   The
    judge found there was no  objective  evidence  to  support  any  health
    related problems or the nature and consequences of any  such  problems.
    The judge found that there were benefits designed to  cater  for  those
    who have care and attention or supervision needs.  The judge did accept
    the Appellant's partner's evidence about the effect upon her family and
    business if the Appellant were to  return  to  Iran.   The  judge  also
    accepted at [30] that the Appellant was now drug free and at a low risk
    of re-offending (based on the evidence advanced by the Appellant in the
    form of a risk assessment and from a particular agency).

17. The judge also found that the Appellant  established  his  private  and
    family life at a time when he had no lawful immigration status and that
    he could not have assumed that he would have obtained any such  status,
    given his record of offending and the dismissal of  his  asylum  claim.
    Whilst the judge accepted it  was  unduly  harsh  for  the  Appellant's
    partner to go with him to Iran, the judge did not find that it would be
    unduly harsh for the Appellant's partner to remain in  the  UK  without
    the Appellant.

18. The judge found that the Appellant could not meet the Immigration Rules
    and when considering the issue of whether there  were  very  compelling
    circumstances to outweigh the public interest in deportation, the judge
    considered the factors in favour of the  Appellant  but  at  paragraphs
    [31] to [34] reached the conclusion that the balance lay in  favour  of
    deportation and that  there  was  a  strong  public  interest  in  this
    particular Appellant's deportation.  The judge  consequently  dismissed
    the appeal on all grounds.

19. The Appellant applied  for  permission  to  appeal  which  was  refused
    initially by the First-tier Tribunal on 13th  April  2016.   Permission
    was granted by the Upper Tribunal on 5th May 2016.

20. I heard from both representatives who made their submissions before me.
     Mr Pipe on behalf of the Appellant relied upon the written grounds and
    also made further oral submissions.  Mr Bates relied upon the  Rule  24
    response filed and also made oral submissions.  Those  submissions  are
    set out in the Record of Proceedings and will be incorporated  into  my
    consideration of whether  or  not  the  grounds  demonstrate  that  the
    judge's decision involved the making of an error on a point of law.

The Grounds

21. The first ground advanced on behalf of the  Appellant  relates  to  the
    judge's consideration of his protection claim.  Firstly it is submitted
    that the judge's approach to the Devaseelan principles were flawed  and
    secondly, it is asserted that the judge erred in her assessment of  the
    expert report when considering the risk on return.

22. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  considered  the  Appellant's  protection
    claim at paragraphs [10] to  [24]  of  the  determination.   The  judge
    stated as follows:-

         "19. I first deal with the asylum issue.  I remind myself  that  at
             First-tier level the asylum appeal was  dismissed.   I  remind
             myself of what was said in Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702.  The
             first determination stands as an assessment of the  claim  the
             Appellant was making at the time of  that  determination  and,
             apart from anything else, if issues and evidence on the  first
             and  second  appeals  are  materially  the  same,  the  second
             Tribunal should treat the issue as being settled by the  first
             decision rather than allowing the matter to  be  re-litigated.
             In this appeal, of course,  it  is  said  that  there  is  new
             evidence which entitles me to reassess the asylum claim.

         20.  The Appellant relies upon a report, dated 19th February  2016,
             from Dr Fatah.  The skeleton argument helpfully provided by Mr
             Pipe refers me to relevant parts of the report.  At  paragraph
             63 it is said that  if  the  Appellant  engages  in  political
             activity with the relevant party that it is likely  to  result
             in his detention.   At  paragraph  136  it  says  there  is  a
             possibility that the Appellant could be penalised if  he  were
             returned to  Iran  and  at  paragraph  144  it  is  said  that
             objective evidence suggests that  activists  do  come  to  the
             attention  of  the  authorities  and  are  penalised  for  the
             activities.  I am not, however, concerned with 'activists'  in
             general but only members of the group  in  question.   I  note
             that at paragraph 137 the  author  of  the  report  says  that
             specific details of the group in question were  not  available
             to him.  Paragraphs 139-143 give examples  of  persecution  of
             activists.  The Appellant to  my  mind  falls  within  a  very
             different category from most of those  referred  to.   He  has
             not, for example, taken part in any protests against  the  re-
             election of the president, he did not take up arms against the
             Islamic system and none of those referred to in the paragraphs
             to which I have referred appear to have been  members  of  the
             group of which the Appellant claims he is a member.

         21.  I note also that at paragraph 209 it is said that  an  Iranian
             royalist/monarchist opposition is  not  active  and  I  remind
             myself that the Appellant does not claim to  have  engaged  in
             any monarchist political activities  in  the  United  Kingdom.
             The concluding sentence in paragraph 209 - 'the  Azadee  Group
             has not been found as in the objective evidence observed  ...'
             does not make sense.

         22.  I remind myself that one of the questions put to the author of
             the report was whether the Azadee Group still  exists.   There
             is no indication in the report  that  it  does.   If  that  is
             indeed the case the Appellant could hardly continue  to  be  a
             member of it, even if it were accepted  that  he  had  been  a
             member at any material time.  I note that in paragraph 67  the
             author of the report says that '... the status of the royalist
             branch Azadee in Iran is not clear ...' and although  he  goes
             on to give examples of ill-treatment of individuals affiliated
             with pro-monarchist groups those persons do not appear to have
             been members of Azadee.  Although, at paragraph 48,  Dr  Fatah
             says that the Appellant associates himself  with  the  claimed
             Azadee Group he  will  be  in  violation  of  the  fundamental
             principles of the Republic, the tenor of his report as a whole
             does not clearly show that the Azadee still exists, much  less
             that  its  members  come  to  the  adverse  attention  of  the
             authorities.

         23.  I note also that it is said that  the  Appellant's  past  drug
             problems/convictions could put him at risk.  The report refers
             to punishments of those involved in drug trafficking and  drug
             offences, clearly referring to  offences  committed  in  Iran.
             The report also says that drug addiction is a  crime  in  Iran
             but, set against that, it is clearly a significant part of the
             Appellant's case that he is now, and will remain,  drug  free.
             Paragraph 213 refers to 'Iranians suffering from  drug  abuse'
             and to those found to be trafficking or smuggling drugs.   The
             Appellant is not in any of those categories neither, given his
             account that he is  now  drug  free,  would  he  be  found  in
             possession of drugs.  The report, then in this regard  focuses
             upon punishments for those committing drug related offences in
             Iran.  It does not  clearly  say  what  the  attitude  of  the
             authorities is to those who have convictions of  drug  related
             offences abroad, quite apart from the  fact  that  it  is  not
             clear whether the Iranian authorities would in  any  event  be
             aware of the conviction of the Appellant.

         24.  For the above reasons I attach minimal weight  to  the  expert
             report insofar as it relates to the organisation of which  the
             Appellant claims to be a member and his  past  drug  offences.
             For that reason, and applying Devaseelan principles I  do  not
             consider that I am empowered to re-open the asylum claim  and,
             that being the case, the first decision stands".

23. As the chronology sets out, the Appellant claims to  have  entered  the
    United Kingdom in the year 2000 and had made a claim for  asylum  based
    on his political opinion which was refused by the Secretary  of  State.
    His appeal was subsequently dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal  in  a
    determination promulgated on 3rd July 2002  (exhibited  at  G1  of  the
    Respondent's bundle).  I have set out earlier a short  pr�cis  of  that
    decision.  In essence, the First-tier Tribunal considered  the  factual
    account that  he  had  given  of  his  membership  of  the  party,  his
    subsequent arrest, detention and ill-treatment and escape.  The  First-
    tier Tribunal disbelieved the Appellant's account for the reasons given
    and did not accept that he would be at risk  of  harm  if  returned  to
    Iran.

24. It is submitted on behalf of the Appellant that at paragraph  [24]  the
    judge made a material misdirection in law in  applying  the  Devaseelan
    principles.  In essence, it is submitted that the judge failed to treat
    the 2002 decision as the starting point but as an "end point" (I  refer
    to the oral submissions made), when the judge  should  have  considered
    the new evidence.

25. I do not accept that submission.  Whilst the judge  at  paragraph  [24]
    made reference to not "re-opening the asylum claim", it is  plain  from
    reading paragraphs [19] to [24] in their entirety and as a  whole  that
    the judge had properly applied the correct approach.  At [19] the judge
    properly directed herself to the decision of Devaseelan and  the  whole
    tenor of paragraph [19] demonstrates that the judge was aware that  the
    first determination was the starting point.  Furthermore, the judge  in
    that paragraph properly identified that in this appeal, there  was  new
    evidence  which  entitled  the  judge  to  "reassess  the  claim".   At
    paragraphs [20] -  [24]  the  judge  proceeded  to  consider  that  new
    evidence which had been advanced by the Appellant, namely the report of
    Dr Fatah.  It is not asserted that the judge left out  of  account  any
    other evidence and Mr Pipe accepted the only new evidence was  that  of
    Dr Fatah which had any relevance to his claim.  Having considered  that
    evidence the judge reassessed the asylum claim which is  what  she  had
    said at paragraph [19] and  thus  properly  directed  herself  in  law.
    Consequently this ground does not demonstrate  any  arguable  error  of
    law.

26. The second issue relates to  the  judge's  assessment  of  that  expert
    report.  In the written grounds it is submitted that the  judge  failed
    to consider the expert report at  [48]  where  it  was  said  that  the
    Appellant's political affiliation put him at risk and at [52] where  it
    was stated that his political affiliation  with  a  royalist  political
    movement put him at risk of detention.  The grounds on to  submit  that
    whilst the expert did not have information on the "Azardi" organisation
    he identified Nehzar-e-Azade-e Iran (the Appellant's group was said  to
    be affiliated to this movement)  as  a  monarchist  organisation  whose
    activists were at risk.

27. In his oral argument Mr Pipe submitted that the judge had not  properly
    considered the political group at paragraph [7] of  the  determination,
    by referring to his support of the  movement  known  as  Nehzar-e-Azade
    whereas his claim was that he was part  of  a  movement  known  as  the
    "Azadi" which claimed to be a party affiliated to  Nehzar-e-Azade  (see
    paragraphs [3] and [23] of the  determination)  of  Judge  Renton.   He
    submitted that the judge  only  based  her  findings  on  the  umbrella
    organisation.

28.  He further submitted that Dr Fatah was an accepted expert and he  took
    the Tribunal through the salient parts of Dr Fatah's  report  which  he
    stated had not been properly understood or assessed by  the  judge  and
    that the attribution of minimal weight to the report was irrational  on
    the judge's part.  Whilst Dr Fatah at  paragraphs  [34]  and  [67]  and
    [137] concluded that the "Azadee Group was not a group listed as one of
    the known  groups  or  organisations  associated  with  the  monarchist
    movement" nor  had  it  been  found  in  the  objective  evidence  (see
    conclusion and summary at [2009]), Mr Pipe submitted  that  because  it
    was not referred to in the "open sources" it did not  necessarily  mean
    that the party did not exist.  He further referred the Tribunal to  the
    evidence in the report which supported risk of harm to those supporting
    the Nehzat-e-Azade Party  at  paragraphs  [37]  to  [43]  and  also  at
    paragraphs [68] to [73] of the report relating to those associated with
    pro-monarchist groups.

29. By way of reply,  Mr  Bates  submitted  that  the  judge  had  properly
    considered the expert report and that she was entitled to place minimal
    weight on the report in the light of its contents, her  assessment  and
    also on the factual basis of the claim.  The Appellant's claim had been
    disbelieved by the First-tier Tribunal who did not accept that  he  had
    been detained or ill-treated or that he had come to  the  attention  of
    the authorities in Iran in the  way  claimed  and  that  there  was  no
    evidence that he had engaged in any support of  monarchist  parties  in
    the United Kingdom.  Consequently he submitted,  it  was  open  to  the
    judge to take those matters into account when making an  assessment  of
    the expert report at paragraphs [20] to [24] of her determination.

30. I have considered the submissions made by the parties with care. It  is
    necessary to set out the earlier evidence advanced by the Appellant and
    the findings of the First-tier Tribunal which were made  shortly  after
    the Appellant had made his claim for asylum.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
    in 2002 at paragraph [3] of that decision set out  that  the  Appellant
    had joined a monarchist organisation known only as  the  "Azadi"  which
    had been part  of  the  royalist  movement.   The  judge  recorded  the
    Appellant's oral evidence  at  paragraph  [11]  whereby  the  Appellant
    stated that the Azadi Party had been founded ten years  previously  and
    had been a branch of the Nehzad-Azadi Party.  In his witness  statement
    dated 24th May 2001 he gave further details at paragraph 6 that he  had
    been a member of an organisation who had  promoted  and  supported  the
    "old system when the royal family  were  in  charge".   He  stated  the
    organisation had no name, there was no membership  card  (paragraph  3)
    and he referred to the group as "Azadi" which translated as  "freedom".



31. As set out earlier, the First-tier Tribunal did not  find  his  account
    credible in any respect and comprehensively rejected his account of his
    arrest, detention and escape for the reasons given.  The judge was  not
    satisfied that he would have come to the attention of  the  authorities
    and would be at risk on return.

32. In his witness statement for the present appeal  (dated  22nd  February
    2016 (page 387 of Appellant's bundle at paragraph 10)),  the  Appellant
    described himself as a member of an organisation which had no name  but
    were a branch of the royalist movement who  called  themselves  "Azadi"
    which translated as "freedom".  I observe that the statement of reasons
    (dated 6th February 2015 exhibited at M1 of the Respondent's bundle) at
    paragraph 13 sets out the claim differently by  stating  "he  joined  a
    political group known as Nehzateh Azadee".  That does not  accord  with
    the account of the Appellant either given in 2001  or  now  as  to  the
    status of the group that he previously belonged to.

33. From reading the Appellant's account, and as set  out  from  the  above
    evidence, the Appellant asserted himself to be a member of a group  who
    had no name but called themselves  "Azadi"  meaning  "freedom"  and  he
    claimed to be affiliated or that this was a branch of the  Nehzat-Azade
    Party (see Appellant's  oral  evidence  recorded  by  Judge  Renton  at
    paragraph [11] of his determination).

34. Whilst it is submitted that the First-tier Tribunal  at  paragraph  [7]
    wrongly referred to his support of the  Nehzateh-Azadee,  it  is  plain
    from reading the determination as a whole, and in particular  paragraph
    [8], [19] and [20] and [22] that the judge was fully aware of the basis
    of the Appellant's claim and that he had claimed to be a  member  of  a
    group who called themselves Azadi who were said to be  associated  with
    the Nehzat-Azade Party.  At [22] the judge  specifically  engaged  with
    the expert evidence of Dr Fatah relating to the  existence  of  such  a
    group.  Consequently I find no merit in that submission that the  judge
    only based her assessment on the umbrella organisation.

35. As to the existence of the group the judge at [22] properly  considered
    the expert report of Dr Fatah and was entitled to reach the  conclusion
    that there was no evidence that the group was in existence or that  its
    members had come to the attention of  the  authorities.   At  paragraph
    [34] the expert set out the  names  of  the  groups  and  organisations
    associated  with  the  monarchist  movement.   At  paragraph  [35],  he
    concluded that the Azadi Group was not included in that list.  He  went
    on to say that whilst the group was not listed it did not mean that  it
    did not exist.  It is in this context that Mr Pipe submits that it  was
    wrong of the judge to dismiss the report and to find  no  risk  to  the
    Appellant on the basis that the group was  not  listed.   He  submitted
    that that did not mean that the group  itself  was  not  in  existence.
    However at [37] Dr Fatah recorded that there was no  information  about
    the Azadee Group in the "open sources"  and  at  [137]  could  give  no
    specific details as to the "Azadi" royalist movement and  at  [209]  he
    recorded that there had been no objective evidence found to support the
    existence of such a group.  It was therefore open to the judge to reach
    the conclusion based on the contents of the expert  report  that  there
    was no evidence of the Azadee Group in existence or  that  its  members
    came to  the  adverse  attention  of  the  authorities.   As  Mr  Bates
    submitted, Dr Fatah was unable to find any references to such  a  group
    when undertaking his research and that he, as  an  expert,  was  better
    placed to know if any such  movement  existed  whether  from  any  open
    sources or otherwise based on his own contacts in Iran and  his  status
    as an accepted expert in the field.

36. Furthermore, the only evidence as to the existence of such a group came
    from the Appellant whose account of his  activity  for  the  group  was
    comprehensively disbelieved by the First-tier  Tribunal.   This  was  a
    relevant consideration.  It was therefore open to the judge to consider
    the contents of the expert  report  against  the  background  of  those
    findings.

37. At paragraph [20], the judge considered the Appellant's profile and  it
    was open to the judge to consider that on the findings  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal he could not be described as an "activist" and  that  the
    Appellant did not fall within any of the profiles of those referred  to
    at paragraphs [139] - [144].  It was also a relevant consideration  for
    the judge to take into account  when  assessing  the  contents  of  the
    report and risk on return that  at  the  current  time  the  monarchist
    opposition was not active in Iran (see paragraph [209]  of  the  expert
    report) and that there was no evidence that  in  the  years  since  his
    arrival in 2000 that he had claimed to have engaged  in  any  political
    activities whatsoever, whether monarchist or otherwise.

38. Mr Pipe submits that the judge failed properly to have  regard  to  the
    expert report at paragraphs [36] to [43] which made  reference  to  the
    Nehzar-e-Azadi-e Iran (freedom movement),  the  organisation  that  the
    Appellant claimed the Azadi were affiliated to and the  examples  given
    of them at paragraphs [68] to [72].  However, the report  at  paragraph
    [37] makes it plain that whilst the author had  evidence  of  Nehzat-e-
    Azadi-e Iran organisation which claimed to be a monarchist movement, Dr
    Fatah was unable to link the Azadee Group described by the Appellant to
    the Nehzar-e-Azadi-e organisation and said this at  paragraph  [37]  of
    the report:-

         "I shall provide objective evidence with regard  to  the  Nehzat-e-
         Azadi-e Iran organisation that Mr A organisation, 'Azardi'  claimed
         to be affiliated to.  For clarity, I have to state that  these  two
         organisations both claim to be monarchist movements, obviously they
         share ideology and political goals, albeit it is not  known  to  me
         that they are linked.  This is  because  there  is  no  information
         about Azardi in the open sources".

    Consequently the judge gave full consideration to the contents  of  the
    expert report and was entitled to view its contents against and in  the
    light of the findings of the previous First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   It
    was open to the judge to conclude that there was no evidence  that  the
    Azadee Group was in existence (even if it were  accepted  that  he  had
    been a member at any material time) and the evidence given by Dr  Fatah
    at paragraph [37] could not link the Azadee Group to the Nehzar-e-Azadi-
    e Iran.  The judge was also entitled to  take  into  account  that  the
    Appellant had not engaged in any political  activities,  monarchist  or
    otherwise, in the last sixteen years (see paragraph [21]) and  that  on
    the findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge when taking into  account
    the evidence in the report, he would not come to the attention  of  the
    authorities in Iran.  Whilst Mr Pipe pointed to  the  reference  of  Dr
    Fatah at paragraph [118] had made no distinction between "low and  high
    level political activists" on the findings of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge he was not found to be an activist of any kind, indeed his  claim
    was rejected.

39. Overall I am satisfied  that  the  judge  was  entitled  to  reach  the
    conclusion that the evidence of Dr Fatah did not lead to  the  reaching
    of any different conclusion to that reached by the First-tier  Tribunal
    and that he had not demonstrated that he would be at risk on return  to
    Iran.

40. At [23] the judge also dealt with the issue raised  by  the  expert  in
    relation  to  the  Appellant's  past  drug  problems   and   subsequent
    convictions.  The judge  gave  adequate  and  sustainable  reasons  for
    reaching the conclusion at paragraph [23] that he would not be at  risk
    on return based on any past drug problem or convictions.  As the  judge
    clearly set out, the tenor of the report referred  to  punishments  for
    those involved in drug trafficking and drug offences but in the context
    of them having been committed in Iran.  Whilst  drug  addiction  was  a
    crime in Iran, that had to  be  seen  in  the  light  of  the  evidence
    advanced by the Appellant in both the independent risk  assessment  and
    the other relevant evidence that he was drug free and thus he  was  not
    in any of the categories referred to at paragraph [213] of the  report.



41. Dealing with the Article 8 claim it  is  submitted  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that in assessing the public interest  the  judge  failed  to
    weigh in the balance the contents of the risk assessment  exhibited  at
    page 329.  It is also asserted in the written grounds  that  the  judge
    failed to consider the  completion  of  the  recovery  programme  which
    concluded that he had become drug free.  Further in the written grounds
    it was submitted that the failure to consider the reports  vitiate  the
    assessment  of  the  public  interest  and  whether  "very   compelling
    circumstances" existed.

42. In his oral submissions, Mr Pipe submitted that the only  reference  to
    the report was at paragraph [11] and that even if  paragraph  [30]  was
    taken into account, that paragraph did not do justice  to  the  "public
    interest" issue.  He further submitted that as set out in  the  report,
    the Appellant's offending was tied to his drug addiction and that  when
    this had ended,  no  further  criminal  offences  were  committed.   He
    referred the Tribunal to section 9 of the report which was an  analysis
    of the offending and that following his imprisonment in November  2014,
    he finally completed a drug detoxification programme (paragraph  [342])
    and had managed to stay drug free.  He was subsequently granted bail in
    July 2015 and had not used any  illicit  substances  since  that  date.
    Section 11 refers to his recovery and that it had taken thirteen  years
    to address his addiction and that whilst there was no independent means
    of verifying it, that he had  been  drug  free  for  the  past  fifteen
    months.

43. Mr Pipe also made reference to the report and its consideration of  the
    Home Office minute and decision to deport and the description of him as
    a "prolific offender and the risk of harm to others".  The report  made
    it clear that this description should not have been attributed  to  the
    Appellant and that he did not pose a risk of harm to  the  public.   Mr
    Pipe also referred the Tribunal to paragraph [12.3.1] and the erroneous
    reference to offences that had  in  fact  not  been  committed  by  the
    Appellant.  The overall conclusions of the report were that he did  not
    present a risk of harm to others and that the risk of re-offending  was
    lower than estimated previously (see [12.3.1] and  [12.4.3]).   It  was
    therefore submitted that the judge's acceptance of the evidence as  set
    out at paragraph [30] of the determination was not a proper  assessment
    of the report and given the importance and the nature of the  offending
    both reports including the recovery report was capable of reducing  the
    public interest.

44. The correct approach on an appeal on human  rights  grounds  which  has
    been brought to seek to resist deportation is to consider  whether  the
    Appellant is a foreign criminal as defined by Section  117D(2)(a),  (b)
    or (c); and if so, does he fall within paragraph 399  or  399A  of  the
    Immigration Rules; if not, are there very compelling circumstances over
    and above those falling within paragraph 399 or 399A relied upon,  such
    as to be formed by the seriousness of the criminality of the  Appellant
    taking into account the factors set out in Section 117 (see decision of
    Chege (section 117D - Article 8 - approach) [2015] UKUT 165).

45. The Court of Appeal in the decision of the Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department v LW (Jamaica) [2016] EWCA Civ 369 at  [14]  summarised
    succinctly the laws as follows:-

         "(i) the new Rules provide a comprehensive code;

         (ii) the context is the great weight to be attached to  the  public
             interest in the deportation of foreign criminals;

         (iii)    that public  interest  and  related  questions  of  public
             confidence reflect (1)  protection  of  the  public  from  re-
             offending; (2) deterrence; (3) public revulsion;

         (iv)     the considerations in a deportation  case  are  thus  very
             different from those applicable to the  cases  of  immigration
             control;

         (v)  a proportionality test, taking  all  the  relevant  Article  8
             criteria into account and weighed in the  scales  against  the
             public interest in deportation,  is  to  be  conducted  -  but
             through the lens of the new Rules, rather than a free-standing
             exercise;

         (vi) in the case of a person sentenced for  at  least  four  years'
             imprisonment, paragraph 398(a) applies and  neither  paragraph
             399 nor 399A is applicable; accordingly, it will  only  be  in
             'exceptional  circumstances'  that  the  public  interest   in
             deportation will be outweighed by other factors;

         (vii)     'exceptional'  here  means  something  'very  compelling'
             rather than something 'unusual'; that something  is  'unusual'
             is, no doubt, a necessary but not sufficient condition for the
             determination that 'exceptional circumstances' apply.

         (viii)   The application of the new Rules in an individual case  is
             necessarily fact specific".

46. There is no dispute between the  parties  that  the  judge  incorrectly
    stated the law at paragraphs [26] to [29] and that  having  found  that
    the Appellant could not meet the Rules had to  consider  whether  there
    were compelling  circumstances  to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in
    deportation.

47. The submissions advanced on behalf of the Appellant, in essence, submit
    that the judge, in  considering  whether  there  were  such  compelling
    circumstances, did not place in the balance the evidence and  the  risk
    assessment report and the evidence from the recovery unit.  I have  set
    out those submissions earlier in this determination.

48. Contrary to those submissions, I am satisfied that the judge  did  give
    consideration to both reports in the determination  and  ultimately  in
    the balancing exercise.  It is plain in my judgment that the judge  had
    regard to the contents of the report and the relevance of  it  for  the
    Appellant as the judge recorded that:-

         "The Appellant maintains he has been drug free and has completed  a
         recovery programme and relies upon a risk assessment who  concludes
         that the Appellant is no longer a prolific  offender  and  that  he
         represents only a low risk of harm  to  others,  his  risk  of  re-
         offending being significantly lower than previously estimated" (see
         paragraph [11] of the determination.

    That is an accurate and succinct summary of  the  documentation  relied
    upon by the Appellant.   Having  considered  that  evidence  the  judge
    reached the findings equally succinctly at [30] in which it was  stated
    that:-

         "I accept also  from  the  objective  evidence  provided  that  the
         Appellant is now drug free".

    The judge also accepted that there was a low risk of re-offending.

    It is clear that the judge when referring to the  "objective  evidence"
    could only be referring to the recovery report and the risk  assessment
    report.  Whilst Mr Pipe submits that paragraph [11] and paragraph  [30]
    do not do justice to the reports and that the references at  those  two
    paragraphs are insufficient, I do not agree with that submission.   The
    judge properly had regard to those  reports  and  wholly  accepted  the
    contents and the  conclusions  reached  that  the  Appellant,  after  a
    substantial period of drug addiction was now free of drugs, and that in
    the absence of an OASys Report (the Appellant having been sentenced  to
    a term of imprisonment of less than  twelve  months)  that  the  report
    concluded that he was at a low risk of re-offending notwithstanding his
    criminal history.  It is difficult to see what more was  necessary  for
    the judge to state when she clearly accepted the contents  of  both  of
    those reports.  It  was  therefore  unnecessary  to  make  any  further
    findings in this regard (as the written  grounds  assert  at  paragraph
    3(a)).

49. It is, however, submitted that the judge failed to take  this  evidence
    into account in the balancing  exercise  when  considering  the  public
    interest and  whether  compelling  circumstances  existed.   I  do  not
    consider that this submission has any merit.  The  judge  properly  had
    regard to the nature of the deportation proceedings and the  effect  of
    the 2007 Act and Section 32(4) makes it plain that the deportation of a
    foreign national is conducive to the public good.  This is described as
    a statement of  public  policy  and  enacted  by  parliament  (see  the
    decision of SS (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 550 at  paragraph  [53]
    and see LC (China) [2014] EWCA  Civ  310  at  paragraph  [17]).   Those
    decisions emphasise the great weight  to  be  attached  to  the  public
    interest in the deportation of foreign criminals and the importance  of
    this policy in this regard which has been given by parliament to the UK
    Borders Act 2007.  The judge made reference to these principles at [27]
    and [28] where she stated at [27]

         "I remind myself of what was said in MF (Nigeria) [2013]  EWCA  Civ
         1192 to the effect that great weight should be given to the  public
         interest  in  deporting  foreign  criminals  who  do  not   satisfy
         paragraphs 398, 399 or 399A and that, although there is no test  of
         exceptionality, the  scales  are  heavily  weighted  in  favour  of
         deportation and that  something  very  compelling  is  required  to
         outweigh the public interest in removal.  In the case  to  which  I
         have referred it is made clear that I have to recognise the  weight
         attached to the deportation of foreign criminals and  to  recognise
         that the Rules make it clear that great weight should be  given  to
         the public interest.  I have to  examine  the  factors  that  would
         outweigh the public interest in deportation".

50. At paragraph [28] the judge made reference to the decision  of  SSHD  v
    AQ, CD and TH [2015] EWCA Civ 25 and also the decision of SS (Nigeria).



51.  When  considering  the  question  of  whether  there  were  compelling
    circumstances which outweighed the  public  interest,  the  judge  gave
    specific reference to the factors raised on behalf of the Appellant  at
    [30] and specifically referred to the acceptance of the contents of the
    two reports and took them into account  as  factors  in  the  balancing
    exercise and that  the  Appellant  was  now  drug  free  following  his
    criminal offending and had been assessed as a low risk of re-offending.
     Those are the factors that the judge had earlier stated that she would
    have to examine as factors that would "outweigh the public interest  in
    deportation".  In this context, the judge was entitled to weigh against
    those factors the Appellant's criminal record and past offending  which
    she described at [31] as an "appalling and  lengthy  criminal  record".
    The Appellant had amassed 26 convictions  for  43  offences  from  2004
    until 2014.  The offences themselves are summarised within the decision
    letter and the report at  section  8.   The  history  of  the  offences
    demonstrate that the courts imposed penalties for his offending by  the
    use of a number of sentences including  community  sentences  involving
    probation and supervision requirements and also attendance at substance
    misuse programmes.  The history also demonstrates that  he  breached  a
    number of orders which resulted in his imprisonment in 2008 and further
    breaches were committed in 2009 and 2012.  The history therefore  shows
    a lengthy pattern of repeated acquisitive offending  and  that  he  had
    been the subject of a number of community orders which he had breached.



52. It is also a relevant consideration that the risk  of  re-offending  is
    only one facet of the public interest and as identified in a number  of
    cases (see ZZ (Tanzania) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1404, SC  (Zimbabwe)  v
    SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 206 and Danso  v  SSHD  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  590  at
    paragraphs [20] and  [21].   Another  important  facet  of  the  public
    interest is the need to deter foreign nationals from committing  crimes
    and for  them  to  understand  that  whatever  the  circumstances,  one
    consequence may well be deportation.  Another  identifiable  factor  is
    the role of a deportation order as an expression of society's revulsion
    and the building of public confidence.  Contrary to the grounds,  I  am
    satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal  properly  identified  and  took
    into account the contents of the reports when conducting the  balancing
    exercise and the question of weight to be  attached  to  those  factors
    were matters for the judge.   The  judge  was  entitled  to  reach  the
    conclusion that, notwithstanding the factors identified  in  favour  of
    the Appellant,  including  that  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    Appellant's partner to accompany him to Iran, and that he was at a  low
    risk of re-offending, and his rehabilitation from drug addiction,  that
    these factors did not  outweigh  the  strong  public  interest  in  his
    deportation (see paragraphs [33] and [34]).  The balancing exercise,  I
    am satisfied, was conducted by the  judge  and  the  balance  that  was
    struck could not properly be said to be outwith the judge's discretion.
     Consequently the decision made by the First-tier Tribunal was open  to
    the judge to make on the evidence which  was  properly  considered  and
    assessed.  The grounds do  not  demonstrate  any  error  of  law.   The
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal is therefore upheld.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law and therefore the determination stands.  The  appeal
is dismissed.


Signed [pic]
                                Date: 29/9/2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
