
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00672/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On March 16, 2018                      |On March 26, 2018                   |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                  RAMI [A]
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Ti, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I do not make an anonymity order.

 2. The appellant is an Iraqi national.  He claimed  to  have  entered  the
    United Kingdom on January 12, 2012 and he claimed asylum the same  day.
    The respondent refused his claim  on  February  10,  2012.  His  appeal
    against this decision was rejected by the Tribunal on April  18,  2012.
    His appeal rights were deemed exhausted on July 25, 2012.

 3. On May 12, 2015 he lodged further submissions but these were refused by
    the respondent on May 16, 2015.  That  decision  was  reconsidered  but
    further refused on January 21 and November 30, 2016.

 4.  The  appellant's  most  recent  submissions  were  considered  by  the
    respondent on January 6, 2017 when she refused to  grant  asylum  under
    paragraphs 336 and 339M HC 395.

 5. The appellant lodged grounds  of  appeal  on  January  20,  2017  under
    Section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  His
    appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Coll  (hereinafter
    called "the Judge") on July 18, 2017 and in a decision  promulgated  on
    August 29, 2017 the Judge refused the appeal on all grounds.

 6. The appellant appealed this decision on September 6,  2017.  Permission
    to appeal was refused by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Davidge  on
    November 10, 2017 but when those grounds were  renewed  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Rintoul granted permission on December  18,  2017.  He  found  it
    arguable the Judge  may  have  misdirected  herself  as  to  Devaseelan
    (Second Appeals-ECHR-Extraterritorial Effect) Sri  Lanka  [2002]  UKIAT
    007092.

 7. In a Rule 24 response dated January 17, 2017 the respondent opposed the
    permission arguing the Tribunal had properly directed itself  and  made
    findings open to it.

 8. This matter came before me on the above date.

    SUBMISSIONS ON ERROR IN LAW

 9. Mr Ti submitted the  Judge  had  erred  in  her  approach  to  the  new
    arguments presented by the appellant.

10. He argued that  the  appellant  would  be  perceived,  in  Iraq,  as  a
    Christian in the social or cultural  sense  and  whilst  this  was  not
    raised before the original Judge who heard his appeal in  2012  it  did
    not change the fact that no decision had been taken about his social or
    cultural identity and how he would be perceived in Iraq.

11. The Judge's approach to Devaseelan was flawed. At paragraph 50  of  her
    decision the Judge concluded that as the issue of the appellant being a
    Christian in the social  or  cultural  sense  could  have  been  argued
    previously she was unable  to  consider  it  under  the  principles  of
    Devaseelan. This was a flawed approach and what the Judge  should  have
    done  was  to  consider   the   new   evidence   with   the   "greatest
    circumspection". By refusing to consider this evidence  the  Judge  had
    erred.

12. The Judge failed to give sufficient weight to the expert report  of  Dr
    George who dealt with the implications of being born as a Christian  or
    raised in a Christian family without been practising. This was a matter
    which should similarly have been  considered  in  more  detail  by  the
    Judge.

13. The  Judge  also  erred  by  revisiting  the  authenticity  of  certain
    documents that had been adduced by the appellant. Those  documents  had
    not  previously  been  questioned  and  following  the  principles   of
    Devaseelan the Judge should not have revisited that evidence  based  on
    the approach she adopted to the appellant's  claim  that  he  would  be
    perceived as a Christian in the social or cultural sense.

14. Mr Ti submitted that if the Tribunal was able to revisit this  evidence
    then it should have also considered the issue of the appellant being  a
    Christian in the social or cultural sense.

15. Mr Ti further  submitted  that  the  Judge  failed  to  consider  those
    documents in light of the Landinfo report that had been included in the
    bundle. Concerns were raised in this report  over  the  reliability  of
    such documents but in deciding  whether  the  appellant  had  submitted
    fraudulent documents the Judge ignored this evidence.

16.  The  final  issue  is  that  the  latest  country  guidance  decisions
    identified Kirkuk as a contested area and was therefore unsafe.  Whilst
    the respondent submitted evidence to support an argument that the  city
    was now safe Mr Ti argued that the evidence was not significant  enough
    to depart from the country guidance decision. In  short,  he  submitted
    the Judge applied an incorrect test.

17. Mr Melvin relied on  the  Rule  24  response.  He  submitted  that  the
    original asylum decision made by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Cope
    was extremely detailed and that  Judge  had  considered  all  religious
    issues raised by the appellant. The Judge had rejected in its  entirety
    the appellant's claim to be a Christian and those  findings  had  never
    been challenged.

18. At the second appeal hearing the appellant raised  two  further  issues
    namely the perception of being a Christian and evidence provided  by  a
    family friend which was in document form.

19. Mr Melvin submitted that the family friend had not attended the hearing
    or signed a witness statement. The document that had been  produced  to
    the court was merely a  picture of what was said to be  his  statement.
    The Judge was entitled to deal with that evidence as she did.

20. In any event, the parties had  already  agreed  that  the  findings  in
    paragraphs 82 and 83 of the original Tribunal decision would stand  and
    these paragraphs confirmed that the Judge did not accept the  appellant
    had not been in contact with his family.

21. As regards the perception of being a Christian Mr Melvin submitted that
    the Judge did  deal  with  this  evidence.  In  particular,  the  Judge
    considered the appellant's Christian social identity at paragraph 47 of
    her decision and at paragraph 51 the Judge considered, contrary  to  Mr
    Ti's submission, the evidence of Dr George.  At  paragraph  60  of  her
    decision the Judge reaffirmed earlier findings that the  appellant  was
    not a Christian in any sense.

22. Mr Melvin submitted the Judge considered all the available evidence and
    made findings on his Christianity and the findings on  whether  he  had
    family in Iraq were open to her.

23. With regard to the fraudulent document Mr Melvin  submitted  the  Judge
    was entitled to consider the respondent's  report  that  the  documents
    were fraudulent. He did  not  need  to  consider  the  Landinfo  report
    because the appellant had obtained  their  own  expert  evidence.  This
    expert  had  examined  the  documents  but  due   to   the   "unhelpful
    conclusions" the report had never been submitted to the  Tribunal.  The
    document that Mr Ti now sought to rely on was background  evidence  but
    an expert report which examined the actual documents is  more  reliable
    and  the  Judge  was  entitled  to  follow  the  conclusions   of   the
    respondent's report when the  appellant  decided  not  to  submit  into
    evidence his own expert report.

24. With regard to the departure from findings in a country  guidance  case
    the Judge had ample evidence that Kirkuk  was  no  longer  a  contested
    area. She was entitled to make the findings she did.

25. Mr Ti re-emphasised the following points:

      a) the evidence to depart from a country guidance finding  had  to  be
         strong and in this case the evidence was not strong.

      b) Culturally the appellant would be known as a Christian.

      c) The Judge failed to consider Dr George's report.

      d) Whilst the Judge was entitled to draw an inference on the documents
         she should only have done so after considering all the evidence.

26. Having heard these submissions I reserved my decision.

    FINDINGS ON ERROR IN LAW

27. The original Judge's decision from 2012 formed  part  of  the  evidence
    considered both by the respondent and the Tribunal when  the  appellant
    renewed his application in 2017.

28. Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul found it arguable the Judge's approach  to
    Devaseelan was flawed.

29. In considering the Judge's approach on this issue it  is  important  to
    look at the decision as a whole and not merely to pick  out  particular
    sentences.

30. Mr Ti argued that the Judge was obliged to consider the  evidence  that
    the appellant would be viewed culturally and sociably as  a  Christian.
    In normal circumstances I would agree with  this  submission  with  the
    proviso  that  such  evidence  should  be  viewed  with  the  "greatest
    circumspection".

31. However, it is abundantly clear from any reading  of  the  two  Judges'
    decisions that neither found the appellant's claim to be a Christian in
    any sense credible. There was therefore  no  necessity  placed  on  the
    Judge to separately consider this as a risk issue for the appellant.

32. I disagree with Mr Ti's  argument  that  the  Judge  should  have  made
    specific findings for the simple reason that the  Judge  rejected  that
    the appellant was a Christian "in any sense".

33. With regard to the revisiting of the appellant's documents I accept the
    respondent could have raised this issue before the original  Judge.  It
    is unclear why this was not done but the Judge hearing  the  appeal  in
    the First-tier Tribunal had before her an expert report that identified
    the appellant's documents as fraudulent. The case  had  been  adjourned
    for the appellant to have those documents examined by his own expert.

34. It is clear from any reading of the Judge's decision that such a report
    was obtained and it is also clear that Mr Ti chose not to rely on  that
    report because it was "unhelpful". Instead Mr Ti sought to  argue  that
    the Judge should have considered a general report. He  referred  me  to
    the Landinfo report that was in the appellant's bundle.

35. Where there are no specific expert reports on documents I  would  agree
    with his submission that some weight should have  been  given  to  that
    report but where, as in this case, there was  expert  evidence  on  the
    actual documents themselves and the appellant had chosen not to  submit
    his own report because it was "unhelpful" the  Judge  was  entitled  to
    approach those documents in the manner she did.

36. Mr Ti argued the Judge did not have regard to Dr George's report but  I
    am satisfied the Judge considered this report at paragraph  51  of  her
    decision.

37. The final issue related to the Judge's approach to the issue of whether
    Kirkuk was a contested  area.  The  country  guidance  decision  of  AA
    (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC) as amended by AA (Iraq) v
    SSHD and SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 944 and BA (Returns to Baghdad)  Iraq  CG
    [2017] UKUT 18 (IAC) do not specifically state that Kirkuk is no longer
    a contested area but there was evidence before the Judge that Isis  had
    been defeated and that Kirkuk was no longer a contested  area  although
    there were areas that continued to be contested.

38. I pointed out to Mr Ti that the Judge concluded at paragraph 57 of  her
    decision that internal relocation was available and that the grounds of
    appeal had not taken issue with this finding. Whilst Mr Ti referred  me
    to paragraph 53 of the decision it is clear from the Judge's finding at
    paragraph 57 that Mr Ti's submissions with regard to the other areas of
    Iraq to which the respondent has stated the  appellant  could  relocate
    safely to  were  rejected.  It  therefore  follows  that  even  if  the
    appellant could not return to Kirkuk there had been no challenge to the
    issue of internal relocation in the current grounds of appeal.

39. In light of the above I find there is no error in law.

    DECISION

40. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

41. I uphold the previous decision.


Signed                              Date     22/03/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I do not make a fee award as I have dismissed the appeal.


Signed                              Date     22/03/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
