
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00708/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9th October 2018                           |On 8th November 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                                   Mr m A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Fitzsimmons
For the Respondent:    Mr Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 25th September 1998 is a citizen  of  Iraq.   The
    Appellant was  represented  by  Ms  Fitzsimmons.   The  Respondent  was
    represented by Mr Howells a senior Presenting Officer.



Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had arrived in the United Kingdom on 6th January 2009 and
    claimed asylum the same day.  His application had been refused  and  he
    had become appeal rights exhausted in October 2010.   Thereafter  there
    were further submissions and applications for judicial  review  and  on
    30th  November  2017  the  Respondent  again  refused  the  Appellant's
    application for asylum.  The Appellant had appealed that  decision  and
    his appeal had been heard by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Mathews
    sitting at Newport on 13th February 2018.  The judge had dismissed  the
    appeal on all grounds.

 3. The Appellant  had  made  application  for  permission  to  appeal  and
    permission to appeal was granted on 18th  June  2018.   The  judge  had
    found that arguably the judge had made inconsistent findings in respect
    of the Appellant's father and took the view that that finding  infected
    the  entire  judgment  and  permission  was  granted  on  all  grounds.
    Directions were issued firstly for the Upper Tribunal to decide whether
    an error of law had  been  made  and  the  matter  came  before  us  in
    accordance with those directions.

Submissions on Behalf of the Appellant

 4. Ms Fitzsimmons referred to the Grounds of Appeal.  Firstly, it was said
    that the judge had erred in respect of  his  approach  to  humanitarian
    protection given the Appellant was from Kirkuk  and  it  was  submitted
    that  the  judge  should  have  looked  at  the  Appellant's   evidence
    indicating why Kirkuk was an area that still fell within the  terms  of
    Article 15(c).

 5. Secondly, we were referred to the inconsistencies in  the  findings  in
    relation to the Appellant's father. Thirdly it was said that there were
    errors of law in respect of the examination of internal relocation.

Submissions on Behalf of the Respondent

 6. It was conceded that there was merit in  the  grounds  which  had  been
    raised in  respect  of  the  approach  to  the  issue  of  humanitarian
    protection and thereafter internal relocation.  It  was  accepted  that
    the judge did not appear to have the  relevant  Respondent's  CPIN  and
    only appeared to have applied  that  which  was  contained  within  the
    refusal letter which was the Respondent's country  policy  rather  than
    the relevant CPIN.  It  was  further  conceded  that  when  looking  at
    internal relocation in respect of either Baghdad or the IKR  there  had
    been little or no reference to country guidance or  indeed  the  expert
    report within the Appellant's bundle.  It was conceded that there  were
    errors of law in this case.

 7. We now provide our decision in respect of this matter.





Decision and Reasons

 8. The judge noted at paragraph 18 that it was accepted the Appellant  was
    from Kirkuk in Iraq and Kurdish.  It was submitted  by  Ms  Fitzsimmons
    that the judge had erred in his consideration of  return  to  the  home
    area of Kirkuk, in  that  the  judge  had  departed  from  the  country
    guidance case of AA [2015] which found  Kirkuk  to  be  an  area  where
    return would bring about  a  need  for  humanitarian  protection  under
    Article 15(c) and had not provided reasons why he  departed  from  that
    case nor had he considered the material available as a  whole  to  show
    whether there were good reasons and cogent evidence to depart from that
    country guidance case was appropriate.  At paragraph 50 the judge found
    no adequate evidential basis that the Appellant would face a  risk  and
    that  the  Appellant  was  therefore  not  entitled   to   humanitarian
    protection.  At paragraph 51 the judge specifically found the Appellant
    was excluded from humanitarian protection.

 9. Mr Howells conceded there was merit in the submission  that  the  judge
    had erred in his assessment of humanitarian protection.  It seems clear
    that at paragraph 33 when the judge referred to country guidance he was
    referring to the Respondent's country guidance as contained within  the
    refusal letter rather than the case  law  of  AA  [2015].   Mr  Howells
    accepted that the judge in fact did not have a copy of the Home  Office
    CPIN in the evidence  before  him  and  that  the  only  such  evidence
    available to the judge was an extract quoted  within  the  Home  Office
    refusal letter and referred to by the judge and that that quotation was
    from the CPIN dealing with country policy rather than that which  dealt
    with internal relocation which was the relevant one.  It  is  also  the
    case that the judge did not identify AA [2015] as disclosing Kirkuk was
    an area where humanitarian protection would apply if  removal  to  that
    area was envisaged.  Further he did not appear to  adequately  consider
    material within the Appellant's bundle  that  dealt  with  the  current
    situation in Iraq and therefore had not properly considered that  which
    was available in terms of whether or not a return to the home  area  of
    Kirkuk was possible or  would  invoke  Article  15(c).   The  assertion
    therefore that the Appellant was excluded from humanitarian  protection
    (paragraph 51) was not based on an adequate assessment  of  either  the
    case law or the available country material and was an error in law.

10. The judge had looked at return  to  either  Baghdad  or  the  IKR.   In
    relation to relocation to the IKR the judge at paragraph 44  had  again
    noted the expert report saying the Appellant would be unable  to  enter
    the IKR but concluded that provided insufficient  evidence  to  subvert
    the country information and guidance set out by the Respondent.  Again,
    this is a reference to the quotation from the CPIN found in the refusal
    letter and is tainted with  the  same  difficulty  referred  to  above.
    Further, the judge had not  adequately  looked  at  all  the  available
    material  including  a  proper  assessment  of  the  expert  report  to
    demonstrate why that quotation within the refusal letter  from  a  CPIN
    provided more persuasive and cogent  evidence.   There  is  further  no
    reference to the case of AAH [2018] when considering relocation to  the
    IKR.

11. The same problems  arise  in  respect  of  the  judge's  assessment  of
    internal relocation to Baghdad in that there is no reference in respect
    to the country guidance case of BA (Baghdad) nor an adequate assessment
    of the totality of the country material  available  to  the  judge  and
    potentially an over reliance on  the  quotation  from  the  wrong  CPIN
    contained within the Home Office refusal letter.

12. Whilst it is clear the judge had considered evidence in his  assessment
    of risk on return and had made a number of findings set out within  the
    decision, it was unfortunately a process that was tainted by a reliance
    upon a quotation from the wrong CPIN within the refusal  letter  and  a
    less than  adequate  consideration  of  the  totality  of  the  country
    material provided within the Appellant's bundle.   Those  were  matters
    that were of significance in this case such that a  material  error  of
    law was made.

Notice of Decision

13. A material error of law was made by the judge in this case and  we  set
    aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal. The appeal  is  remitted
    to the First Tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing before a  judge  other
    than Judge Mathews.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 30/10/18

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever

