

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number PA/00206/2020 (V)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard by "Microsoft Teams"                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On the 30th June 2021                      |On the 12th July 2021         |
|                                           |                              |


                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                             SHABAZ SALIM HAMID
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr A Burns, of Latta & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against the decision of a  panel  comprising  FtT
    Judges Grimes and Komorowski, promulgated on 3 March 2020.

 2. Ground 1 is entitled "failure to consider relevant material and country
    guidance on enhanced risk through perceived association with  ISIS  [or
    ISIL]".  It contends that the finding at [29]  of  no  basis  for  such
    suspicion overlooks (i) circumstances in the area,  specified  in  SMO,
    KSP & IM (Article 15(c); identity documents)(CG) 2019 UKUT 400 at  [50,
    60, 76, 260, 261, 296, & 315] and (ii) the appellant's circumstances as
    a single Kurdish male of fighting age, a farm worker, absent  from  the
    area since 2014.

 3. Ground 2 is entitled "failure to consider relevant material and country
    guidance on enhanced risk through religion and ethnicity".  It contends
    that failure to consider the evidence specified in  ground  1  vitiated
    the risk assessment in these respects,  and  refers  (i)  to  materials
    about ISIS attacks on members of minority  groups,  including  Kaka'is,
    who are in an "extreme level of minority", and (ii) to SMO at [300], on
    the need for an evaluation "with particular care, with reference to the
    composition of the area in question, the local balance of power and the
    extent of ISIL activity in the area...".

 4. Mr Burns submitted along the  lines  of  the  grounds.   The  principal
    points I noted were these:

      i) The issue was the appellant's location  on  the  sliding  scale  of
         Article 15 (c) risk, as specified in SMO.

     ii) The FtT went wrong on ground 1, perceived  association  with  ISIS,
         and ground 2, ethnicity and membership of a religious minority.

    iii) SMO at [315] required  the  tribunal  to  look  at  the  background
         evidence of ISIS activity in relation  to  the  background  of  the
         appellant.  The decision  of  the  FtT  at  [29]  was  "essentially
         dismissive of those circumstances".

     iv) There was before the FtT  an  expert  report  by  Dr  Fatah,  whose
         comments on the appellant's area were incorporated almost word  for
         word in [29] of the decision.  However, the report was completed in
         2018,  prior  to  SMO.   Material  specified  in  SMO  and  in  the
         appellant's skeleton argument was  "not  considered  in  sufficient
         detail".

      v) The panel gave "no good reason for not following SMO".

     vi) The materials overlooked showed an increased threat  from  ISIS  in
         the appellant's area to members of the rural population, as he was.

    vii) On a proper application of SMO to the evidence, the  conclusion  of
         no risk of  being  associated  with  ISIS  could  not  stand.   His
         characteristics - being of fighting age, a member of  an  "extreme"
         religious minority, having left in 2015, shortly after  significant
         ISIS activity in the area, and returning after  a  long  absence  -
         placed him at the higher end of the sliding scale.

   viii) SMO at [296] emphasised that reasons for suspicion  of  ISIS  links
         might be tenuous.

     ix) The decision should be set aside, and the case should  be  remitted
         to the FtT for a fresh hearing on updated evidence.

 5. The main points which I noted from the  respondent's  submissions  were
    these:

      i) The panel dealt clearly with the two main points relied upon by the
         appellant, the risk of a false perception of association with ISIS,
         and his membership of a religious minority.

     ii) The appellant did not refer to anything which had  been  overlooked
         and which have might have  led  to  another  conclusion  on  either
         aspect.

    iii) As the panel noted, the alleged risk of suspicion was based only on
         ISIS having occupied the appellant's hone area for  2  days,  which
         happened 2 years after he left.

     iv) The panel's succinct reasoning at [29 - 31] was based  on  applying
         SMO and the absence of material to show risk  based  on  particular
         characteristics of the appellant.

      v) The relevant evidence from the expert report for the appellant  was
         accurately quoted.  It was beside the point that  the  report  pre-
         dated  SMO,  as  evidence  of  developments  since  then  did   not
         strengthen the appellant's claim.  By the  time  ISIS  was  in  his
         area, he was in the UK.

     vi) SMO at [296] gave examples of those who might be suspected even for
         tenuous reasons: those who remained in an ISIS controlled area  for
         a period of time, and those who provided  legal  services  to  ISIS
         suspects or their families.  The appellant  fell  into  no  similar
         category.

    vii) The appellant referred to SMO at [300] on careful  assessment,  but
         the last sentence was also instructive, "Membership of an ethnic or
         religious  minority  may  increase  risk  ...  but   a   contextual
         evaluation rather than a presumption is required."

   viii) The panel made no error on either element of  the  claim,  and  the
         appeal should be dismissed.

 6. In reply Mr Burns submitted that:

      i) By relying on the expert report, the panel overlooked  evidence  of
         later ISIS resurgence in the area.

     ii) The appellant's return  after  a  lengthy  absence  was  likely  to
         provoke suspicion that he had been involved with ISIS during  those
         missing years.

    iii) Paragraph [296] was not an exhaustive list of suspicious factors.

     iv) It was accepted that there was no presumption,  but  the  appellant
         fell at the higher end of the scale.

 7. I reserved my decision.

 8. Mr Burns referred to the appellant as a member of an "extreme religious
    minority"; for avoidance of  doubt,  this  meant  not  that  he  was  a
    religious extremist, but that his is a very small minority.

 9. I accept that [296] is not intended to provide an  exhaustive  list  of
    reasons for suspicion.  That is  explicitly  how  it  is  framed.   The
    examples are nevertheless instructive.  Far from remaining in  an  ISIS
    controlled area, the appellant was long gone.

10. I accept that reasons for suspicion might be tenuous, but for all  that
    was referred to by the appellant, either in the FtT or in the  UT,  the
    reasons were beyond tenuous.

11. The submission on return after years away overlooks that the  appellant
    would not be arriving from ISIS territory; there would be no reason  to
    suspect that he was; and he would  return  with  documentation  of  his
    period and location of absence (see SMO at headnote 25).

12. ISIS may have been active in the appellant's home area since  the  date
    of Dr Khaki's report, but that is even longer after he left.  There was
    no reference to anything to persuade the  FtT  that  such  developments
    might enhance the risk that he would be suspected of having anything to
    do with ISIS.

13. Decisions should not be supported by additional  reasons;  but  in  the
    context  of  suspicion  of  ISIS  links,  the  appellant's  ethnic  and
    religious identity makes that less likely.

14. Mr Burns has advanced the appellant's  claim  assiduously  before  both
    tribunals.  However, it has not been  shown  that  the  FtT  failed  to
    follow SMO, dismissed the claim out of hand,  or  failed  to  refer  to
    anything which might have made a difference.  SMO,  in  the  nature  of
    country guidance, is full of detail and nuance, but in applying  it  to
    the present case all the panel needed to say was at [28], no basis  for
    suspicion of ISIS links, and at [31], no material  to  show  particular
    risk through personal characteristics (Kurdish and Kakis  identity  not
    being enough to create a presumption, without more).  The  grounds  and
    submissions hint at an infinity of further detail, but do  not  specify
    anything necessary which was omitted.

15. The decision of the FtT shall stand.

16. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

        Hugh Macleman

      2 July 2021
      UT Judge Macleman


                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email.




