
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: PA/00291/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester                       |  Decision Promulgated         |
|On: 27th November 2017                     |On: 3rd January 2018           |
|                                           |                               |
|                                           |                               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                              TWANA SALIH QADER
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:           -
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Iraq born  in  1995.   He  appeals  with
    permission[1] the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Raikes),
    who on the 21st February 2017 dismissed his protection claim.








    Background and Matters in Issue


 2. When he claimed asylum in July 2016 the Appellant stated  that  he  was
    from Baqert village, Makhmour, Mosul.  He said that he  had  fled  ISIS
    who had taken control of  his  local  area  and  were  threatening  him
    because he had not joined their ranks.


 3. The Respondent refused the claim  by  way  of  letter  dated  the  23rd
    December 2016. The Respondent disbelieved the Appellant's claim that he
    had personally received threats  from  ISIS.  She  found,  based  on  a
    'google map' search that  Baqert  village  is  within  the  Independent
    Kurdish Region (IKR). The Respondent found that if  the  Appellant  had
    any protection concerns there, he could move to Erbil or Makhmour, both
    places where he had previously lived.  The  Respondent  relied  on  the
    assessment made in AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 that  the
    IKR is "virtually violence free" and  noted  the  Appellant's  evidence
    that he has relatives in the region, including uncles and cousins  with
    whom he had previously stayed. In  light  of  this  it  was  considered
    reasonable that the Appellant relocate within Iraq to avoid any contact
    with ISIS.

 4. The Appellant appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.    He  gave  oral
    evidence which the Tribunal found to be inconsistent  and  implausible.
    It rejected his account of receiving threats from ISIS.   The  Tribunal
    noted the Appellant's evidence that he is not from the Kurdish  region,
    but agreed with the Respondent that Makhmour, the  district  where  the
    Appellant lived, is part of the Erbil governate, and as such is part of
    the IKR: "I am satisfied that the area he is from does not appear to be
    a contested area, and he has provided no evidence to  suggest  that  it
    is".  It went on to find that if the Appellant did not wish  to  return
    to Makhmour it remained open to him to relocate to Erbil, where he  had
    previously lived, and where a number  of  members  of  his  family  had
    lived. Applying  the  guidance  in  AA  the  Tribunal  found  that  the
    Appellant would be given entry  to  the  IKR,  and  that  it  would  be
    reasonable for him  to  live  there.  Alternatively,  he  could  go  to
    Baghdad.

 5. When the Appellant lodged his onward appeal to the Upper Tribunal Judge
    Shaerf very fairly noted that  the  Appellant  had  been  unrepresented
    throughout the asylum process. Whilst he found the grounds  drafted  by
    the Appellant failed to identify any arguable errors in the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal, he granted permission for two reasons.  First,
    he was concerned that the Tribunal may have failed to take into account
    evidence in the Respondent's own Country Information and Guidance  Note
    to the effect that there has been fierce fighting around Mosul and that
    many of the  areas  in  the  border  of  Nineveh  governate  do  remain
    'contested'. Secondly he thought it arguable that the Tribunal had  not
    dealt adequately with internal flight.

    Discussion and Findings

 6. This case is perhaps the perfect example of how  difficult  it  is  for
    decision makers in the asylum context to keep abreast  of  the  complex
    and fast-changing  picture  on  the  ground  in  Iraq.  It  is  further
    testament to the  importance  of  having  accurate  country  background
    evidence.   Both Respondent and First-tier Tribunal in this  case  felt
    confident in placing the town of Makhmour in the Erbil governate.  That
    being so, they were able to say with certainty that it is part  of  the
    IKR. Given the findings in AA that the IKR is "virtually violence free"
    the claim was  rejected  and  the  appeal  dismissed.    That  line  of
    reasoning was all based on the premise that 'google maps'  was  correct
    to place the town of Makhmour in the Erbil governate: see paragraph  39
    of the refusal letter.


 7.  Had  either  decision  maker  looked  at  an  alternative  source   of
    information they would have seen that in fact Makhmour  is  officially,
    as far as the Iraqi government  are  concerned,  part  of  the  Nineveh
    governate.   Since  the  Respondent  accepts   that   Nineveh   remains
    'contested' the decision in this case could have been  very  different.
    The starting point would have been that there is an Article 15(c)  risk
    to the Appellant, and  the  only  question  would  have  been  internal
    flight.   As it happened this unrepresented appellant failed to produce
    any objective evidence to counter the view expressed by  'google  maps'
    and all he could do was to reiterate his own view that Makhmour was not
    part of the IKR.  I note for  the  record  that  Makhmour  was  on  the
    frontline of fighting in 2014 when it was seized, just as the Appellant
    describes, by ISIS.  It was subsequently liberated by PKK peshmerga but
    remains 'contested' today.  A Kurdish town subject to the 'Arabisation'
    programme under the Ba'athists it is now on the frontline  of  the  new
    war in Iraq, between the Kurdish forces seeking to  claim  it  for  the
    IKR, and the Baghdad government seeking to keep it part of Iraq.  There
    have for instance been significant clashes in and around the  town  the
    past few weeks between peshmerga and  Iranian-backed  Shi'ite  militias
    acting on behalf of the Iraqi government.  In the last week  there  has
    been a major terrorist attack on the Kurdish refugee camp there.


 8. It is therefore arguable that the First-tier Tribunal erred as a matter
    of fact when it categorised  Makhmour  as  "virtually  violence  free",
    being part of the moderately safe IKR.  It is however not an error  for
    which this decision could be set aside.  That is because  there  is  no
    arguable  error  in  the  Tribunal's  ultimate  conclusion  that   this
    Appellant could safely  relocate  to  Erbil.    Given  that  the  Erbil
    government claim Makhmour as part of  its  territory  it  would  appear
    unlikely that a resident of that area would be  refused  entry  to  the
    IKR. As the First-tier Tribunal note [at paragraph 30] Kurds  are  able
    to obtain an initial period of 10 days entry after which the permit can
    be renewed. There was no evidence before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    suggest that it would be unduly harsh for a healthy young man,  with  a
    large extended family in the area (with whom he  remains  in  contact),
    who speaks fluent Sorani, who has lived there previously, to travel  to
    Erbil.  The fact that he may need to transit in Baghdad is not  of  any
    great significance. The findings in BA (Returns  to  Baghdad)  Iraq  CG
    [2017] UKUT 00018(IAC) are not to the effect that a  Sunni  Kurd  would
    experience problems transiting in Baghdad airport to get on a  domestic
    flight to Erbil.



    Decision

 9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no error of  law  and
    it is upheld.


10. There no order for anonymity.

                                                   [pic]


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                          14th December 2017


                           -----------------------
[1] Permission was granted by Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
Shaerf on the 8th June 2017


