
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00759/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6th March 2019                             |On 18th March 2019            |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     l a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Mair of Counsel instructed by Greater
                    Manchester Immigration Aid Unit
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of Judge  A  J  Parker  (the
    judge) of the First-tier Tribunal (the FTT) dated 9th August 2018.

 2. The Appellant is a female Nigerian national.  Her daughter,  born  19th
    January 2009, is a dependant in  her  appeal.   The  Appellant's  human
    rights claim and claim for international protection was refused on  2nd
    January 2018.  The appeal was heard on 9th August 2018.

 3. The judge allowed the appeal with reference to Article 8  of  the  1950
    European Convention on the basis  that  the  Appellant's  daughter  had
    resided in the UK since birth and was almost 10 years  of  age  at  the
    date of the FTT hearing.  The judge  dismissed  all  other  Grounds  of
    Appeal finding that the Appellant was not a credible witness,  and  had
    given  inconsistent  and  implausible  evidence   notwithstanding   her
    vulnerable witness status.  The judge found there would be no real risk
    on return, and the Appellant could return to her home area,  and  there
    is a sufficiency of protection in Nigeria, and the Appellant would also
    have a reasonable internal relocation option.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

 4. The Appellant's claim for protection was made on the basis  that  there
    was a real risk of her daughter being forced to undergo FGM if returned
    to Nigeria, and the Appellant would face a real risk of further  sexual
    exploitation.

 5. It was submitted that the judge had erred  in  assessing  the  risk  in
    relation to FGM by failing to consider the risk  from  the  Appellant's
    family.  It was submitted that  the  judge  had  erred  in  stating  at
    paragraph 23 that the Appellant's family did not wish FGM to be carried
    out on the daughter whereas the Appellant in her asylum  interview  had
    expressly stated that her family do believe in FGM  which  was  carried
    out on her.  In her  evidence  at  the  appeal  hearing  the  Appellant
    referred to her sister having warned her not to return home because the
    family wanted to carry out FGM on her daughter.

 6. It was submitted that the judge had erred in proceeding  on  the  basis
    that the Appellant had claimed that FGM was against  the  tradition  of
    the Yoruba tribe as no such claim was made.  The  Respondent's  refusal
    letter recognised that one of the highest rates of FGM is in the Yoruba
    tribe and this was confirmed in the  Respondent's  CPIN  at  2.3.5  and
    7.6.1.

 7. It was submitted that the above errors are material given  the  judge's
    finding that the Appellant could return home to  her  family.   It  was
    submitted that there appeared  to  have  been  some  confusion  in  the
    judge's mind as to who was at risk from FGM, as the judge at  paragraph
    20 had indicated that because the Appellant had undergone FGM, the risk
    profile for the Appellant would be greatly reduced.  The case  was  put
    on the basis that the risk of FGM was to the Appellant's  daughter  not
    the Appellant who had already undergone FGM.

 8. It was submitted that the judge had erred when assessing sufficiency of
    protection from FGM by simply adopting the  Respondent's  arguments  on
    this point.  This failed to take into account that there  had  been  no
    convictions or charges following the coming into force of The  Violence
    Against Persons (Prohibition) Act 2015.

 9. It was contended that the judge has conducted a  flawed  assessment  of
    relocation by  simply  stating  that  the  Appellant  had  demonstrated
    considerable fortitude in locating to the United Kingdom,  but  failing
    to  address  adequately  the  Appellant's   individual   circumstances,
    including the fact that she would be a single mother with a child, with
     mental health issues, minimal education and  little  work  experience.
    She would not have a family to rely on given the risk  of  FGM  to  her
    daughter.

10. It was contended that the judge had conducted a  flawed  assessment  of
    sexual exploitation.  The judge had agreed with the Respondent that the
    Appellant's account was apparently "inconsistent  and  implausible  and
    lacking in detail" (paragraph 37) but had provided  inadequate  reasons
    for reaching this conclusion.  It was submitted that the Respondent had
    actually  stated  that  various  elements  of  the  account  of  sexual
    exploitation  were  coherent  and  plausible  including   her   general
    treatment in the house in which she was kept and treatment from men who
    came to the house, as indicated in the refusal decision  at  paragraphs
    44, 48 and 49.  It was submitted that it was inadequate for  the  judge
    simply to rely in bare terms on what had been said by the Respondent.

11. It was submitted that the judge had conducted a  flawed  assessment  of
    credibility by adopting an overly narrow and restrictive  view  as  set
    out in paragraph 29, and failed to take into  account  or  address  the
    impact  of  the  Appellant  being  a   potential   victim   of   sexual
    exploitation.  It was contended the judge had not  taken  into  account
    paragraphs 6 and 7 of the skeleton  argument,  which  quotes  from  the
    Respondent's own guidance in relation to potential  victims  of  sexual
    exploitation and which refers to mitigating  reasons  why  a  potential
    victim  of  human  trafficking  or  modern   slavery   is   incoherent,
    inconsistent or delays giving details on material facts.

Permission to Appeal

12. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Lever in the following terms;



         "The judge had provided a lengthy and clear assessment  in  respect
         of the Appellant's claim to remain in the UK under Article 8  ECHR.
         This was largely based on the fact that  the  Appellant's  daughter
         had been born in the UK and had lived  here  continuously  for  ten
         years.  There is nothing wrong in law in the  decision  reached  by
         the judge in this respect.  In terms  of  risk  on  return  however
         matters  are  less  clear.   The  judge  had  adequately  set   out
         inconsistencies and contradictions within the Appellant's  evidence
         that could well have led to adverse credibility findings.   However
         there arguably appears to be some confusion as to who was  at  risk
         and from whom.  In relating the  refusal  grounds  it  appears  the
         Appellant was claiming the risk was to  her  young  daughter  being
         forced to  undergo  FGM,  such  risk  coming  from  the  daughter's
         father's family.  However there  were  references  and  conclusions
         drawn as to the risk to the Appellant herself from her own  family.
         The picture presented in the decision is somewhat confusing and  it
         is arguable that the judge has  not  adequately  and  with  clarity
         identified  the  individual  at  risk  and  the  alleged  potential
         perpetrators.   It  is  arguable  that  the  lack  of  clarity  and
         identification may amount to an error of law in terms of  a  proper
         assessment of the evidence."

13. Directions were made that there should be an oral  hearing  before  the
    Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether the FTT decision contained an error
    of law such that it should be set aside.



My Analysis and Conclusions

14. At the oral hearing before me Ms Mair  relied  and  expanded  upon  the
    grounds contained within the application for permission to appeal.

15. Mr Diwnycz accepted that the grounds disclosed a material error of  law
    and that the decision of the FTT should be set aside and remade.

16. I am not bound by the concession made by Mr Diwnycz, but  in  my  view,
    the concession is rightly made.  I find a material error of law as  set
    out in the grounds contained within the application for  permission  to
    appeal, read with the grant of permission.

17. There has been no challenge to the findings made by the judge that  the
    appeal should be allowed on Article 8 grounds and  those  findings  are
    preserved.

18. Both representatives submitted it would be  appropriate  to  remit  the
    appeal back to the FTT to be heard afresh.

19. Having  considered  the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statements,  in
    particular paragraph 7.2, I find that it is appropriate  to  remit  the
    appeal to the FTT because there will be extensive judicial fact-finding
    required.  It is more appropriate that this is undertaken  by  the  FTT
    rather than the Upper Tribunal.

20. In addition to the findings in relation to Article 8  being  preserved,
    both representatives agreed that it would be  appropriate  to  preserve
    the finding made by the  judge  that  the  Appellant  is  a  vulnerable
    witness.  In the circumstances that finding is also preserved.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FTT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that it  is  remitted  to
the FTT.  Findings in relation to Article 8 are preserved as is the  finding
that the Appellant is a vulnerable witness.   The  hearing  before  the  FTT
will consider whether the Appellant has a well-founded fear  of  persecution
and whether she and/or  her  daughter  would  be  at  risk  if  returned  to
Nigeria.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead  to  contempt  of  court  proceedings.   This
direction is made because the Appellant has made a claim  for  international
protection.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall    6th March 2019


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.  The issue of any fee award will need to be  considered
by the FTT.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall    6th March 2019

