
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00374/2020 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by way of a remote hearing              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On the 14 May 2021                            |On 5 July 2021                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                                    H M A
                         (anonymity direction made)

                                     AND
                                                                   Appellant

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M. Read, Counsel on behalf of the appellant.

For the Respondent:    Ms Pettersen, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:


      1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Moxon (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the
         "FtTJ")  promulgated  on  the  13  October  2020,  in   which   the
         appellant's appeal against the decision to  refuse  his  protection
         claim was dismissed.


      2. I make a  direction  regarding  anonymity  under  Rule  14  of  the
         Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal  Rules)  Rules  2008  as  the
         proceedings relate to the  circumstances  of  a  protection  claim.
         Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise  the
         appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him. This  direction  applies
         both to the appellant and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
         with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


      3. The hearing took  place  on  14  May  2021,  by  a  remote  hearing
         conducted on Microsoft teams which has been consented  to  and  not
         objected to by the parties. A face- to- face hearing was  not  held
         because it was not practicable, and both parties  agreed  that  all
         issues could be determined  in  a  remote  hearing.  The  advocates
         attended remotely via video. There were no issues regarding  sound,
         and no technical problems were encountered during the hearing and I
         am satisfied both advocates were  able  to  make  their  respective
         cases by the chosen means.

Background:

      4. The appellant is a national of Iraq. His immigration history is set
         out in the decision letter, the decision of the FtTJ and the papers
         before the tribunal. It can be summarised as follows.


      5. The appellant claimed to have left Iraq on 31 August 2008 and
         travelled to Norway via Turkey. He remained in Norway for 3 to 4
         months and claimed asylum but left in April 2009 before his asylum
         claim was concluded. He travelled from Norway to France, where he
         remained for 2 to 3 months before entering the United Kingdom
         clandestinely by lorry in September 2009.

      6. The appellant was encountered in the United Kingdom in December
         2009 and arrested, he then claimed asylum. He was removed to Norway
         the following month. Records show that he was fingerprinted in
         Denmark on 5 March 2010.

      7. At [22] the judge recorded that there was a discrepancy in the
         evidence of his movement thereafter in relation to whether or not
         he returned to Iraq in 2010. He is recorded as disclosing that he
         returned to Iraq where he remained until 2014 and that he re-
         entered the United Kingdom in June 2015. However, he subsequently
         asserted that he never returned to Iraq and that it returned to the
         United Kingdom in 2010, where he remained until it was apprehended
         in 2015.

      8. However, the FtTJ found as a fact that he returned to Iraq in 2010
         where he remained until 2014 (see reasoning at [53] (i)).

      9. The appellant was encountered in August 2015 and was returned to
         Denmark on 17 November 2015. However, only eight days later he
         entered the UK control zone in Dunkirk, where he was issued with
         illegal entry paperwork. Nonetheless the appellant returned to the
         United Kingdom, where he was encountered again in June 2017 and
         detained until August 2017.

     10. On 18 August 2017 a request was made to Denmark and Norway under
         the Dublin III Regulations to take responsibility for his asylum
         claim. Denmark accepted responsibility and that his claim was
         refused and certified under third country grounds. Removal
         directions were set to return to Denmark.

     11. As the appellant could not be returned to Denmark within the agreed
         deadline therefore it was decided on 25 January 2018 that the
         United Kingdom would take responsibility for his asylum claim.

     12. The basis of his claim was that when he was in Iraq he fell in love
         with a colleague H, and he gradually got to know her, and they
         began a relationship in 2007. It was asserted that she was from the
         Barzini tribe and a powerful family. Her father and brother worked
         for the KDP and had state security guards.

     13. After six or seven months the appellant asked his parents to go to
         her parents and presented a marriage proposal which they did but
         were turned away. Alternatively, he went with his parents propose
         marriage to her family that they reacted aggressively but managed
         to escape. The appellant went to the police, but they did not do
         anything as he broken one of the country's customary laws.

     14. After approximately a month, the appellant's family to propose
         marriage again. H's father became very angry and threatened the
         appellant's family and told his parents if they heard or saw him
         and H together, they would kill the appellant.

     15. Two days after the proposal, whilst on the way to work he was
         attacked by H's brother who threatened to kill him, and he was shot
         near the leg. He went to the police station to complain but did not
         think they did anything due to H's family being powerful.

     16. Three or four days after he was attacked, he received a phone call
         from H, she told him to meet her at hospital. The appellant went
         and met with her who had been severely beaten. Her driver saw the
         appellant and H together and she told the appellant to leave. He
         later received a call from his mother who told him that H's family
         had gone to the house and threatened his father.

     17. The next morning on the way to work two cars pulled up and he was
         put into the car and blindfolded and taken to a room where he was
         tortured by H's brother. He woke up in hospital and his father told
         and that he had to leave Iraq. His father said that H's family had
         gone to the home and threatened to kill him and said they would
         then kill him and then kill H. He was later told that H was now
         disabled. Alternatively, before he left Iraq, his father gave me an
         envelope which contain photographs showing H being beaten and hit
         with a heavy object on her legs.

     18. The appellant claims whilst in Norway he was attacked by a group of
         men said they been sent by H's father. His location was discovered
         after his youngest brother mentioned he was in Norway to 1 of his
         friends at school. Alternatively, his location was discovered after
         his younger brother was attacked and the family humiliated so they
         told H's family where it was.

     19. The appellant claims it is parents, brother and sister were all
         killed by ISIS in 2015.

     20. The appellant claims that since his arrival in the United Kingdom
         he has been baptised and converted to Christianity whilst in
         detention in 2015.

     21. The appellant claimed that he had shared a room with another person
         called A who was from Iran and taught the appellant how to pray. He
         attended church in the United Kingdom.

The decision of the respondent:

     22. In a decision letter of 23 December 2019, the respondent refused
         his protection claim.  The basis of his claim was advanced on to
         grounds namely his religion (having converted to Christianity) and
         his membership of a particular social group namely being a
         potential victim of honour violence in Iraq.

     23. In the light of the documentary and supporting evidence, the
         respondent accepted that he was an Iraqi national of Kurdish
         ethnicity.

     24. At paragraphs [51 - 83] the respondent comprehensively addressed
         the appellant's claim to be at risk of harm in Iraq as a result of
         his relationship with H. The respondent set out a number of adverse
         credibility findings relating to his account which the respondent
         set out was inconsistent in a number of important aspects with some
         aspects so highly inconsistent that when considered together
         demonstrated that his account was not one upon which any reliance
         could be placed.

     25. As to his claimed conversion to Christianity that was addressed in
         the decision letter at paragraphs [90 - 104]. The respondent set
         out areas of inconsistency in his evidence and concluded at [104]
         that taken in the round some of the aspects of his claim were
         considered inconsistent for someone who regularly attended church
         had been a practising Christian for four years. Some aspects were
         said to be inconsistent with external information and the
         documentation that it provided (the baptism certificate and letters
         from the church) was given limited weight.

     26. At paragraphs [105 - 109], the respondent considered his claim that
         his parents had been killed but concluded that the appellant had
         given three different accounts as to the death of his family and
         thus that was also rejected.

     27. At paragraphs 110 - 114, the respondent considered section 8 of the
         2004 Act and that as a result of his conduct, having claimed asylum
         only after he had been arrested in 2015, furthermore, his claim
         that he arrived in 2009 with the intention of escaping problems in
         Iraq but did not claim asylum then and also his conduct of
         travelling through Denmark and France both considered to be safe
         countries and having failed to take advantage of a reasonable
         opportunity to make asylum human rights claim. Thus it was
         concluded that his credibility was damaged by that conduct.

     28. The remainder of the decision letter dealt with return to Iraq (the
         appellant's home area) in accordance with the country materials and
         the CG case law.

     29. The respondent also considered in the alternative that even if it
         was accepted that he was a Christian, the objective material
         relevant to Christian converts in the Kurdish region or Iraq did
         not demonstrate that he would be at a real risk of harm as a result
         of his religion (at paragraphs 1 to 5 - 130).Article 8 was also
         considered at paragraphs [157 - 172]. His article 3 claim based on
         his medical condition was also considered at [173 - 182].
         Consequently, his claim was refused on protection and human rights
         grounds.

The decision of the FtTJ:


     30. The appellant appealed that decision, and it came before the FtT
         (Judge Moxon) on 28 September 2020. In a decision promulgated on 13
         October 2020, the FtTJ dismissed his appeal.

     31. At the outset of the hearing the judge considered a preliminary
         application made on the half of the appellant for an adjournment
         for a witness, the Reverend, to attend. The application was
         considered by the judge at paragraphs [6]-[11] and also at [65]-
         [66] but for the reasons that he gave he refused the application
         for an adjournment. The judge also noted at [12] a further witness
         was not available, but an adjournment was not sought on that basis.

     32. The judge heard evidence from the appellant and also from a
         witness, Mr E.

     33. His findings of fact an assessment of the evidence is set out in
         considerable detail from paragraphs [33]-[70]. In considering the
         appellant's credibility, the FtTJ set out the features of the
         evidence that enhanced the appellant's credibility at [33] (a)-(d).



     34. Whilst the judge assigned some weight to the fact the appellant had
         some mental health conditions, which corroborated his assertion of
         negative experiences, the judge concluded for the reasons set out
         at paragraphs [35]- 37] that the author of the report was not a
         suitably qualified medical practitioner to provide a diagnosis of
         post-traumatic stress disorder.

     35. As to the weight given to the evidence from the church community,
         the judge noted that he gave this evidence "substantial weight" at
         [39], at [41] he also gave the corroborative evidence from the
         Reverend "significant weight" and that he accepted it came from
         what should be considered an "expert witness" noting that the
         author "truthfully believe the appellant to be a genuine convert to
         the Christian faith." In this context he noted "however upon being
         faced with someone who attends church and church activities
         enthusiastically for the past year, the expert would not, nor could
         he be expected to, subject the appellant's motive to the anxious
         scrutiny that I must undertake. We have significantly different
         roles." At [44] he stated "nevertheless, I give significant weight
         to the evidence of the Reverend which is not diminished by the fact
         that he was unable to give oral evidence.

     36. In relation to the evidence of Mr E, the judge addressed this at
         [45], noting that the weight was enhanced by the fact that it
         obtained asylum in the UK on account of his own religious
         conversion and thus considered as evidence of a "genuine
         Christian". However, the weight given to the evidence was tempered
         by the fact that he was a friend of the appellant and therefore was
         not independent. Furthermore, the judge identified that there was
         some inconsistency in the evidence between the appellant and the
         witness as to when they first met. The judge also noted that he
         gave weight to the evidence of Mr M, who had not attended the court
         to give evidence that the judge found that "his inability to attend
         the hearing did not detract the weight that I assign to hs
         evidence, although I note that he is not independent but is a
         friend of the appellant."

     37. The judge then undertook a critical assessment of the evidence and
         at [46] set out that in his judgement "the appellant's credibility
         significantly undermined by the many material inconsistencies in
         the accounts he has given" and from (a) -(m) set out in detail the
         inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence which related to his
         claim to be at risk as a result of an honour crime and also in
         relation to his conversion to Christianity. The judge identified
         that there were inconsistencies in his account as to:

             . How he met H,
             . H's family connections,
             . his proposal to H,
             . the discovery of the relationship,
             . the attack upon the appellant by H's family,
             . reporting the attack to the police,
             . the kidnap and torture of the appellant,
             . the attack on H,
             . his whereabouts between 2010 - 2014 and immigration history,
             . his support in the UK between 2010 and 2015,
             . the death of his family,
             . whether he was located in Norway by H's family,
             . attendance at church in the United Kingdom.

     38. At paragraphs [47] -[52], the FtTJ addressed the explanations given
         by the appellant for the inconsistencies in his account. They
         related to interpretive problems, not being able to understand the
         contents of his witness statements and the claim that he had memory
         problems. The judge considered those explanations but gave reasons
         as to why none of them explained the inconsistencies in his
         account.


     39. The FtTJ went on to identify further aspects of the appellant's
         evidence that undermined his credibility at [53 - 55] which related
         to his claim to be at risk of an honour crime and in relation to
         his claimed conversion to Christianity.

     40.  The judge further noted that the appellant had failed to obtain
         evidence to support many of his claims and had not provided a
         written explanation for that failure particularly in the light that
         he was legally represented. This included evidence from Norway to
         confirm his hospitalisation and complaint to the police, medical
         evidence. The judge also considered that the appellant's
         credibility was damaged by his failure to claim asylum in the safe
         countries that he spent time including France and Denmark and his
         failure to remain in Norway until the outcome of his asylum claim.
         The judge rejected his claim that he was in fear of H's family in
         those countries. The judge also found his credibility to be damaged
         by the fact that he did not initially claim asylum in the United
         Kingdom and only did so when he was apprehended by the authorities.
         The judge rejected his account that he feared being returned to
         Norway as a sufficient explanation or his assertion of PTSD, memory
         problems and the side-effects of his medication, a medical report
         from a scarring or trauma expert, and evidence from A whom he
         asserted had converted him to Christianity in 2015 and with whom he
         remained in contact, evidence from his maternal cousin friends or
         anyone else to evidence that he remained in the United Kingdom
         between 2010 and 2014.


     41. At [g] the FtTJ addressed points raised relevant to section 8 of
         the 2004 Act and found overall that the appellant's credibility was
         damaged by his failure to claim asylum in the safe countries that
         he spent time within including France and Denmark and the failure
         to remain in Norway until the outcome of his asylum claim in that
         country. The judge rejected his claim that he feared H's family in
         those countries. Judge also found that his credibility was damaged
         by the fact that he did not initially claim asylum in the UK and
         only did so upon apprehension by the authorities (at ([h]).

     42. The judge found as a fact that the appellant returned to Iraq in
         2010 where he remained until 2014. In reaching that finding he
         relied on the contents of the August 2015 travel interview and
         found the fact the appellant was not materially disadvantaged by
         the fact that he was questioned in English without the benefit of
         an interpreter. The judge gave reasons for reaching that view.

     43. At [54] the judge considered the baptism certificate that gave
         reasons why he found the document to be unreliable. At [55] the
         judge gave reasons why the documents from Iraq are also unreliable.

     44. At [56] -[60], the FtTJ returned to the issues in the appeal. He
         stated as follows:

         56. I have stood back and considered all of the evidence in the
         round and given as much weight as I feel able to the evidence that
         is supportive of the appellant's claim. I have reminded myself of
         the low standard of proof to be adopted. However, even upon that
         low standard of proof I am not satisfied that the appellant has an
         objective or subjective fear of harm in Iraq, and I find is a fact
         that he has concocted a fabrication which he has sought to adapt
         over time. I find him to be an untruthful witness.


         57. I find is a fact that his relationship with H, and the
         subsequent fallout, is a fabrication from beginning to end. Whilst
         I accept that the core of the claim has remained consistent, and is
         itself consistent with country evidence, he has been materially
         inconsistent in relation to almost each and every aspect of the
         narrative. I am conscious that when an honest person is asked to
         relate facts numerous times over many years, innocent
         inconsistencies are likely to occur. I am also conscious that many
         of the accounts were given in interviews which are likely to have
         been stressful. However, these factors do not adequately explain
         the extent of the inconsistencies about significant stages of his
         life. He has failed to prove his account, even to the requisite low
         standard of proof to be adopted.


         58. Whilst I give weight to the supporting evidence in relation to
         the appellant's purported conversion to Christianity, particularly
         from Reverend M, I am not satisfied, even to the requisite low
         standard, that he is a genuine Christian convert. I note the
         general adverse credibility findings, in addition to the lack of
         corroboration of his conversion from A or others at the material
         time and the fact that he asserts that he attended a synagogue for
         over a month without realising that he was not within a Christian
         church.
         59. In light of the adverse credibility findings, my general
         dismissal of his narrative account, and the fact that he has been
         inconsistent as the cause of their death, I do not accept that the
         appellant's family have been killed.


         60. I therefore find the fact that the appellant has no objective
         or subjective fear of returning to the IKR and that he has access
         to family support.


         61. I consider those findings against the country guidance of SMO.
         The appellant is from the IKR as it would be returned there. I was
         expressly told that there are no documented barriers to return. In
         any event am satisfied that he has family you can secure
         documentation as I reject his assertion that they have been killed.
         I am satisfied that he would be able to support himself as a
         healthy male of working age was familiar with the IKR. In any
         event, I find the fact that he has access to support from his
         family."

     45. At [66]  the  FtTJ  stated  that  even  accepting  the  appellant's
         purported religious conversion would not have  led  to  credibility
         findings that would have the results in a different  conclusion  of
         the veracity of his claim fear of honour-based violence in light of
         the numerous  credibility  findings  and  inconsistencies  in  this
         narrative of events surrounding the purported relationship  with  H
         and the consequences thereof.

     46. At [67] - 70] the FtTJ considered in the alternative that  even  if
         he had accepted that the appellant  was  a  Christian  convert,  he
         would have dismissed his appeal for  international  protection  for
         the reason that he set  out  and  by  reference  to  the  objective
         material.

     47. He concluded at [71 - 72], that he did not accept to the  requisite
         standard of proof that he had entered into a relationship which had
         resulted him being at risk of any violence. He did not accept  that
         the  appellant  had  attracted  the  adverse   attention   of   the
         authorities, ISI S or any particular family as alleged or  at  all.
         Nor did he accept that he been subjected to  targeted  violence  or
         that his family being killed. Furthermore, he did  not  accept  the
         requisite standard of  proof  that  the  appellant  was  a  genuine
         Christian convert and in any event, he was not satisfied  that  any
         such conversion would place at reasonable risk of harm in the IKR.

     48. The FtTJ therefore dismissed the appeal.

     49. Permission to appeal was  issued  and  on  16  November  2020,  and
         permission to appeal was refused  by  FtTJ Adio but on renewal  was
         granted by UTJ Grubb for the following reasons:-



      1. The First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Moxon)  dismissed  the  appellant's
         appeal against a decision to refuse his  international  protection,
         humanitarian  protection  and  human  rights  claims.   The   judge
         rejected the appellant's claim to be at risk of an  honour  killing
         and to have converted to Christianity and  so  to  be  at  risk  of
         persecution on return to Iraq.

      2. The application was lodged one day out of time on 4 December  2020.
         The delay is trivial and, having regard to  all  the  circumstances
         including the relative prejudice to  the  parties,  I  exercise  my
         discretion to extend time.

      3. There are 4 principal Grounds of Appeal ((1)-(4))  with  a  further
         supplementary 5 Grounds (5)-(9)) engaging with the  FtT's  decision
         to refuse permission  on  the  original  four  grounds.  They  only
         directly challenge the findings and  decision  in  respect  of  the
         appellant's claim for asylum based upon his claimed  conversion  to
         Christianity. Any challenge to his credibility in  respect  of  the
         later might (and I state it no higher than that) however infect the
         findings in respect of his claim to fear an honour killing.

      4. Grounds (1) and (2) argue that it was unfair  not  to  adjourn  the
         hearing in order to allow a  'Dorodian'  witness  to  attend.   The
         Grounds are arguable.   At  para  [46(m)]  the  judge  relied  upon
         inconsistencies between the appellant's evidence and  that  of  the
         'Dorodian' witness which, in the latter's absence, could  not  give
         any evidence that might explain  the  inconsistencies.   It  is  no
         answer to this that the  witness'  evidence  was  accepted  by  the
         Presenting Officer (see para [11])  -  the  unfairness  is  to  the
         appellant  in  denying  him  an  opportunity  to  deal   with   the
         inconsistency by raising it with the witness in oral evidence.

      5.  I refuse permission on Ground (3), the  judge  plainly  considered
         the evidence of the appellant's mental health at paras [33(d)]  and
         [34]-[38] and any potential impact it might have on his evidence in
         the light of his depression  but  rejecting  of  a  claim  that  he
         suffered from PTSD.

      6. I would not exclude consideration of Ground (4). If,  however,  the
         finding that the appellant is not at risk in the IKR as a Christian
         convert is sustainable, the issue  of  materiality  of  any  errors
         established under the other grounds will need to be established.

      7. For these reasons, permission  to  appeal  is  granted  limited  to
         Grounds (1),  (2)  and  (4)  (and,  to  the  extent  they  add  any
         additional challenge, the supplementary Grounds (5), (6),  (7)  and
         (9)).

      8. Permission is refused on Ground (3) and  the  supplementary  Ground
         (8).



The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

     50. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
         directions on  indicating that it was  provisionally  of  the  view
         that the error of law issue could be determined without a face- to-
         face hearing and directions were given for a remote hearing to take
         place and that this could take place via Skype. Both  parties  have
         indicated that they were content for the hearing to proceed by this
         method. Therefore, the Tribunal listed the hearing to  enable  oral
         submissions to be given by each of the parties with the  assistance
         of their advocates.

     51. Mr Read on behalf of the appellant relied upon the written  grounds
         of appeal  and the written submissions dated 13 May 2021.

     52. There was no Rule 24 response filed on behalf of the respondent.

     53. I also heard oral submission from the advocates, and I am  grateful
         for their assistance and their clear oral submissions. I intend  to
         set out those submissions by reference to the grounds  advanced  on
         behalf of the appellant.

The grounds of challenge:


     54. The grounds of permission on the renewed application to the Upper
         Tribunal consisted of eight grounds of appeal. They are as follows:


             Ground 1: the FtTJ acted irrationality by contradicting
             himself (in the context of the adjournment application).


             Ground 2: the failure to provide the appellant with a fair
             hearing (in the context of the application to adjourn).


             Ground 3; failure to consider the medical report.

             Ground 4: that the judge misdirected himself to the test to be
             applied to risk of harm on returning protection claim.


             Ground 5: irrationality on the part of Judge Adio when he
             refused permission.

             Ground 6: failure to consider a relevant consideration by
         Judge Adio.


             Ground 7: Judge Adio taking into account an irrelevant
         consideration.


             Ground 8: the failure of Judge Adio to provide reasons in
             relation to ground three dealing with the medical report.


             Ground 9: the failure of Judge Adio when refusing permission
             on ground 4 relating to the misdirection to be applied to the
             risk of harm on return in a protection claim.


     55. As can be seen by the grant of permission, UTJ Grubb did not grant
         permission on all grounds and expressly refused permission on
         ground 3 (relating to the medical evidence) and what was described
         as supplementary ground  (8). Therefore, permission was granted
         limited to Grounds 1 and 2 which argue that the FtTJ was unfair in
         not adjourning the hearing to allow a witness to attend and Ground
         4. He granted permission on the supplementary Grounds 5,6,7 and 9
         only to the extent they add any additional challenge. Those grounds
         as drafted sought to challenge the decision of Judge Adio when he
         refused permission.



Grounds 1 and 2

     56. I therefore begin consideration of the appeal by reference to
         grounds 1 and 2 which concern the decision made by the FtTJ to
         refuse the application for an adjournment for a witness to attend
         the hearing.


     57. Mr Read, Counsel on behalf of the appellant relied upon the written
         grounds and the skeleton argument filed on the day before the
         hearing.


     58. Ground 1 relied upon by the appellant is stated as follows "the 1st
         ground is irrationality in that the FtT has acted to contradict
         itself."

     59. It is submitted in the grounds and the skeleton argument that the
         FtTJ acted irrationally by not adjourning the hearing and that a
         "doctrine of precedent" applied which required the FtTJ not to go
         behind the decision of another judge applying the decision in
         Devaseelan (see paragraph 17 of the skeleton argument and the oral
         submissions).

     60. Mr Read submits that as a previous judge had adjourned the hearing
         on 6 March due to the unavailability of the Reverend, the judge who
         heard the appeal on 28 September 2020 was irrational in failing to
         adjourn the hearing for the witness to attend.

     61. It is further submitted that to proceed in the absence of the
         witness was unfair to the appellant because the unavailability of
         the witness denied the appellant the opportunity of explaining
         apparent contradictions in the evidence which the judge held
         against the appellant at paragraph 46(m) (I refer to ground 2 and
         the written skeleton at paragraph 19).

     62. The skeleton argument and the oral submission made by Mr Read refer
         to the history of the appeal proceedings. I have also had the
         opportunity to consider the appeal case file and the note made by
         the judges and the orders contained in it.

     63. On 12 February 2020 it is recorded that a notice was sent to the
         parties adjourning the appeal due to the failure of both the
         appellant and the respondent to file their respective bundles upon
         the tribunal within the timescales ("non-compliance) and a
         direction was sent for both to file their bundles by 19 February
         2020.

     64. On 21 February 2020 the appeal was listed for hearing before the
         FTT. I have the FtTJ's handwritten note of the hearing and his
         reason for adjourning the appeal on that day. He writes "the
         application for an adjournment made by both parties on the day.
         Both parties filed bundles on 12 February 2020, due to the flood
         the HOPO cannot access the file." There is reference to the
         presenting officer receiving the appellant's bundle of 234 pages on
         the day of the hearing and that he would not have the time to
         prepare and that it "it included 2 witnesses he had no prior
         knowledge of." It is also recorded that the appellant's counsel had
         received the respondent's bundle on the day of the hearing and that
         he was trying to access it and also that the refusal letter ran to
         45 pages and that there was also insufficient time for him to
         prepare the appeal. The judge therefore stated, "I concluded that
         the only fair way to deal with the case was to adjourn it."

     65. Therefore, both parties were unable to proceed at the hearing on 21
         February 2020 and the hearing was adjourned.

     66. I observe that in the appellant's skeleton argument filed by Mr
         Read he raises an issue concerning the compliance scheme which is
         part of the FTT case management procedure. Reference is made to the
         differences in the hearing centres and that the scheme did not
         apply countrywide. Reference is made at paragraph 4 that the appeal
         raises broader concerns and whether the judge had properly applied
         the compliance scheme and also issues of accommodating witnesses.

     67. This issue had not been raised in the grounds of challenge nor at
         an earlier hearing of this appeal in April but arises in a skeleton
         argument filed the day before the hearing. Consequently, there is
         been no evidence filed concerning the procedures adopted by the
         First-tier Tribunal nor has the respondent been on notice that such
         an issue would be ventilated before the Upper Tribunal.

     68. This is not an issue that is raised in the grounds nor can it be
         considered as one that arises inferentially from the grounds of
         challenge. In my judgement it concerns an entirely separate
         argument which relies upon the procedure deployed in the FTT. There
         is no evidence before this tribunal concerning the operation of
         those procedures and in the circumstances, I do not consider that
         it is an issue which the Upper Tribunal is either required or
         should address. There may be an appeal where a challenge to the
         procedure rules is properly identified and argued on notice but for
         the reasons set out above, I am satisfied that this is not the
         appeal to do so.

     69. I return to the chronology. Following the adjournment made on
         behalf of both parties on 21 February 2020, the appeal was listed
         for hearing on 6 March 2020. Again, the hearing was adjourned. I
         have taken the following information from the adjournment form
         completed by the judge where at paragraph 14 he stated the
         following:

         "Dorodian witness not available. Appellant solicitors informed week
         before the hearing but did not inform the tribunal and requested
         appeal to be given another date. Appellants rep did not supply
         witness availability."

     70. The judge therefore adjourned the hearing on the application of the
         appellant's counsel. There is little else in the file  and  I  take
         the following information from counsel's skeleton  argument.  There
         followed a notice of hearing for relisting the  appeal  on  6  July
         2020 and further directions were issued  on  29  July  2020  for  a
         hearing which had a time estimate of 4 hours. It is said  that  the
         notice of hearing which was to take place on 28 September 2020  was
         received on 17 September 2020.

     71. At the hearing before the FtTJ on 20 September 2020 it  was  argued
         that the appeal had been listed at short notice on the 17 September
         2020 and "the tribunal service had erred in failing to contact  the
         appellant solicitors to ascertain witness availability"(I refer  to
         paragraph 6 of the FtTJ's decision).

     72. The FtTJ considered the application for an adjournment setting  out
         his reasoning for refusing the application at paragraphs  [6]-[12].
         He stated as follows:

             "6. At the outset of the hearing Mr Read sought an adjournment
             as a witness for the appellant, Reverend X, was unavailable to
             attend as he was officiating a funeral. Mr  Read  argued  that
             the hearing had been listed at short notice  on  17  September
             2024 hearing on  28  September  2020  and  that  the  tribunal
             service  had  erred  in  failing  to  contact  the   appellant
             solicitors to ascertain witness availability.

             7. The evidence of Reverend X is at page 70 of the appellant's
             bundle and is a letter, dated 22 January  2020,  in  which  he
             states that he is known  the  appellant  since  the  appellant
             joined the church at  the  end  of  September  2019  and  that
             thereafter he has been a regular attender  and  is  developing
             his understanding of the Christian faith. There is an  earlier
             letter from the Reverend within the respondent's bundle.

             8. Mr Saddique helpfully confirmed that the credibility of the
             Reverend was not challenged and that it was accepted that  the
             Reverend honestly believes  the  appellant  to  be  a  genuine
             convert to Christianity.

             9. When considering an application  to  adjourn,  the  primary
             consideration  is  1  of  fairness,  as  outlined  in  Nwaigwe
             (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC).

             10. Whilst I accept that the Reverend has a  good  reason  his
             absence, I nevertheless concluded that it was fair and in  the
             interests of justice to proceed in the  absence  of  his  oral
             evidence. I noted that the hearing  had  been  adjourned  once
             before and the appeal relates  to  a  decision  made  over  10
             months ago.  Unnecessary  further  delay  is  to  be  avoided.
             Further, the criticism of the tribunal service  is  misplaced.
             The  appellant  is  represented  by  an  experienced  firm  of
             immigration solicitors that knew that the hearing was  due  to
             be listed and you that such hearings are listed at  relatively
             short notice. It  is  therefore  incumbent  upon  them  to  be
             proactive in providing witness availability, something that Mr
             Read confirmed they had failed to do.

             11. Finally, and most importantly, the witness evidence is not
             contested. The appellant therefore has the benefit of accepted
             witness evidence from a Reverend who honestly believes to be a
             Christian convert. As such, the witness'  presence  would  not
             add anything to the appellant's case. It was not  argued  that
             there was additional evidence that he  would  be  required  to
             give, and in any event had that been the  case  no  doubt  the
             solicitors would have obtained an addendum  witness  statement
             for him in advance of  the  hearing  in  accordance  with  the
             standard directions in regard to service of evidence.

             12. Later in the hearing Mr Read told me that the witness Mr M
             was not available to give life evidence due to  suffering  flu
             symptoms. He did not seek an adjournment on that basis and  in
             any event I'm satisfied that it was fair  to  proceed  in  his
             absence and that I could consider the contents of his  witness
             statement in the round with all of the evidence in the case."

             Later at  [65] the FtTJ stated  that  he  had  "Revisited  the
             application to adjourn" but reached the  conclusion  "that  it
             was fair and in the interests of justice to proceed  with  the
             hearing the reasons outlined in paragraphs 10 and 11 above."

     73. I therefore considered the grounds of challenge  in  light  of  the
         procedural  background.  Having  done  so  I  cannot   accept   the
         submission made by Mr Read that  the  FtTJ  was  bound  by  way  of
         precedent to make the same decision as the judge on 6 March 2020.

     74. Mr Read has set out  in  his  skeleton  argument  references  to  2
         decisions, Devaseelan [2002] UKUT 702 and Young v Bristol Aeroplane
         Company, Ltd [1944] 1 KB 718. Mr Read did not take the tribunal  to
         those decisions but  sought  to  rely  upon  them  to  support  his
         argument that the decision in Devaseelan  was  "authority  for  the
         legal proposition that a judge should not go behind the back  of  a
         brother or sister judge." In relation to the decision  of  Young  v
         British Aeroplane Company, Ltd he relies upon paragraph  729  where
         it was stated:

         "on a careful examination of the whole matter we have come  to  the
         clear conclusion that  this  court  is  bound  to  follow  previous
         decisions of its own as well  as  those  of  courts  of  coordinate
         jurisdiction."

     75. In my judgement neither of those decisions have  any  bearing  upon
         the decision of the FtTJ. The decision of Devaseelan relates to the
         factual findings made by a previous judge when hearing an appeal by
         the same appellant and the circumstances that apply.  The  guidance
         in that case was referred to with approval by the Court  of  Appeal
         in Djebbar v SSHD [2004 EWCA Civ 804. Judge LJ said this about  the
         application of the guidelines at [30]: "perhaps the most  important
         feature of the guidance is that the fundamental obligation of every
         special adjudicators independently to decide each  new  application
         on its own individual merits was preserved."  Having  set  out  the
         guidance and consider the criticisms made of it by the claimant  in
         that case, Judge LJ said at [40] "the great value of  the  guidance
         is that it invests the decision-making process in  each  individual
         fresh application with the necessary degree of sensible flexibility
         and  desirable  consistency  of  approach,  without  imposing   any
         unacceptable restrictions on the 2nd adjudicators ability  to  make
         findings  which  he  conscientiously  believed  to  be  right.   It
         therefore admirably fulfils its intended purpose." As  set  out  in
         SSHD v BK (Afghanistan) [2019] EWCA Civ 1358  the  authorities  are
         clear that the guidelines are not based on any application  of  the
         principle of res judicata or issue estoppel.

     76. As to the decision  in  Young  (as  cited),  the  Court  of  Appeal
         considered that it was bound to follow its own decision  and  those
         of courts of coordinate jurisdiction and the "full" court is in the
         same position in this respect as a division of the court consisting
         of 3 members. The court set out 3 exceptions to the rule,  (1)  the
         court is entitled and  bound  to  decide  which  of  2  conflicting
         decisions of its own it will follow; (2)  the  court  is  bound  to
         refuse to follow a decision of its own which, though not  expressly
         overall, cannot, in its opinion, stand with  the  decision  of  the
         House of Lords: (3) the court is not bound to follow a decision  of
         its own if  it  is  satisfied  that  the  decision  was  given  per
         incuriam, e.g. where a statute or a rule having statutory effect it
         would have affected the decision was not brought to  the  attention
         of the earlier court.

     77. In my judgement neither of those cases provide any  assistance  for
         the appellant nor do they support his argument.

     78. The 3rd case cited  is  that  of  Nwaigwe  (adjournment:  fairness)
         [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC) and is a  decision  which  deals  expressly
         with case management decisions.

     79. The First-tier Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) 2014 Rules
         at Rule 4(3) (h) empowers the Tribunal to adjourn a hearing. Rule 2
         sets out the "overriding  objective"  under  the  Rules  which  the
         Tribunal "must seek to give effect to" when  exercising  any  power
         under the Rules.  It  follows  that  they  are  the  issues  to  be
         considered on an adjournment application as  well.  The  overriding
         objective is to deal with cases "fairly and justly" ( at Rule 2(1).
         This is defined as including "(a) dealing with  the  case  in  ways
         which  are  proportionate  to  the  importance  of  the  case,  the
         complexity of the issues, the anticipated costs and  the  resources
         of the parties  and  of  the  Tribunal;  (b)  avoiding  unnecessary
         formality and seeking flexibility in the proceedings; (c) ensuring,
         so far as is practicable, that the parties are able to  participate
         fully in the proceedings; (d) using any special  expertise  of  the
         Tribunal effectively; (e) avoiding delay so far as compatible  with
         proper consideration of the issues".

     80.  In Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC) it  was
         held that If  a  Tribunal  refuses  to  accede  to  an  adjournment
         request, such decision could, in principle, be erroneous in law  in
         several respects: these include a failure to take into account  all
         material considerations; permitting  immaterial  considerations  to
         intrude; denying the party concerned a  fair  hearing;  failing  to
         apply the correct test; and acting irrationally.  In  practice,  in
         most cases the question will be whether the  refusal  deprived  the
         affected party of his right to a fair hearing. Where an adjournment
         refusal is challenged on  fairness  grounds,  it  is  important  to
         recognise that the question for the Upper Tribunal is  not  whether
         the FtT acted reasonably. Rather, the test to be applied is that of
         fairness: was there any deprivation of the affected  party's  right
         to a fair hearing?


     81. The decision to refuse the application for adjournment was a case
         management decision which the first instance Judge will have a wide
         discretion based on the ordinary principles of fairness and in the
         light of the overriding objective contained in the procedural
         rules.

     82. In my judgement there is no binding principle of precedent which
         would preclude the FtTJ from exercising his own discretion on the
         issue of an adjournment as the trial judge seized of the appeal and
         therefore would be expected to have a full understanding of the
         issues relevant to the appeal and the evidence relied upon. The
         FtTJ was fully aware of the earlier decision to adjourn the
         hearing.

     83. It seems to me that the real issue, which is identified from the
         decision in Nwaige, and the procedural rules is whether the
         decision to refuse the application for an adjournment resulted in
         any unfairness to the appellant.

Ground 2:

     84. This leads me to ground 2. Mr Read on behalf of the appellant
         submits that the judge failed to provide the appellant with a fair
         hearing and the reasons given by the FtTJ at paragraph [10] and his
         reference made to the hearing having been adjourned before, was not
         relevant to the question of whether the hearing was fair or not.

     85. I have set out earlier the reasons given by the FtTJ for refusing
         the application for an adjournment for the Reverend to give
         evidence. Whilst the grounds refer to paragraph [10] in isolation,
         in my judgement the decision needs to be read as a whole.

     86. The FtTJ plainly considered the applicable procedural rules and did
         so in light of the overriding objective of dealing with cases
         "justly and fairly". His reference to the issue of delay is a
         matter expressly set out within the procedural rules at paragraph 2
         (1) (e) and therefore the judge was not in error in considering the
         issue of delay. Furthermore, it was open to the FtTJ to take into
         account what he set out at [10]: "further, the criticism of the
         tribunal service is misplaced. The appellant is represented by an
         experienced firm of immigration solicitors that knew the hearing
         was due to be listed in you that such hearings are listed at
         relatively short notice. It is therefore incumbent upon them to be
         proactive in providing witness availability, something that Mr Read
         confirmed they had failed to do."

     87. That said, it is plain from reading the decision that the judge had
         at the forefront of his mind the issue of fairness and expressly
         directed himself to that test at paragraph [9] as a "primary
         consideration" when reaching his overall decision.


     88. It is not the position as the grounds argue (at paragraph 27) that
         the appellant could not succeed without the attendance of the
         Reverend. The grounds cite the decision of Dorodian and that no one
         should be regarded as a committed Christian who is not vouched for
         as such by Minister of the church. However, that does not mean that
         written evidence which confirms this is evidence which cannot be
         taken into account as relevant and confirmatory evidence of such a
         claim.

     89. When considering the issue of fairness, the FtTJ was entitled to
         take into account the nature of the evidence to be given by the
         witness. The judge set out at [7] that it was in the form of a
         letter on page 70 of the appellant's bundle dated 22/2/20 and there
         was an earlier letter from him in the respondent's bundle.

     90. At paragraph [8] the judge recorded that the presenting officer
         acting on behalf of the respondent "confirmed the credibility of
         the Reverend was not challenged" and "that it was accepted that the
         Reverend honestly believed the appellant to be a genuine convert to
         Christianity."

     91. At paragraph [11] the FtTJ stated:

         "11. Finally, and most importantly, the witness evidence is not
         contested. The appellant therefore has the benefit of accepted
         witness evidence from a Reverend who honestly believes him to be a
         Christian convert. As such, the witness' presence would not add
         anything to the appellant's case. It is not argued that there was
         additional evidence that he would be required to give, and in any
         event had that been the case no doubt the solicitors would have
         obtained an addendum witness statement from him in advance of the
         hearing in accordance with the standard directions in regard to
         service of evidence."

     92. Therefore, the contents of the evidence of the Reverend as set out
         in 2 letters was not contested but ranked as accepted evidence. In
         those circumstances it cannot reasonably be said that there was any
         unfairness to the appellant as a judge identified that the benefit
         operated in favour of the appellant and that "the appellant
         therefore has the benefit of accepted witness evidence from a
         Reverend who honestly believes him to be a Christian convert." The
         judge also made the relevant observation as to what necessarily
         followed from this and that "as such the witness' presence would
         not add anything to the appellant's case."


     93. The judge was also entitled to take into account at the hearing
         that it had not been stated or argued that there was any additional
         evidence that the witness would be required to give. Indeed, it has
         not been identified in the grounds or at the hearing that any
         additional evidence that the witness would have given was not
         contained in the 2 letters obtained from the witness prior to the
         hearing.

     94. As a judge correctly took into account at paragraph [11] , if that
         had been the case "no doubt the solicitors would have obtained an
         additional witness statement from the Reverend in advance of the
         hearing in accordance with the standard directions in regards  to
         the service of evidence" relied upon. That is consistent with the
         general rule that witnesses giving oral evidence should provide a
         written statement of that evidence to stand as their evidence in
         chief as part of the general case management powers of the
         tribunal.

     95. Furthermore, as submitted on behalf of the respondent it is not the
         case that the judge sought to give little weight to the evidence of
         the Reverend on the basis of his failure or otherwise to attend the
         hearing. That would have been irrational in light of the decision
         to not adjourn the hearing.

     96. In fact the FtTJ did not just give the evidence "weight" but gave
         the evidence "substantial weight" (at [39]) and "significant
         weight" (at [41] and [44]) where again the FtTJ reiterated the way
         in which he approached the evidence. He stated:


             "I give significant weight to the evidence of the Reverend
             which is not diminished by the fact that he was unable to give
             oral evidence."


     97. In his skeleton argument and his oral submissions Mr Read submitted
         that the refusal to adjourn the hearing unfairly prejudiced the
         appellant's case because the unavailability of the Reverend denied
         the appellant the opportunity of explaining apparent contradictions
         in the evidence which the judge held against him at paragraph 46
         (m) of the decision.

     98. The grounds state "from [46] at (a)- (m) the tribunal listed the
         inconsistencies in A's evidence. It is only finally at (m) that the
         tribunal notes inconsistencies relevant to the question of A's
         conversion to Christianity. The inconsistencies are difference in
         the accounts of A's church attendance between the oral evidence
         given by the AA under cross examination and the witness evidence
         given by the Dorodian witness. The failure to allow the Dorodian
         witness to attend denied the appellant the benefit of any
         correcting or clarifying evidence of the inconsistencies that the
         Dorodian witness may have been able to offer the tribunal. That is
         clearly disadvantaged a in the tribunal's assessment of his
         credibility. That disadvantage is unfair."

     99. I have therefore considered this submission with care and have done
         so in the light of the decision.

    100. At paragraph 46 (m) the FtTJ stated as follows:

         "(m) attendance at church in the United Kingdom; He disclosed that
         he had been attending the church since the beginning of the year
         (2019) and he repeated that assertion during his oral evidence.
         However, Reverend details in his witness statement that he started
         working at St X's in November 2018 and that the appellant started
         attending in September 2019, which significantly undermines the
         appellant's account of having started at the beginning of the year.
         When the inconsistency was put the appellant during cross-
         examination, he stated that Reverend did not know when the
         appellant started as the Reverend had started work at the church
         afterwards, but this is not correct, as the Reverend stated that he
         started to work at the church in 2018."

    101. At [47] -[52] the FtTJ sets out his reasons for rejecting the
         appellant's various explanations for the inconsistencies of his
         evidence that the judge had summarised in the earlier paragraph at
         [46] (a) -(m).


    102. At subparagraph (m) the FtTJ refers to the appellant's evidence
         that he had been attending church since the beginning of the year
         (2019). The judge identifies 2 sources of evidence. In his asylum
         interview at question 153, the appellant was asked, "how long have
         you been attending the church?" He answered, "I started attending
         the church at the beginning of the year because before that I was
         in a bad state, but I was praying, because I used to spend most of
         my time at home."

    103. The 2nd source was the appellant's oral evidence at the hearing
         where he repeated what he had said in his interview that he had
         been attending the church since the beginning of the year 2019.

    104. The FtTJ stated that the Reverend's evidence set out in his letter
         stated that the Reverend began working at the church in November
         2018 and that the appellant started attending in September 2019
         (see letter dated 25/10/19). The letter went on to state "he
         informed me he was attending in the past. I personally could not
         validate this as I have only been in post X since November 2018".

    105. The FtTJ stated that the evidence of the Reverend "undermines the
         appellant's account of having started at the beginning of the
         year".

    106. The judge went on to state, "when the inconsistency was put the
         appellant during cross-examination he stated that Reverend X did
         not know when the appellant had started as the Reverend had started
         work at the church afterwards" (that is, after the beginning of
         2019) but the judge stated, "but this is not correct as the
         Reverend stated that he started to work at the church in 2018".


    107. The grounds assert that the inconsistencies in the evidence set out
         at (m) are the differences in the accounts of the appellant's
         church attendance between the oral evidence given by the appellant
         under cross examination and the written evidence given by the
         Reverend and that the failure to allow the Reverend to attend the
         hearing denied the appellant the benefit of correcting or
         clarifying the evidence of the inconsistencies. It is on that basis
         it is asserted that this had the effect of disadvantaging the
         appellant in the tribunal's assessment of his credibility.


    108. In my judgement the grounds fail to properly assess the evidence
         set out at subparagraph (m). The inconsistency was not based on the
         appellant's oral evidence in cross-examination but was based on the
         evidence given in his interview at question 153 which was repeated
         in oral evidence. Therefore the discrepancy was set out in the
         appellant's evidence before he gave oral evidence in cross
         examination where he repeated the same point. The apparent
         inconsistency was also set out in the decision letter at paragraph
         95 and therefore it stood as a clear discrepancy from December 2019
         which was the date of the decision letter.

    109. The witness had already clarified this in his letter that the
         appellant had said that he had attended the church "in the past"
         but that the Reverend could not "personally validate this" as he
         had only been in post since November 2018. The Reverend provided a
         later letter at page 70 of the appellant's bundle dated February
         2020 and again the witness confirmed that the date of his knowledge
         of the appellant stating, "I have known him since he joined the
         church at the end of September 2019".

    110. It is reasonable to assume that the discrepancy was plain well
         before the hearing on 28 September 2020 and in fact was plain since
         December 2019 as it was set out in the decision letter and it was
         repeated in the Reverend's evidence in February 2020.
         Notwithstanding that evidence, the appellant confirmed that he had
         started at the church in the earlier part of 2019. It is therefore
         not the position that the failure to adjourn denied the appellant
         the benefit of correcting the evidence. The appellant had the
         opportunity to clarify his evidence a number of months before the
         hearing, but no steps had been taken to do so. When looking at the
         letter written by the Reverend, he had been consistent in his
         evidence that he joined the church in November 2018 and that the
         appellant had joined in September 2019. He referred to the
         appellant's claim that the appellant had stated that he had
         attended "in the past" but that he could not validate this. It has
         therefore not been demonstrated that the witness could clarify any
         inconsistency. Furthermore, it was not the Reverend's inconsistent
         evidence but that of the appellant himself. Nor has it been
         demonstrated that the inconsistency arose as a result of cross-
         examination. That is clearly not the case when the evidence is
         considered as a whole.


    111. During the hearing I invited counsel to identify any other
         inconsistencies in the evidence which the Reverend would have been
         able to clarify. Mr Read was not able to point to any save for the
         above issue which had been replicated in the grounds and the
         skeleton argument.

    112. Drawing those issues together, the decision made to refuse the
         application for an adjournment was a case management decision over
         which the FtTJ had a wide discretion applying the ordinary
         principles of fairness. In my judgement the FtTJ was plainly aware
         of the relevant procedure rules and expressly took into account the
         decision of Nwaige (as cited) which underscored the importance of
         fairness to the proceedings. The judge gave adequate and
         sustainable reasons for reaching the conclusion that it had not
         been demonstrated that it was not in the interests of justice to
         adjourn the appeal and that there would be no unfairness to the
         appellant in doing so by fully taking into account the nature of
         the evidence of the witness and whether it was contested or not and
         also as the decision demonstrates, the judge not only gave weight
         that evidence but gave it significant and substantial weight in his
         assessment, taking that evidence at its highest.

    113. Against that background, I accept the submission made on behalf of
         the respondent  that the decision taken by the judge could not be
         properly described as irrational  but one in which he gave
         sustainable reasons to support taking that course of action and in
         my judgement it has not been demonstrated that there has been any
         unfairness to the appellant in doing so. Therefore grounds 1 and 2
         are not made out.

    114. It is accepted that permission to appeal was not granted in respect
         of ground 3.

Ground 4:

    115. I now turn to ground 4. It concerns paragraph [70] of the FtTJ's
         decision, where the FtTJ stated, "As such even if I was to accept
         to the requisite low standard of proof that the appellant is a
         Christian, I would nevertheless not be satisfied that there is a
         reasonable risk of harm that would result to the appellant in
         Iraq."

    116. It is submitted on behalf of the appellant that a "reasonable risk
         of harm" is not the test for protection and that the test for
         protection is a "real risk" that is a risk that is "not fanciful".
         An alternative formulation includes "a reasonable degree of
         likelihood (or a real risk) of the claimants fear of being well-
         founded."

    117. It is therefore submitted by Mr Read that the FtTJ misdirected
         himself to the test to be applied to the risk of harm on return in
         a protection claim.

    118. Ms Pettersen on behalf of the respondent submitted that this was an
         alternative finding and that on the earlier findings made by the
         FtTJ he had rejected the appellant's factual claim to be at risk of
         harm as a result of his relationship with a woman in Iraq and also
         rejected his conversion to Christianity. Thus even if the judge
         erred in what she described as an "in felicitous statement" at
         paragraph [70], it was of no materiality to the outcome as the FtTJ
         had made sustainable findings that the appellant was not a genuine
         Christian convert and therefore any assessment of risk of harm in
         that regard set out at paragraph  [70]was not material to the
         outcome.

    119. Ms Pettersen further submitted that there had been no challenge in
         the written grounds to the FtTJ's assessment of the objective
         evidence which the judge set out and analysed at [68]-[69].

    120. I am not satisfied that the FtTJ erred in law as the grounds
         contend. The First-tier Tribunal is an expert tribunal charged with
         administering a complex area of law in challenging circumstances.
         It is probable that in understanding and applying the law in its
         specialised field the Tribunal will have got it right. The decision
         of the FtTJ is to be read as a whole. The FtTJ was plainly aware of
         the burden and standard of proof applicable to the appeal which he
         set out in his decision at paragraphs [13] -[15]. The FtTJ
         correctly referred to the burden on the appellant to show that "a
         reasonable degree of likelihood that returning to Iraq would expose
         him to a real risk of an act of persecution..." And a "real risk of
         serious harm" (as set out at paragraph 14 and 15). At a number of
         points in his decision the FtTJ correctly referred to the "lower
         standard of proof " ( see at [56],[58]). In his concluding
         paragraphs at [62] the FtTJ addressed the risk of return to Iraq
         stating, " I do not accept that there is a reasonable degree of
         likelihood that returning the appellant to Iraq would expose him to
         a real risk of persecution" and at [63] " I am not satisfied that
         there are substantial grounds for believing that the appellant
         would face a real risk of serious harm..". At paragraph [70] the
         FtTJ referred to the "requisite low standard of proof" which in my
         judgement could only refer to the applicable test of "reasonable
         degree of likelihood" and therefore any reference to "reasonable
         risk of harm" should viewed in the context of the decision as a
         whole. Consequently, I am not satisfied that the judge fell into
         error.

    121. In any event, as Ms Pettersen submits, even if there were an error
         it would have no materiality to the outcome given the FtTJ's
         primary conclusion whereby the judge rejected the appellant's
         account of entering into a relationship which would have resulted
         him being at real risk of violence, or that he had attracted the
         adverse attention of the authorities or ISIS or any particular
         family. Nor did the judge accept that he had been the subject of
         any targeted violence as alleged or at all or that his family had
         been killed. Furthermore, on the assessment undertaken by the FtTJ,
         the appellant was not found to be a genuine Christian convert and
         therefore any reference in the alternative to risk of harm on that
         basis was not material to his decision.


    122. Standing back and considering the decision reached by the judge  as
         a whole, I am satisfied that the FtTJ undertook a careful  analysis
         of the appellant's factual  claim.  The  grounds  do  not  seek  to
         challenge any of the  factual  findings  made  in  respect  of  his
         account of events in Iraq and the  conclusions  reached  concerning
         the   credibility   of   the   appellant   and   the    significant
         inconsistencies in his account summarised by the FtTJ at  paragraph
         46 (a)-(l)  and  also  at  [53]  (a)  -(i).    The  FtTJ  similarly
         undertook a careful appraisal of the evidence advanced on behalf of
         the appellant relating to his claimed conversion  to  Christianity.
         The FtTJ did not reach his conclusion solely based on  the  earlier
         findings relating to events in Iraq but  also  by  considering  the
         evidence holistically which  included  the  oral  evidence  of  the
         appellant and his witness  who attended at the hearing and also the
         written evidence of the Reverend  and  Mr  M  (  see  TF  (Iran)  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] CSIH 58, 2019  SC
         81).  The FtTJ gave substantial weight to  the  evidence  from  the
         Reverend ( at [39] and [41]) whose evidence  he accepted  should be
         considered as  expert evidence( although an approach now subject to
         some criticism by the Upper Tribunal (see MH  (Review;  slip  rule;
         church witnesses) Iran [2020] UKUT 125 (IAC)).  In undertaking that
         factual assessment, the FtTJ accepted that the Reverend  truthfully
         believed the appellant to be a genuine  convert  to  the  Christian
         faith but also the judge was entitled to reach the  view  that  the
         Reverend would not, nor  could  he  be  expected  to,  subject  the
         appellant's motives to the anxious scrutiny that he must  undertake
         as the judge. His observation that "we have significantly different
         roles" accurately described their respective positions.   The  FtTJ
         in this case, as in all others, as the  factfinder  considered  the
         evidence as a whole, which included the opinion evidence  from  the
         church.


    123. In my judgement the FtTJ carried out a careful consideration of the
         evidence in the round and reached overall conclusions that were
         open to him. In particular, the FtTJ was entitled to take into
         account the following evidential factors:


         1) his rejection of the appellant's assertion that he was unable to
            attend church and United Kingdom prior to 2019 (see [53] (c)),
         2) that his attendance at a "Jewish church" for a significant
            period was implausible and that a committed Christian who had
            converted to the faith despite the belief that it would place
            him at risk of harm his own country, would attend the wrong
            religion unwittingly on several occasions until someone pointed
            out his error was implausible  ( at [53] (d)),
         3) the inconsistent evidence given by his supporting witness at
            [45].
         4) The appellant's failure without good reason to inform his close
            family member with whom he has lived with or been supported by
            of his conversion to Christianity ([53](e)),
         5) the failure to provide evidence from A whom he asserted
            converted into Christianity in 2015 with whom he remained in
            contact with (at [53](f) (iv))
         6) the rejection of the baptism certificate as a reliable document
            (at [54]).


    124. Consequently, for the reasons given above, I am satisfied that the
         decision of the FtTJ did not make an error on a point of law and
         the decision of the FtT stands. The appeal is dismissed.


Notice of Decision.

    125. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making
         of an error on a point of law and therefore the decision of the FtT
         stands.




Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

                                Dated   29 June 2021


I make a direction  regarding  anonymity  under  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal Rules) Rules 2008 as  the  proceedings  relate  to
the circumstances of a protection claim. Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or
court directs otherwise the appellant is granted anonymity.   No  report  of
these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him. This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent.


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days if  the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5  working  days
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working  days  if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email.

