

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                     Appeal
Number PA/00826/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Centre City Tower
         Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 12th July 2017
                On 1st August 2017


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                                    S R S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant: Mr S Woodhouse (Legal Representative, HS Immigration
Consultants)
For the Respondent: Ms H Aboni (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant, a citizen of Iran, applied for asylum in the UK in 2016
   but was refused. The Appellant then appealed the decision and that was
   heard by Judge Obhi at Sheldon Court in Birmingham. She dismissed his
   appeal in a decision promulgated on the 30th of March 2017. The Appellant
   was granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on the basis of
   grounds of the 6th of April 2017.

2. There were 2 main issues that the Judge had to consider, the first was
   whether the Appellant was a genuine convert to Christianity and the
   second turned on his internet activity. So far as the first was concerned
   the Judge rejected the Appellant's claim to have converted. The challenge
   to that finding was on the basis that the Judge had applied the wrong
   standard of proof there being a reference in paragraph 30 to the balance
   of probabilities.

3. The Judge had correctly identified the appropriate standard of proof in
   paragraphs 13 and 33 of the decision and the line objected to in
   paragraph 30 came at the end of a series of paragraphs, starting at
   paragraph 26, in which the Appellant's claim had been discussed. Had that
   been the only issue then I would not have found for the Appellant.

4. However, it was accepted by the Home Office that the decision contained
   no analysis of the Appellant's internet activity and so no assessment of
   whether the Appellant would be at risk on return to Iran. This was an
   issue that had to be addressed in full but had not been considered even
   partially.

5. The Appellant's appeal papers include further evidence in relation to
   his claimed conversion. That evidence is not relevant to the issue of an
   error of law as the assessment of a decision has to be on the basis of
   the information that was presented to the Judge in the appeal. If an
   Appellant fails to provide relevant evidence at their appeal hearing or
   in the papers submitted then that is not an error by the Judge.

6. In reality in this case given the Judge's failure to consider the
   Appellant's internet profile and the risk that that might create for him
   means that that aspect of the case requires full appraisal and a series
   of findings to be made on a number of discrete issues. Given the nature
   of the additional evidence submitted in relation to the Appellant's
   claimed conversion and the issues to be decided in relation to the
   internet evidence which has to be considered in full I indicated that it
   would be better if all matters could be heard to together and to that end
   the entire decision would be set aside and remitted to the First-tier
   Tribunal for rehearing on all issues.

7. The practicality of that approach was accepted by the parties at the
   hearing and accordingly that is the means by which this appeal is
   disposed.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making
of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision and remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal
for re-hearing on all issues with no findings preserved. This is not to be
re-heard by Judge Obhi

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.)

Fee Award

In remitting the decision for rehearing I make no fee award which remains
an issue for the First-tier Tribunal dependent on the outcome of the
rehearing.

Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 1st August 2017

