
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00676/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21st September 2016                        |On 4th October 2016           |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY


                                   Between

                                  FITIM [S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Hena, Counsel for Virgo Solicitors, London
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Albania born on 13th November  1999.   He
    appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  dated  23rd  December
    2015 refusing him asylum and  humanitarian  protection  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  His appeal was heard by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Walters on  6th  July  2016.   It  was  dismissed  on  asylum  grounds,
    humanitarian protection grounds and human rights grounds in a  decision
    promulgated on 1st August 2016.

 2. An application for permission to appeal  was  made  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant.  Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ransley
    on 19th August 2016.  The permission states that  the  judge  may  have
    failed to apply the correct burden and standard of proof regarding  the
    Embassy in Tirana's faxed letter that was submitted by  the  Respondent
    at the hearing.  The judge failed to explain why he gave such weight to
    the Embassy's letter when the Respondent had failed to provide  a  copy
    of the source documents on which the findings of the Embassy in  Tirana
    were based.  They state that the judge missed a  key  argument  by  the
    Appellant's Counsel on the inaccuracy of the document.

 3. There is  a  Rule  24  response  which  states  that  the  Respondent's
    assertion  is  that  the  Appellant  provided   incorrect   information
    concerning his movements  which  materially  damaged  his  claim.   The
    burden of proof was on the Respondent to the balance  of  probabilities
    to demonstrate that the Appellant was not  telling  the  truth  in  his
    account of his travels.  The Appellant's account was core to his  claim
    but the response states that the  judge  was  entitled  to  place  what
    weight he considered appropriate on the Respondent's  verification  and
    to include in that assessment that the Appellant accepted  he  was  the
    person in  the  photograph  attached  to  the  British  Embassy  letter
    (paragraph 40).  The judge found that further documentation would  have
    been preferable but that the lack of it did not in  itself  render  the
    Embassy reply as inaccurate.  The response states that it was  open  to
    the judge to find that the Appellant had failed to establish his claim.



The Hearing

 4. The Presenting Officer submitted that he accepts  that  there  were  no
    source documents with the  British  Embassy  letter  submitted  by  the
    Respondent.

 5. Counsel for the Appellant submitted that there is no dispute  that  the
    burden is on the Respondent to the  civil  standard,  to  show  that  a
    document, on which she is relying, is accurate.

 6. I was referred to paragraph 13 of the grounds of application which sets
    out the burden and standard of proof. Counsel submitted that the  judge
    only refers to the burden of proof being on the Appellant and  mentions
    nothing about the burden of proof being on the Respondent  relating  to
    the letter from the British Embassy in Tirana.  She submitted that this
    is an important issue and  I  was  referred  to  paragraph  44  of  the
    decision, in which the judge refers to the British Embassy  letter  but
    again does not state that the burden of  proof  is  on  the  Respondent
    relating to this document.  She submitted that the judge has not  given
    this anxious scrutiny.

 7. I was referred to the British Embassy in Tirana's  letter,  dated  30th
    September 2015 and Counsel submitted that this letter is  not  accurate
    as although it  states  that  the  Appellant's  father  travelled  into
    Albania from Kosovo in 2008 and there is no record  of  him  travelling
    out of Albania after that and there is no  evidence  of  when  he  left
    Albania to travel to Kosovo.  Counsel submitted that this document from
    the British Embassy is therefore lacking but the judge has accepted its
    terms as supporting the Respondent's case.  The letter  refers  to  the
    Appellant's father's biometric passport being issued in  2011  but  his
    father not having registered any travel since then.  She submitted that
    this goes to the core of the claim  and  the  judge  has  not  properly
    reasoned his decision.  With  regard  to  the  Appellant's  photograph,
    which is attached to the Embassy letter, she submitted that this is not
    a good enough reason for the judge to accept the letter and dismiss the
    appeal.

 8. She submitted that with regard to the letter from the Democratic  Party
    of Albania which was submitted by the Appellant, the judge was wrong to
    give it no weight because the Appellant's uncle who supplied it was not
    at the hearing.  She submitted that these two pieces of  evidence  have
    been treated totally differently and it is not clear whether the  judge
    finds that the burden of proof is on the  Respondent  relating  to  the
    British Embassy letter.  She submitted that the judge  did  not  engage
    with the submissions.

 9. The Presenting Officer submitted that the judge does not directly refer
    to the burden of proof being on the Respondent relating to the  British
    Embassy letter, at paragraph 13 of the  decision,  but  the  judge  has
    given proper consideration to all the  documents  before  him  and  has
    applied anxious scrutiny to the answers given at the hearing.

10. With regard to the letters and responses  not  being  attached  to  the
    British Embassy letter, the judge was aware of this and  refers  to  it
    but still felt he could place weight on  the  document.   He  submitted
    that Counsel has stated that the Appellant's  photograph  which  is  on
    this document is not enough but at the hearing the  Appellant  accepted
    that it is his photograph and I was referred to the actual document and
    the words above the photograph.  These  refer  to  the  photograph  and
    state that the personal details of the subject Fitim [S] born  on  13th
    November 1999 were extracted from TIMS (Albanian Border  and  Migration
    Database).  He submitted that the personal details are correct and this
    information could only have come from TIMS.   He  submitted  that  this
    gives weight to the document and he submitted that had the judge quoted
    this in his decision, the point now raised as a material error  of  law
    would be otiose as the Respondent would then have satisfied the  burden
    of proof.  He submitted that the judge was entitled  to  rely  on  this
    document when coming to his decision.

11. The Presenting Officer submitted that the Appellant states that he left
    Albania at a certain time because his father  had  been  threatened  at
    that time.  He submitted that there is no other way the  Embassy  could
    have got the information which is in its letter than from  the  sources
    quoted in the letter and when this information  is  considered,  it  is
    clear that the Appellant left Albania at an earlier date than he is now
    stating and that his father  did  not  go  with  him.   The  Presenting
    Officer submitted that with regard to  Counsel's  submission  that  the
    British Embassy document is not accurate because there is nothing which
    states when the Appellant's father travelled out of Albania to  Kosovo,
    this is  not  relevant.   This  application  was  made  in  2015.   The
    information is that the Appellant's father has not  left  Albania.   He
    submitted that the judge was entitled to take all of these matters into
    account and give weight to the British Embassy letter.

12. The Presenting Officer submitted that the judge has not given the  same
    weight to the  Appellant's  documents  from  the  Democratic  Party  of
    Albania because the  certificate  which  states  that  the  Appellant's
    father is a DP member has no date on it and makes  no  mention  of  how
    long the Appellant's father has been a DP member or what  his  position
    is in the party.  The judge also found that less weight could be  given
    to it because the Appellant's uncle who had obtained this document  did
    not appear to give evidence at  the  hearing.  The  Presenting  Officer
    pointed out that the membership card of the Appellant's father was  not
    issued until 1st February 2016.

13. He submitted that  the  judge  gave  proper  reasons  for  giving  this
    document little weight and there is no material error  of  law  in  the
    judge's decision.  The judge concluded that there was no  substance  to
    the Appellant's claim.

14. I asked Counsel about the relevance  of  when  the  Appellant's  father
    exited Albania to go to Kosovo.  She submitted that  if  he  can  leave
    Albania without the system being updated and the  system  can  pick  up
    when the Appellant's father came back to Albania from Kosovo, the  fact
    that there is no mention of him leaving to go to Kosovo means that  the
    British Embassy letter is not accurate.

15. She admitted that there is no statement from the Appellant's uncle  and
    he did not appear for the hearing of the appeal and she  admitted  that
    the Democratic Party letter does not say much but she submitted that if
    the judge accepts the Democratic Party of Albania's letter, this  shows
    that the Appellant's father was politically active.  I asked her  about
    the date on the membership card and she said that when the  Appellant's
    uncle went to get the card, as the Appellant's father was not there, it
    had to be re-issued.  It may have to  be  re-issued  every  year.   She
    submitted that the membership card shows that his father is politically
    affiliated.

16. Counsel submitted that the photograph with the details above it on  the
    British Embassy letter does not necessarily  show  when  the  Appellant
    left Albania.  This letter could refer to the date when he applied  for
    his passport and that is why there is a record with the  Embassy.   She
    submitted that the British Embassy letter without the  source  evidence
    is not sufficient to show when the Appellant left Albania.

Decision and Reasons

17. If weight is given to the letter from the British Embassy in Tirana, it
    is clear that the Appellant's story is untrue.  It  has  been  accepted
    that the documents referred to in that letter have  not  been  produced
    but not only did the Appellant, according to this letter leave  Albania
    on 13th April 2015, travelling to Kosovo by car,  the  passport  stamps
    also indicate that he travelled through Macedonia on the same  day  and
    through Hungary on 15th April 2015.  The fact that the passport  stamps
    support the letter must be relevant and so it seems  that  the  Embassy
    letter is accurate relating to the Appellant so there is no  reason  to
    suppose it would be inaccurate regarding the Appellant's  father.   The
    Appellant has admitted that he is part of a family with his parents and
    three siblings and he has admitted that the photograph attached to  the
    letter is of him.  I am satisfied with the personal details which  have
    been supplied by TIMS and find that this is sufficient for the judge to
    give considerable weight to this letter.  It is true that the judge has
    not specifically stated that the  burden  of  proof  relating  to  this
    letter is on the Respondent but based on the evidence before the judge,
    I find that the Respondent has discharged the burden of proof  relating
    to this letter.  The letter also refers to the Appellant's  father  and
    states that he travelled into Albania from  Kosovo  in  November  2008.
    There is no record of him having left Albania to go to  Kosovo.   There
    is a further entry which states that the Appellant's father was removed
    to  Albania  on  9th  August  2005   undocumented.   There   are   many
    possibilities as to why the date of his father's exit from  Albania  is
    not mentioned in the letter.

18. The British Embassy letter refers to a scanned  copy  of  the  official
    response from the Albanian Ministry of the Interior and scanned  copies
    of the subject's personal  and  family  certificates  provided  by  the
    General Directorate of Civil Status Registry.  The fact that these  are
    mentioned in the letter is significant.  It is  unfortunate  that  they
    are not with the letter but I see no reason why they would be  referred
    to by the person writing the letter if he had not had sight of them.  I
    find that the fact that there is  no  date  given  of  the  Appellant's
    father's exit from Albania, is  irrelevant.  This  does  not  mean  the
    letter is inaccurate. I find that it can be relied on as did the judge.
     I also note that there is a credibility issue  in  the  decision  when
    paragraphs 35 and 36 are  studied.   With  regard  to  the  Appellant's
    address in Albania, there seems to be no  issue  about  this.  This  is
    dealt with at paragraphs 37 to 39 of the decision.

19. With regard  to  the  evidence  provided  by  the  Appellant  from  the
    Democratic Party of Albania  about  his  father's  membership  and  his
    father's membership card, the  judge  found  it  significant  that  the
    Appellant's uncle who had obtained this evidence  did  not  attend  the
    hearing or even make a statement.   The  judge  was  entitled  to  this
    finding. The certificate from the DP makes no reference to  the  length
    of time the Appellant's father has been a member or if he is an  active
    member and it is not dated.  The membership card was only issued on 1st
    February 2016 after the Appellant made his claim and  it  was  refused.
    The judge was entitled to give little weight  to  these  two  documents
    based on the evidence before him.

20. I do not find that the judge has used the wrong standard  of  proof  or
    burden of proof  relating  to  the  British  Embassy  letter.   He  has
    explained why he gave weight to this letter and he has explained why he
    did not give much weight to the two documents from the Democratic Party
    of Albania.

21. The judge was entitled to come to the decision he did based on what was
    before him and he has given proper reasons for reaching his decision.

Notice of Decision

22. There is no material error of law in the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    decision promulgated on 1st August 2016.  The decision  dismissing  the
    Appellant's appeal on all grounds must stand.

23. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 4th October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray

