
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
PA/00100/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 31 May 2019                         |  On 25 June 2019                   |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL
                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     b c
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:         Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr W Bhebhe, Legal Representative from Njomane Law


Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008,
I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper  Tribunal  or  a  Court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original  Appellant
(referred to as the Claimant in this decision). This direction  applies  to,
amongst others, all parties. Any  failure  to  comply  with  this  direction
could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.






                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. For ease of reference, we refer to the Appellant in  these  proceedings
    before the Upper Tribunal as the Secretary of State and the  Respondent
    as the Claimant.

 2. This is a challenge by the Secretary of State against the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Rourke ("the  judge"),  promulgated  on  29
    March 2019, in which he  allowed  the  Claimant's  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of  State's  decision  of  23  November  2018,  refusing  his
    protection and human rights claims.

 3. These claims had been made by way of further representations  submitted
    to  the  Secretary  of  State  on  26  September  2018,  following  the
    Claimant's previous unsuccessful appeal before the First-tier Tribunal,
    which had been dismissed by a decision promulgated  on  26  April  2010
    (AA/03597/2010). In essence, the Claimant's "new" case was that she had
    been a prominent activist for the MDC in the United  Kingdom  over  the
    course of time and that her profile would place her at risk  on  return
    to Zimbabwe.

The judge's decision

 4. The core aspects of the judge's decision can be summarised as  follows.
    On the  basis  of  what  he  clearly  regarded  as  credible  oral  and
    documentary evidence, the judge accepted at [22] that the Claimant  was
    an active  member  of  the  MDC  in  the  United  Kingdom.  Indeed,  at
    [23(iii)(b)], he found her to be a "committed MDC  political  activist"
    who would, significantly for the purposes of  this  appeal,  engage  in
    such activities in Zimbabwe.

 5. The judge made specific reference to the country guidance  case  of  CM
    (EM country guidance; disclosure) Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT  00059  (IAC)
    ("CM"), which  had  formed  the  basis  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    assessment of risk in the reasons for refusal letter. At [23(i)(a)-(n)]
    the judge proceeded to set out a number of passages from the  Secretary
    of State's most recent Country Policy  and  Information  Note  ("CPIN")
    entitled  "Zimbabwe:  opposition  to  the  government",  published   in
    February 2019. A number of these passages are in fact  taken  from  the
    section  of  the  CPIN  representing  the  Secretary  of  State's   own
    assessment  of  the  country  situation,  although  those  set  out  at
    [23(i)((f)-(n)] relate to the primary sources  of  country  information
    themselves.

 6. On the basis of the country information referred to (and the  Secretary
    of State's assessment thereof), at [23(iii)] the judge  concluded  that
    he was able to depart from the guidance set out in CM.  In  support  of
    this, the judge notes the age of CM (it having been  heard  in  October
    2012) and what he describes as the "general tone" of the assessment and
    information contained in the CPIN. At  [23(iii)(b)]  the  judge  quotes
    from para. 2.4.13 of that document:

           "... There is a lack of  clear  and  cogent  evidence  that  the
           government has, in practice, fundamentally changed the political
           environment or how it treats those opposed to the state."

 7. From this, the judge draws the following conclusion:

           "I take from this that the situation at the moment is too  fluid
           and too uncertain to decide that a person who, I have found,  is
           a committed MDC political activist and who would engage in  such
           activities in Zimbabwe, would not face the kind  of  persecution
           outlined in the background evidence above (regardless of whether
           or not the Zimbabwean authorities  were  aware  of  her  surplus
           activities - which seems inherently unlikely)."

 8. At [23(iii)(d)] the judge concludes that the Claimant would  be  unable
    to relocate  "in  the  countryside"  on  the  basis  that  she  had  no
    connections to rural areas.

 9. Article 8 is dealt with briefly at [24]. The Claimant's precarious  and
    then unlawful status in the United Kingdom is noted. There is reference
    to the delay by the Secretary of State in considering previous  further
    representations submitted in 2012, together with the  Claimant's  total
    period of 14 years' residence in the United Kingdom.

10.  The  Claimant's  appeal  was  duly  allowed   on   "asylum   grounds",
    "humanitarian protection grounds", and "human rights grounds".

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

11. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal do not challenge the judge's
    findings of fact as regards the Claimant's political activities in  the
    United Kingdom, their motivation, and her intention to  undertake  such
    activities on return to Zimbabwe.

12. Instead, they seek to attack the judge's conclusion that he was able to
    depart from the guidance in CM with reference to the "test" set out  by
    the Court of Appeal in SG (Iraq) [2012] EWCA Civ 940  (that  being  the
    need to show "very strong grounds supported by cogent evidence"  -  see
    para. 47). It is said that the judge failed to  refer  to  any  "cogent
    evidence" or provide reasons underpinning any "very strong grounds".

13. On the issue of internal relocation, the  Secretary  of  State  asserts
    that the judge failed to consider the possibility of the Claimant going
    to live in Bulawayo, an option, so it is said, that CM provides for.

14. Finally, the judge is taken to  task  for  failing  to  identify  which
    specific Article of the ECHR is relied upon when allowing the appeal on
    "human rights grounds".

15. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pooler on
    30 April 2019.



The hearing before us

16. Mr Melvin relied on  the  grounds  of  appeal.  At  one  point  in  his
    submissions there was an intimation that the  Secretary  of  State  was
    seeking to argue that the country situation in Zimbabwe had improved to
    the extent that CM should be departed from in his favour. When  it  was
    pointed out that this had never formed part of the Secretary of State's
    case against the Claimant and that, on the contrary, the  Secretary  of
    State had expressly relied  on  the  country  guidance  to  reject  the
    claimed risk on return, Mr Melvin accepted that CM remained  applicable
    in the context of this appeal. He also quite rightly accepted that none
    of the judge's findings of fact had been challenged.

17. It was submitted that the Claimant possessed a "low" political  profile
    and, if CM had been applied by the judge, it would have been  concluded
    that there was no risk in her home area,  or  alternatively,  that  she
    could have internally relocated.

18. Mr Bhebhe relied on his rule 24 response.  In  addition,  he  submitted
    that if CM had been applied, on the facts as found, the Claimant  would
    have succeeded in her appeal in any event.

Decision on error of law

19. As we announced to the parties at the hearing, we conclude  that  there
    are no material errors of law in the judge's decision.

20. Our reasons for this conclusion are as follows.

21. It is the case that the judge purported  to  depart  from  the  country
    guidance in CM. It is also true that he did not specifically  refer  to
    the  relatively  stringent  approach  required  when  undertaking  this
    particular course of action, as set out in SG (Iraq).

22. However, having regard to the passages  from  the  CPIN  cited  in  his
    decision and the conclusions drawn therefrom, it is apparent to us that
    the judge was not in truth making any material departure from  CM,  but
    was instead taking the view that the  situation  in  Zimbabwe  had  not
    improved over the course of time. On the  basis  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's own assessment of the country information contained in the CPIN
    (and the primary sources on which that assessment was  based),  such  a
    view was open to him.

23.  Alternatively,  we  could  adopt  the  position  that  the  judge  was
    concluding that the country situation had materially deteriorated since
    CM. This being the case, we might then conclude that the judge heard in
    failing to identify "very strong grounds supported by  cogent  reasons"
    when purporting to depart from the country guidance.

24. On either analysis and for the reasons set out below, the Secretary  of
    State's primary challenge to the judge's decision must fail.

25. It is quite clear that the guidance  set  out  in  CM  has  formed  the
    bedrock of the Secretary of State's case against the Claimant from  the
    very beginning and throughout the appellate process.  Indeed,  although
    the grounds of appeal  refer  to  an  "improvement"  in  the  political
    situation in Zimbabwe, it is manifestly the  case  that  the  challenge
    being mounted was predicated on the guidance in CM remaining valid.  It
    was primarily on the basis of that assertion that permission to  appeal
    was granted. Before us, Mr Melvin quite rightly  accepted  the  obvious
    and insurmountable difficulties facing any attempt on the part  of  the
    Secretary of State to now suggest that the judge should have  concluded
    that the situation in Zimbabwe had significantly improved to the extent
    that CM should be departed from in his favour.

26. At para. 215 of CM, the Upper Tribunal set out the previous guidance in
    EM and Others (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT 98 (IAC), modified to
    a very limited extent as result of the Supreme Court's judgment  in  RT
    (Zimbabwe) [2012] 3 WLR 345. Sub-para. (i)(5) of the modified  guidance
    states:

           "(5) A returnee to Harare will in general  face  no  significant
           difficulties, if going to a low-density or medium-density  area.
           Whilst the socio-economic situation  in  high-density  areas  is
           more  challenging,  in  general   a   person   without   ZANU-PF
           connections will not face significant problems there  (including
           a "loyalty test"), unless  he  or  she  has  a  significant  MDC
           profile, which might cause him or her to feature on  a  list  of
           those targeted for harassment,  or  would  otherwise  engage  in
           political activities likely to attract the adverse attention  of
           ZANU-PF, or  would  be  reasonably  likely  to  engage  in  such
           activities, but for a fear of  thereby  coming  to  the  adverse
           attention of ZANU-PF.

27. Applying this aspect of the guidance to the  present  case,  there  are
    unchallenged findings by the judge to the effect that the Claimant  was
    a committed political activist for the MDC in the  United  Kingdom  who
    would engage in such activities if returned to Zimbabwe. It is also the
    case that the Claimant's home area in Harare has been accepted  by  the
    Secretary of State as  constituting  a  high-density  location  in  the
    capital (see for example, para. 14 of the reasons for refusal  letter).
    Further, and importantly, the risk to an individual returning to such a
    location  in  Harare  is  not  solely  dependent  upon  them  having  a
    "significant MDC profile" which is likely to place them on  a  list  of
    any sort. The "or" stated in the passage from the guidance quoted above
    clearly shows that an individual who is reasonably likely to engage  in
    genuine MDC activities likely to attract the adverse attention of ZANU-
    PF, or would so engage but for a fear of persecution and/or Article  3-
    treatment, is also reasonably likely to be at risk.

28. In light of the judge's findings of fact, it is sufficiently  clear  to
    us that the Claimant would have succeeded in showing a risk in her home
    area on the basis of CM and the  activities  she  would  carry  out  on
    behalf of the MDC.

29. Therefore, the errors averred in the grounds as having been made by the
    judge is, to this extent, immaterial.

30. As to the issue of internal relocation, it  is  right  that  the  judge
    failed to expressly consider the possibility of the Claimant moving  to
    Bulawayo. However, on the basis that this omission amounts to an error,
    once again, in light of CM we conclude that it  is  immaterial  to  the
    outcome for the reasons set out below.

31. The Claimant's assertion that she is of Shona ethnicity has  never,  as
    far as we can see,  been  challenged  or  found  to  be  untrue.  Para.
    215(i)(7) of CM states:

          "(7) The issue of what is a person's home  for  the  purposes  of
          internal relocation is to be decided as a matter of fact  and  is
          not necessarily to be determined by  reference  to  the  place  a
          person from Zimbabwe regards as his or her rural homeland.  As  a
          general matter, it is unlikely that a person with a  well-founded
          fear of persecution in a major urban centre such as  Harare  will
          have a viable internal relocation alternative to a rural area  in
          the Eastern  provinces.  Relocation  to  Matabeleland  (including
          Bulawayo) may be negated by discrimination, where the returnee is
          Shona."

32. We also bear in mind the judge's finding that  the  Claimant  had  been
    away from Zimbabwe for a total of 14 years and had no connections  with
    any rural area in that country.

33. In our view, even if  the  judge  had  directed  himself  with  greater
    precision to CM and the issue of internal relocation, it  is  extremely
    likely that his conclusion on the issue would have remained  unchanged.
    Indeed, not only would that conclusion have been clearly open  to  him;
    on the basis of the findings of fact, he  would  have  been  inevitably
    driven to it.

34. Finally, we turn to the judge's conclusion that the appeal  was  to  be
    allowed on "human rights grounds". It is unclear as to what  particular
    Article of the ECHR he was relying upon. If he was simply  saying  that
    the risk to the Claimant of persecution meant that she  would  also  be
    exposed to Article 3-treatment, this would be  wholly  unobjectionable.
    If, however, the judge was purporting to allow the appeal on Article  8
    grounds, we would accept that his analysis and reasons  are  deficient.
    On the second of the two possibilities, our conclusion on  the  primary
    issue of the protection claim renders any error in respect of Article 8
    entirely immaterial.

Anonymity

35. We have maintained the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Signed      [pic]            Date: 5 June 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
