
                                    [pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00576/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford by Skype for       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|business                             |                                     |
|On the 12 August 2020                |On 18 August 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

                                     RT
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Diwncyz, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Brakaj, Solicitor instructed on behalf of the
appellant


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:

      1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision
         of the First-tier Tribunal (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ")
         who allowed his appeal in a decision promulgated on the 28 March
         2020.

      2. Whilst the Secretary of State is the appellant, for the sake of
         convenience I intend to refer to the parties as they were before
         the First-tier Tribunal.

      3. I make a direction regarding anonymity under Rule 14 of the
         Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal Rules) Rules 2008 as the
         proceedings relate to the circumstances of a protection claim.
         Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise the
         appellant is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him. This direction applies
         both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
         with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

      4. The hearing took place on 12 August 2020, by means of Skype for
         Business. which has been consented to and not objected to by the
         parties. A face to face hearing was not held because it was not
         practicable and both parties agreed that all issues could be
         determined in a remote hearing.  I conducted the hearing from court
         at Bradford IAC. The advocates attended remotely via video. There
         were no issues regarding sound, and no substantial technical
         problems were encountered during the hearing and I am satisfied
         both advocates were able to make their respective cases by the
         chosen means. Mr Diwncyz did not have the appellant's bundle and he
         was provided with an electronic bundle by Ms Brakaj and time was
         given for him to read and digest those papers.

      5. I am grateful to Mr Diwncyz and Ms Brakaj for their clear oral
         submissions.

Background:

      6. The appellant's claim is summarised in the decision of the FtTJ at
         paragraphs 15-20.  The appellant is an Iraqi national of Kurdish
         ethnicity. He arrived in the UK on 7 March 2008 and claimed asylum
         on the same day. The basis of his claim was that he had left Iraq
         because he was in fear of the family of a girl with whom he had had
         a secret relationship. His problems had begun in January 2007 when
         his secret relationship was discovered, and he had been seen with
         her. She heard subsequently she had been beaten and killed by her
         family. An arrest warrant had been issued for the appellant.

      7. He left Iraq in February 2007, remaining in Iran for eight months
         and later travelling to the UK via Turkey. He arrived on 7 March
         2008.

      8. His claim was refused on 16 October 2009 and in a decision
         promulgated on the 18 December 2009 his appeal against the decision
         to refuse asylum was dismissed by IJ Balloch. The judge rejected
         the appellant's account as one that was vague and inconsistent and
         thus was not a credible one and that the documents that he had
         produced to advance his claim did not support much of his account
         or that they were documents upon which the judge could place
         weight. The judge concluded that the appellant would not be at risk
         on return to Iraq and in the alternative there was no evidence of
         suffering any high degree of risk from indiscriminate violence
         based on the material in 2009.

      9. A High Court review was refused on 11 June 2010 and appeal rights
         were exhausted by the 18 June 2010. He was removed to Iraq on the
         17 March 2010 but returned to the UK within a short period of time
         of his exit. He submitted further submissions up to and including 7
         December 2018 all of which were refused. However, he lodged further
         submissions on 25 October 2019 and on 18 December 2019 a decision
         was made to refuse to grant asylum in a decision letter of the same
         date. The claim was considered as a fresh claim and the appellant
         was given an in country right of appeal.

     10. The appeal came before the FtTJ on 27th February 2020. The FtTJ set
         out the immigration history of the appellant at paragraphs 1 - 3 of
         the decision and also the previous decision of IJ Balloch
         (paragraph 24 - 25). A summary of the oral evidence was set out at
         paragraph 15 - 20 and at paragraph 15 the judge observed that the
         focus of the appeal "rests upon the current circumstances which
         exist in Iraq at this present time and in particular the ability of
         the appellant to secure appropriate identity documentation to
         enable him to return to  Erbil and indeed other regions within the
         IKR". At paragraphs 21 - 33 the judge set out her findings of fact.

     11. On the evidence before the judge, she found that the appellant was
         a young man of fighting age from Erbil in the IKR who had spent 12
         years living in the UK. As to the issue of contact with family
         relatives, at paragraph 27 the judge gave reasons as to why she was
         satisfied that the appellant had lost contact with his family
         members in Iraq; taking into account his length of absence from
         that country, and that he had been blamed for the death of his
         mother by his siblings who considered that she had been placed
         under a huge financial pressure to fund two trips to the UK . At
         paragraph 28 the judge gave reasons as to why she was satisfied
         that the appellant had made all reasonable efforts to trace his
         family which included contact with the Red Cross and attending at
         the Iraqi Consulate. At paragraph 29, the judge concluded that the
         appellant was not in possession of any original identification
         documentation and that it was reasonably likely that he would
         encounter considerable difficulties when attempting to secure CSID
         or an INID in the light of having lost contact with his relatives
         and that there was no male relative who would be willing to try and
         locate the ID documents in their possession or to help him secure
         alternative ID documentation.

     12. At paragraph 31, the judge considered that it was neither feasible
         nor reasonable for him to return to the IKR given his lack of
         documentation and that the appellant had no support network in
         Baghdad and did not speak Arabic. The judge concluded that in the
         light of the country guidance caselaw and that without the
         necessary travel documentation, he would encounter difficulties
         attempting to travel from Baghdad to the IKR and without the CSID
         card or a passport there would be a real risk that he would be
         detained at a checkpoint.

     13. The judge therefore allowed his appeal. On 11 April 2020, the
         Secretary of State issued grounds of appeal against that decision
         and on 28 April 2020 permission was granted by FtTJ Boyes.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

     14. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic the Upper Tribunal issued
         directions, inter alia, indicating that it was provisionally of the
         view that the error of law issue could be determined without a face
         to face hearing and that this could take place via Skype. Both
         parties have indicated that they were content for the hearing to
         proceed by this method. Therefore, the Tribunal listed the hearing
         to enable oral submissions to be given by each of the parties.

     15. Mr Diwncyz on behalf of the respondent relied upon the written
         grounds of appeal. There were no further written submissions. There
         was no Rule 24 response filed on behalf of the appellant.  I also
         heard oral submission from the advocates, and I am grateful for
         their assistance and their clear oral submissions.

     16. Mr Diwncyz relied upon the written grounds and that the respondent
         submitted that the judge had given inadequate reasons for reaching
         her decision to allow the appeal.

     17. In his oral submissions he made reference to the grounds at
         paragraphs 10 - 14 and that the visit to the embassy was not a
         valid attempt to obtain the documentation and cited the decision of
         MA (Ethiopia) in support.

     18. He invited the tribunal to find that the decision of the FtTJ
         demonstrated the making of an error on a point of law as set out in
         the written grounds.

     19. Ms Brakaj submitted that there was no error of law in the decision
         of FtTJ Bircher and that she had given adequate reasons for
         reaching the conclusion that the evidence that he had given on the
         issue of family members and attending at the embassy were credible.
         She submitted that the judge went into detail about his evidence at
         paragraph 27 and that it was possible to understand the reasoning
         of the judge and that the grounds were simply disagreement with the
         decision.

     20. She submitted that the grounds did not assert that the judge was
         irrational but that they were advanced on the basis of inadequacy
         of reasons.

     21. As the ground 2, there was no westernised analysis adopted and that
         it had been entirely plausible as to why the family members no
         longer remained in touch with him.

     22. As to visits to the embassy, it was them to the judge to accept the
         evidence that she had been given and there was no indication of
         anything further that the appellant could do. She highlighted the
         difficulties raised in the country guidance cases as to visits made
         to the embassy.

     23. In summary she submitted that there was no error of law and the
         decision should stand.

Decision on error of law:

     24. The grounds assert that the reasons given by the FtTJ at paragraphs
         27 - 33 do not explain why the previous credibility findings of the
         tribunal are to be departed from and that the FtTJ failed to apply
         the principles in the decision of Devaseelan ( see paragraphs 1 - 2
         of the grounds).

     25. I am satisfied that there is no merit in the grounds. The FtTJ sets
         out the appellant's immigration history at paragraph 2 and directed
         herself to the principles arising from the decision in Devaseelan
         at paragraphs 21 - 22.  At paragraph 24 - 25, the FtTJ set out the
         relevant factual findings of the previous FtTJ (Judge Balloch). It
         is not suggested on behalf of the respondent that the summary is
         incorrect and in fact mirrors what is recited in the decision
         letter. Consequently the FtTJ properly proceeded on the basis that
         the decision of the previous FtTJ had found that the appellant had
         failed to give a credible account and one that had been vague and
         inconsistent and that the copy documentation had not supported much
         of his account. The FtTJ was plainly aware that in the decision
         reached in 2009 the judge had concluded that he was not at risk on
         return to Iraq (see paragraphs 69, 80 and 81 of Judge Balloch's
         decision).

     26. Contrary to the grounds, the FtTJ expressly acknowledged the
         previous adverse credibility findings at paragraph 25 of her
         decision and cited that "the appellant made numerous applications
         in an effort to have the respondent reconsider the refusal decision
         and to in effect overturned the findings of immigration judge
         Balloch. However, the fact remains that despite these numerous
         attempts to return to the reasons why he claimed asylum,
         immigration judge Balloch's findings remain and have never been
         overturned....".

     27. Notwithstanding the previous adverse credibility findings, in my
         judgment the FtTJ was entitled to consider the basis upon which the
         claim had been considered by the respondent and her acknowledgment
         that this was a fresh claim. This was properly set out by the judge
         at paragraph 25 where the judge stated:

             "However, the reason why  the  further  submissions  contained
             within the reasons for refusal letter dated  21  October  2019
             gained traction is because of  the  considerable  difficulties
             some Iraqis are experiencing if returned to Iraq  without  the
             benefit of appropriate ID documentary evidence."

     28. At [15], the FtTJ also reminded herself that the focus of the
         appeal "rests upon the current circumstances which exist in Iraq at
         this present time and in particular the ability of the appellant to
         secure appropriate identity documentation to enable him to
         return....".

     29. Consequently, there is no error of law in the approach taken by the
         FtTJ to the previous credibility findings and I am satisfied that
         the judge was well aware of those previous adverse credibility
         findings when reaching an assessment on the present evidence that
         was before her.

     30. The grounds advanced on behalf of the respondent submit that the
         judge gave inadequate reasons for reaching the conclusion that the
         appellant had lost contact with his family members and that he had
         taken reasonable steps to trace his family and obtain necessary
         documentation.

     31. In this context the grounds assert that it is not clear why the
         FtTJ accepted the appellant's claim that relationships between
         himself and his family had deteriorated and that the judge was
         "lenient" in accepting his claim. Further on the grounds it is
         asserted that the judge had applied a "westernised analysis" as to
         the deterioration of the relationship at paragraph 27 (see
         paragraphs 3, 8 and 9 of the grounds).

     32. I have therefore considered the grounds in the light of the
         decision of the FtTJ and the evidence that was before her. Having
         done so, I am satisfied that the grounds amount no more than a
         disagreement with the decision of the FtTJ.

     33. The FtTJ set out her findings of fact at paragraphs 21 - 33, having
         set out the appellant's earlier claim, the adverse credibility
         findings made by Judge Balloch and the evidence given at the
         hearing before her as to his present circumstances and his ability
         to contact his family and obtain the requisite documentation.

     34. At paragraphs 27 - 30 the judge gave adequate and sustainable
         reasons as to why the she had found that the appellant was not in
         contact with his family members and why in her view, having applied
         the relevant country guidance decision, that he would not be able
         to secure the necessary documentation. The judge properly took into
         account the length of time that he had been in the UK, a total of
         12 years and went on to state " I am satisfied that the appellant
         has lost contact with family members in Erbil and the wider IKR for
         a number of reasons. Firstly having arrived in the UK in 2008
         having paid a large sum of money to be brought here by smuggler the
         appellant was then returned to Iraq with the benefit of yet more
         money from the sale of the family home he was able to re-enter the
         UK again in 2010. The appellant explained in cross-examination that
         his siblings had blamed him for the death of their mother because
         of the huge financial pressure she was placed under because of the
         need to fund not one but two trips by the appellant to the UK. The
         appellant's mother subsequently died and in such circumstances I
         consider it credible that the appellant's remaining family members
         in Iraq would not wish to sustain any contact with him. They blame
         him for their mother's death because of the financial pressure
         placed upon her to sell the family home to pay for the appellant
         second trip to the UK. Also, the considerable length of time the
         appellant has lived in the UK (10 years) means that if
         relationships were strained to some extent anyway the prospect of
         distancing oneself from immediate family members becomes easier
         given the logistics involved."

     35. It is plain from reading that paragraph that the judge gave a
         number of reasons as to why she had reached the conclusion from the
         evidence that he was not in contact with his family members. I do
         not accept that there was any "westernised analysis" undertaken nor
         did the FtTJ fail to take into account that the family had agreed
         to fund his entry to the UK on two occasions. The grounds fail to
         take into account the evidence given by the appellant, which the
         judge accepted, that he had been blamed for the death of his mother
         given the huge financial pressure she had been placed under having
         had to fund not one but two trips by the appellant to the UK.
         Those were findings that were reasonably open to the judge on the
         evidence that was before her.

     36. The grounds seek to challenge the factual findings at paragraph 28
         where the judge concluded that she was satisfied that the appellant
         had made reasonable efforts to trace his family to secure the
         necessary documentation to return to Iraq. At paragraphs 10 - 13 of
         the grounds it is argued that the judge failed to give adequate
         reasons for reaching that finding.

     37. I am satisfied that there is no merit in that submission either.

     38. At paragraph 28 the FtTJ stated as follows:

             "I am satisfied that the appellant  has  made  all  reasonable
             efforts to trace his family. Given that the  family  home  was
             sold the relatives are scattered. I consider that he has  made
             reasonable efforts to locate his family in order to secure the
             necessary documents which would enable him to embark upon  the
             onward journey from Baghdad to Erbil whether by land  or  air.
             He has approached the Red  Cross  and  registered  his  family
             details and desire to locate family members. He  was  informed
             that it is not their policy to issue letters.  They  preferred
             method of communication is via text to a mobile phone  in  the
             event that they have information which they wish to  pass  on.
             The Red Cross did however give the appellant a  business  card
             which is included in the appellant's bundle of documents which
             would indicate that he has been in contact with them and there
             is also a business card  from  the  Iraqi  consul  in  xx  and
             pictures of the appellant outside the Iraqi consul which would
             indicate that he has visited their offices."

     39. In my judgment, the above assessment should be read in the light of
         the factual findings made at paragraph 27.  The FtTJ gave specific
         reasons for reaching the conclusion that the appellant had lost
         contact with his family members and also took into account his
         length of absence from Iraq. I do not accept that the FtTJ failed
         to properly consider the evidence or that the FtTJ failed to give
         anxious scrutiny to the evidence as the grounds assert. The FtTJ
         was entitled to take into account his evidence concerning the
         contact made with the Red Cross. The judge accepted that the
         business card in the appellant's possession and in the bundle
         before her came from that contact. In the light of the evidence
         that the Red Cross do not give letters (see paragraph 28) and the
         appellant's evidence set out at paragraph 19 where he stated that
         he had approached the Red Cross in 2015 and given his family
         details and had updated them in 2019, it was reasonably open to the
         FtTJ to reach the conclusion that he had taken reasonable steps to
         trace his family via contact made to the Red Cross.

     40. In his oral submissions Mr Diwncyz referred to the appellant's
         visit to the embassy as set out at paragraph 28 of the FtTJ's
         decision. In this context he relied upon the decision  of MA
         (Ethiopia) v SSHD (2009) EWCA Civ 289 to support his general
         submission that the evidence given by the appellant as to his visit
         to the embassy was insufficient and could not support the finding
         made by the judge that the appellant had taken all reasonable
         steps.  In that case, the Court stated that where the essential
         issue before the Tribunal was whether someone would or would not be
         returned, the Tribunal should in the normal course require the
         claimant to act bona fides and take all reasonably practical steps
         to seek to obtain the requisite documents to enable her to return.
         The evidence indicated that the appellant, of dual
         Ethiopian/Eritrean nationality had gone to the Embassy and asked
         for a passport but told Ethiopian embassy staff that she was
         Eritrean. That could not constitute a bona fides attempt by the
         appellant to obtain an Ethiopian passport and her appeal was
         dismissed.

     41. Each case turns on its own facts, and as to this appellant's visit
         to the embassy the evidence before the FtTJ consisted of a business
         card from the Iraqi consulate and pictures of the appellant outside
         the embassy building. It is asserted on behalf of the respondent
         that the pictures outside the embassy were staged relying upon the
         presenting Officer's note which was attached to the grounds. I
         observe that the note does not state that the photos were staged
         nor does the note recite any of the evidence given during the
         hearing and thus it provides little or no evidential value when
         addressing this issue.

     42. At paragraph 20 the judge set out the appellant's evidence
         concerning the visit made to the embassy where he stated it was not
         possible to make an appointment in advance and therefore he was
         required to turn up and hope that someone spoke to him. This was
         consistent with his witness statement at paragraph 6 which made
         reference to the visit to the consulate in July 2019 and that the
         consulate said that they could not help him because he did not have
         any original documents and that they had given him a business card
         confirming his attendance but that they could not give him anything
         else.

     43. The grounds assert that the appellant did not request copies of his
         family ID cards. However, the appellant did not have any documents
         to take with him. In the earlier decision in 2009 the appellant
         provided documents to the respondent for his claim. They are
         referred to in the first decision at paragraph 38 and were said to
         be the ID cards of his father mother and sister. The judge found
         that there were no identity documents relevant to the appellant. At
         paragraph 37, the appellant confirmed that the original documents
         had been submitted to his solicitors who had given them to the
         respondent and at paragraph 25 confirmed that he had not received
         any documents from the Home Office. I accept the submission made by
         Ms Brakaj that there were no documents at the hearing, and it was
         not possible to know if any of the documents (whether copies or
         originals) had been retained nine years later.

     44. When looking at the grounds, I am satisfied that they amount to no
         more than a disagreement with the judge's decision. In light of the
         evidence that was before the judge it was open to her to find that
         the appellant had attended the embassy and had taken reasonable
         steps to obtain the documentation. In my judgement the grounds are
         selective in referring to the evidence that was before the judge
         and does not take into account the evidence given by the appellant
         and that in his witness statement (paragraph 6) which is capable of
         supporting his account of attending the embassy.

     45. Furthermore, the appellant's account was supported by the evidence
         of Dr Fatah (see AAH) that the embassy in London is "generally very
         unhelpful" and that the problems of an individual returnee are
         regarded as "trivial".

     46. Whilst the appellant did not take any documents with him that is
         not surprising in light of his evidence that they had been provided
         in 2009 had not been returned to him and that the current
         whereabouts of the documents are not known.

     47. Even if it could be said that the appellant had not taken
         sufficient documentary evidence of the embassy, in the light of the
         factual findings made by the FtTJ that he had no contact with his
         family and the specific circumstances in which the lack of contact
         had taken place, the overall assessment of the judge that he would
         not be able to obtain the necessary documents ( CSID and ID
         documents) was open to the judge. This is confirmed by the country
         guidance decisions before the FtTJ which refers to the requirements
         for family members to assist the appellant in any application made
         to the Iraqi consulate.

     48. Whilst the Tribunal in SMO appeared to conclude that it is still
         possible to get a CSID from the embassy in London (at paragraph
         383), the likelihood of an individual successfully doing so must be
         read in light of Dr Fatah's earlier evidence on the point, as set
         out in the earlier country guidance cases.

     49. The passages in AA to which the Tribunal in SMO refer are set out
         at paragraphs 173-177:

             "173.    As regards those who have an expired or current Iraqi
             passport but no CSID - Dr Fatah identifies in his first report
             that a CSID may be obtained through the "Consular  section  of
             the Iraqi Embassy in London", which will send a request for  a
             replacement or renewed CSID to  the  General  Directorate  for
             Travel and  Nationality  -  Directorate  of  Civil  Status.  A
             request for a replacement  CSID  must  be  accompanied,  inter
             alia, by "any form of official  document  in  support  of  the
             applicant's identity" and the application form must be  signed
             by  "the  head  of  the  family,  or  the  legal  guardian  or
             representative to verify the truth of its contents."  He  also
             added that an applicant must also authorise a person  in  Iraq
             to act as his representative  in  order  for  that  person  to
             "follow up on the progress of the application".

             174. However, Dr Fatah continued  by  explaining  that  if  an
             individual has lost his CSID and does not  know  the  relevant
             page and book number for it, then the Iraq Embassy  in  London
             will not be able to obtain one on his behalf. Instead,  he  or
             she will have to attend the appropriate local office of family
             registration in Iraq or give  a  relative,  friend  or  lawyer
             power of attorney to obtain his or her CSID. The process of  a
             giving power of attorney to a lawyer in  Iraq  to  act  "as  a
             proxy" is commonplace and Dr Fatah had done this  himself.  He
             also explained that the power of attorney  could  be  obtained
             through the Iraq Embassy.

             175. Dr Fatah gave further evidence to the effect that  having
             a marriage certificate may be useful as it would contain  data
             found in the family records. It is, however, not  possible  to
             use a "health card" in order to obtain a CSID because there is
             no primary health care or  GP  system  in  Iraq,  but  instead
             patients attended hospital when they needed to do  so  and  no
             central records are held.

             176. There is a consensus between Dr Fatah's evidence and  the
             following more general  evidence  provided  by  UNHCR-Iraq  in
             April 2015 on the issue of obtaining CSID's from  abroad.  "In
             principle, a failed asylum seeker, or indeed any Iraqi citizen
             abroad, can acquire Iraqi documents  through  Iraqi  embassies
             and consulates. There is a special  authorization  granted  to
             these bodies to provide documents  for  Iraqi  abroad  on  the
             condition that the beneficiaries  should  have  any  available
             documents in order to prove their nationality."

             177. In summary, we conclude that it is possible for an  Iraqi
             national living in  the  UK  to  obtain  a  CSID  through  the
             consular section of the Iraqi Embassy in  London,  if  such  a
             person is able to produce a current or expired passport and/or
             the  book  and  page  number  for  their  family  registration
             details. For persons without  such  a  passport,  or  who  are
             unable to produce the relevant family registration details,  a
             power of attorney can be provided to someone in Iraq  who  can
             thereafter undertake the process of  obtaining  the  CSID  for
             such person from the Civil Status Affairs Office in their home
             governorate.  For  reasons  identified  in  the  section  that
             follows below, at the present time the process of obtaining  a
             CSID from Iraq is likely to be severely hampered if the person
             wishing to obtain the CSID is from an area where Article 15(c)
             serious harm is occurring."

     50. In 2018 Dr Fatah gave further evidence in AAH:

             "26. If applying through a consulate abroad  the  requirements
             are different. Having contacted the consulate in  London,  and
             checked on the website of the  Iraqi  embassy  in  Sweden,  Dr
             Fatah states that the authorities will require  the  applicant
             to first make a statement explaining why he needs a  CSID  and
             attach this to his application form, which must  countersigned
             by the head of the  applicant's  family  and  stamped  by  the
             consulate or embassy; he must then produce his Iraqi  passport
             and proof of status in the country where he is  applying,  the
             name of a representative (proxy) in Iraq, an  additional  form
             completed by the head of the applicant's family verifying that
             the contents of his application form were  true,  four  colour
             copies of his INC, and 10 colour  photographs.  Crucially  the
             applicant  must  be  able  to  produce  something  which   can
             establish the location of his family's details  in  the  civil
             register. This should be a CSID, an INC or birth  certificate.
             If none of these are available to the applicant he must supply
             the identity documents of his  parents.  This  evidence  again
             accords with that of Landinfo  (December  2017)  who  conclude
             that it can be difficult to obtain  replacement  ID  documents
             from an embassy abroad for the individual  who  is  unable  to
             verify his or her identity.

             27.  If you  are  in  Iraq,  and  have  all  of  the  required
             documents,   in   normal   circumstances   the   process    is
             straightforward and quick and should take no more  than  three
             days. Dr Fatah's own daughter was born in the  United  Kingdom
             and he managed to obtain her a CSID in one day from the office
             in Sulaymaniyah, upon payment of a small  fee.  Dr  Fatah  was
             less optimistic about the efficiency of the process if in  the
             United Kingdom. He has regular dealings with the consulate  in
             London and he is not impressed. He said that staff  there  are
             generally very unhelpful."

     51. Thus as  confirmed by the country guidance decisions before the
         FtTJ and summarised above, which refer to the requirements for
         family members to assist the appellant in any application made to
         the Iraqi consulate, this assistance would not be forthcoming in
         the light of the findings of fact made by the judge as to his lack
         of contact with family members.

     52. Ground three is advanced on the basis that the appellant has
         contact with his family and has family members who could provide
         the relevant details to obtain documentation. However for the
         reasons that I have given above, I am not satisfied that the judge
         erred in law in the way that the respondent asserts and that the
         findings made by the judge that he has lost all contact with family
         relatives and that they are not likely to assist him in obtaining
         relevant documentation,  were reasonably open to him on the
         evidence. It follows that ground three cannot succeed on that
         alternative basis.

     53. I remind myself that the question whether the decision contains a
         material error of law is not whether another Judge could have
         reached the opposite conclusion but whether this Judge reached a
         conclusion by appropriately directing himself as to the relevant
         law and assessing the evidence on a rational and lawful basis.

     54. The judge had the advantage of considering all the evidence in the
         case.  As the Supreme Court stated in Henderson v Foxworth
         Investments Ltd [2014] UKSC 41; [2014] 1 WLR 2600 at [62]:

             "It does not matter, with whatever degree of  certainty,  that
             the appellate court considers that it  would  have  reached  a
             different conclusion. What matters  is  whether  the  decision
             under appeal is  one  that  no  reasonable  judge  could  have
             reached."

     55. Following Budhathoki (reasons for decisions) [2014] UKUT 341 (IAC)
         judges need to resolve the key conflicts in evidence and explain in
         clear and brief terms their reasons for preferring one case to the
         other so that parties can understand why they have lost. Reasons
         need not be extensive if the decision as a whole makes sense,
         having regard to the material accepted by a judge: Shizad
         (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 85 (IAC), at [10].

     56. For the reasons set out above, I am satisfied that the FtTJ gave
         adequate and sustainable reasons for reaching her findings of fact
         and her analysis. Thus, it has not been demonstrated that the
         decision of the FtTJ did involve the making of an error on a point
         of law. The decision of the FtTJ shall stand.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of an
error on a point of law and therefore the decision of the FtTJ shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the Appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the Appellant and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could lead to
contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds Dated 17 August 2020






                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such application must be
received by the Upper Tribunal within the appropriate period after this
decision was sent to the person making the application. The appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the individual and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration Acts, the appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the notice of decision is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the application is in detention under the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working days
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is outside
the United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days, if the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday, Christmas
Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the covering
letter or covering email




