
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/00546/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 1st June 2017                          | On 13th July 2017                |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                                     p a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Turner of Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Myanmar born on 1st  February  1988.   He
    first entered the UK illegally sometime in 2008 and applied for  asylum
    on 17th August 2015.  That application  was  refused  for  the  reasons
    given in the Respondent's letter of 11th January 2016.   The  Appellant
    appealed, and his appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    Ghani (the Judge) sitting  at  Birmingham  on  22nd  August  2016.   He
    decided to dismiss the appeal for the reasons  given  in  his  Decision
    dated 2nd November 2016.  The Appellant sought  leave  to  appeal  that
    decision, and on 14th March 2017 such permission was granted.

Error of law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained  a  material
    error on a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Judge dismissed the appeal on asylum  and  humanitarian  protection
    grounds because he was not satisfied that the  Appellant  was  credible
    and he did not believe that the Appellant was an ethnic  Rohingya  from
    Myanmar.  The  Judge  gave  various  reasons  for  his  finding  as  to
    credibility which included his conclusion that the  Appellant  did  not
    speak the Chittagong Bangla Dialect and therefore was unable  to  speak
    his native language.  Further,  the  Judge  did  not  accept  that  the
    Rohingya Refugee Book produced by the Appellant was genuine and  worthy
    of significant weight.

 4. At the hearing before me, Mr Turner argued that the Judge had erred  in
    this conclusion.  Despite a Direction to  do  so,  the  Respondent  had
    failed to produce the Refugee Book  given  to  the  Respondent  by  the
    Appellant, and the Judge had come to his conclusion about that Book  by
    reference to a copy of the same contained in the  Respondent's  Bundle.
    The Refugee Book was a vital piece of evidence and the Judge should not
    have come to any conclusions  in  respect  of  it  without  seeing  the
    original.  Further, the Judge had speculated as to  the  provenance  of
    the Book.  It had not been the fault of the Appellant that the Book was
    not  produced  and  forensically  examined.   The   Book   would   have
    established the credibility of the Appellant.

 5.  Mr Turner went on to submit that the Judge had speculated  as  to  the
    Appellant's inability to speak his native language.   He  had  attached
    insufficient weight to the explanation given by  the  Appellant  as  to
    that inability, and the Judge had not engaged with the  evidence  of  a
    linguistic expert contained in the Appellant's  Bundle  which  provided
    further explanations.

 6. In response, Mrs Aboni referred to the Rule 24 response and argued that
    there were no such errors of law.  The Judge had considered the absence
    of the original Refugee Book and as explained at  paragraph  4  of  the
    Decision had come to a conclusion open to him  that  he  could  proceed
    with a copy.  It was the contents of the Book which were important, not
    its appearance.  The Judge  had  analysed  the  contents  of  the  Book
    carefully and gave sufficient reasons for  deciding  to  attach  little
    weight to it.  Further, the Judge had made  a  finding  concerning  the
    Appellant's inability to speak his native language which  was  open  to
    him and which he fully explained.  That decision was  not  in  conflict
    with any of the objective evidence.

 7. At the hearing I reserved my decision which I now give.

 8. I find no material error of law in the decision of the  Judge  which  I
    therefore do not set aside.   It  is  deplorable  that  the  Respondent
    failed to comply with the Direction of  the  Tribunal  to  produce  the
    original Refugee Book.  However, there was a complete copy of it in the
    evidence before the Judge and the Judge explained at paragraph 4 of his
    Decision why he decided he could proceed on  the  basis  of  that  copy
    without seeing the original Book.   Such  a  decision  was  within  the
    discretion of the Judge and has not resulted in any  prejudice  to  the
    Appellant.  The decision of the Judge is therefore in  accordance  with
    the overriding objective given at Rule  2  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules  2014.
    This is particularly so because as  recorded  at  paragraph  4  of  the
    Decision, the Appellant's representative at the hearing indicated  that
    he was content  to  proceed  without  the  original  being  before  the
    Tribunal  and  did  not  make  any  application  in  respect   of   the
    Respondent's failure to produce the original.  He had left the decision
    whether to proceed or not to the Judge.  It is apparent from  what  the
    Judge wrote later in his Decision that he had been able to  come  to  a
    proper conclusion concerning the weight to  be  attached  to  the  Book
    without seeing the original.  It was  not  argued  that  the  copy  was
    defective in any way.  The Judge fully explained his finding in respect
    of the Book at paragraphs 29, 33 and 34 of the Decision.

 9. The Judge dealt with the issue of the Appellant's language at paragraph
    36 of the Decision.  He came to a conclusion open to him in respect  of
    the Appellant's inability to speak his native  language  and  which  he
    fully explained.  He did not find credible the  reasons  given  by  the
    Appellant for his inability to speak his native language.  In coming to
    this conclusion, the Judge relied upon the objective evidence  supplied
    by the Danish Immigration  Service  Report  of  2011.   The  Judge  was
    entitled to prefer this evidence  to  any  expert  linguistic  evidence
    produced by the Appellant.

10. In any event, the Judge gave a number of other reasons for his  adverse
    credibility finding.  The Judge identified a number of  inconsistencies
    and implausibilities in the evidence of the Appellant,  and  found  the
    Appellant's credibility damaged by operation of  Section  8(2)  of  the
    Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004.

11. For these reasons I find no material error of law in  the  decision  of
    the Judge which therefore I do not set aside.


Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error on a point of law.

I do not set aside that decision.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity  which  I  continue  for
the same reasons as those given by the First-tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 12th July 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton


