
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00524/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 November 2016                          |On 6 December 2016            |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum

                                   Between

                                     NW
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Head, Counsel, instructed by Lawrence Lupin
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. NW (Appellant) appeals against the decision of Judge of the  First-
        tier Tribunal Hanes, promulgated on 04 July  2016,  dismissing  her
        asylum and human rights appeal against the Respondent's decision of
        30 June 2015 refusing her protection and human  rights  claims  and
        making a deportation order against her.




   Background


     2. The Appellant is a national of the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo
        (DRC), date of birth 24 June 1978. She has 3 children  in  the  UK.
        She has a son, GY, born on 13 September 2002 who is also a national
        of the DRC. She has a further son, AK, date of birth 9 April  2012,
        who is a British citizen, and a daughter, ZK, born on 19 July 2015,
        who may be a British citizen (although there was no clear  evidence
        the First-tier Tribunal judge approached the appeal  on  the  basis
        that ZK was British and I do the same). The Appellant has a further
        son, JY, born on  10  August  1999,  who  resides  in  France.  The
        Appellant claimed to have left  the  DRC  in  2005  and  eventually
        arrived in the UK on 29 November 2008 using a French identity  card
        that was not her own.  She  made  an  asylum  claim  following  her
        arrival.


     3. On 16 December  2008  the  Appellant  was  convicted  of  knowingly
        possessing a false or improperly obtained ID card with  intent  and
        received a 12 month sentence of imprisonment. This related  to  her
        use of the French ID card. She  was  served  with  a  Liability  to
        Deportation Notice in January 2009 under the automatic  deportation
        provisions of the UK Borders Act 2007.  She  claims  to  have  been
        reunited with GY on 11 August 2009 and he was added as a  dependent
        on her  asylum  claim  the  following  day.  On  5  July  2013  the
        Respondent  made  a  decision  to  deport  the  Appellant  and  her
        dependent son and refused her asylum claim. Although this  decision
        was withdrawn on 13 January 2014 it was remade on 30 June 2015  and
        the Appellant's asylum and human rights claim was  refused  on  the
        same day.


     4. The Appellant's asylum claim was premised on  a  political  opinion
        she claimed would be imputed to her by  the  DRC  government  as  a
        result of her late husband's alleged  collaboration  with  a  rebel
        army from Rwanda, and as a result of GY's  perceived  ethnicity  as
        somebody whose father  (the  Appellant's  late  husband)  was  half
        Tutsi. She claimed she had been detained, tortured and raped by the
        authorities and had escaped with the help of  a  guard.  The  human
        rights claim under Article 3 relied on the same factual  matrix  as
        the Appellant's asylum claim but  was  additionally  based  on  the
        Appellant's mental health. The Article 8  human  rights  claim  was
        based on the private and family life established by her and  GY  in
        the UK (the Appellant maintained that she had a sister and a  half-
        sister in the UK and other relatives) and the  private  and  family
        life rights of her British national  children  and  the  impact  on
        their welfare if she had no access to appropriate medical treatment
        and support.


     5. As a result of a  significant  number  of  inconsistencies  in  her
        account the Respondent did not find the Appellant  to  be  credible
        and rejected her claim to have being targeted  and  seriously  ill-
        treated by the Congolese authorities. Because the Appellant herself
        did not have any Rwandan ancestors the Respondent was not satisfied
        that she would be  perceived  as  Tutsi.  The  Respondent  was  not
        satisfied that GY would be  perceived  as  Tutsi  purely  from  his
        appearance. Following BM and Others (returnees - criminal and  non-
        criminal) DRC CG [2015] UKUT 00293 (IAC) the  Respondent  concluded
        that the Appellant would not be at risk of persecution as a  result
        of her criminal conviction in the UK. The Respondent  considered  a
        medicolegal report from Dr Juliet Cohen,  dated  4  December  2013.
        Although some of the scarring on the Appellant's body was  said  to
        be "highly consistent" and "typical" of torture, it was noted  that
        there were other possible causes of the  injuries.  The  Respondent
        took into account a diagnosis  of  Post-Traumatic  Stress  Disorder
        (PTSD) and depression but considered there  were  adequate  medical
        and psychiatric facilities available in the DRC. The Respondent did
        not consider the Appellant's deportation would force AK, a  British
        citizen, to leave the EEA as he could reside with his  father,  who
        was a British citizen, although estranged from the  Appellant.  The
        Respondent did not consider it would be unduly harsh for AK to live
        in the DRC as the Appellant was his  primary  carer  and  he  would
        easily adapt to life outside the UK given his young  age  (3  years
        old). The Respondent noted that GY had not lived in the UK  for  at
        least 7 years, was a national of the DRC,  and  would  be  able  to
        return to the DRC with his mother. The Respondent noted that GY did
        not live with the Appellant (he lived with his uncle  in  order  to
        facilitate  his  education).  There  were  said  to  be  no   "very
        compelling circumstances" amounting to  a  very  strong  Article  8
        claim preventing the Appellant being deported.

The First-tier Tribunal hearing

     6. The judge did not hear any oral evidence from the Appellant but did
        hear oral evidence from CMW, who was said  to  be  the  Appellant's
        half-sister, and AMK, a person claiming to be the Appellant's  full
        sister. Having set out the Appellant's immigration history and  the
        sentencing remarks in a lengthy (34 pages) decision, and having set
        out  the  medical  and  social  worker  reports,  the  judge   made
        comprehensive adverse credibility findings  against  the  Appellant
        based on a number of significant inconsistencies  in  her  account.
        Those credibility findings have not been challenged.


     7. The judge completely rejected the Appellant's claim  to  have  been
        targeted by the DRC authorities  and  to  have  been  subjected  to
        serious ill-treatment. The judge was not satisfied the  Appellant's
        husband was half Rwandan or that her two  eldest  children  were  a
        quarter Rwandan. The judge considered the  medical  reports  before
        him including GP reports, two reports  from  Dr  Cohen,  and  three
        letters from a  perinatal  psychiatrist  Dr  Rawat,  who  had  been
        treating  the  Appellant.  The  judge  gave  detailed  reasons  for
        rejecting certain aspects of Dr Cohen's reports  in  preference  to
        the reports by Dr Rawat and for concluding that the  Appellant  did
        not suffer from PTSD. The judge did not accept that CMW or AMK were
        related to the Appellant as  claimed  and  gave  reasons  for  this
        decision. The judge did not accept the Appellant's claim to have no
        family members in the DRC. The judge considered  an  expert  report
        from Mr Seddon, who considered the ethnicity of the Appellant's two
        oldest children, but was not satisfied that the photograph  of  the
        person who it was claimed was her oldest child was in fact  related
        to her, and found that GY was  not  likely  to  be  regarded  as  a
        Rwandan/Tutsi.


     8. In relation to her assessment under Article 8 the  judge  concluded
        that it would not be unduly harsh for the Appellant's  children  to
        return with her to the DRC, nor  would  it  have  an  unduly  harsh
        effect on the two British citizen children if  they  remained  with
        other family members in the UK. The  judge  took  into  account  in
        reaching this decision the  Appellant's  immigration  history,  her
        criminality,  and  the  impact  on  the   children,   applied   the
        considerations in s.117B and s.117C of the Nationality, Immigration
        and Asylum Act 2002, and acknowledged her duty under  s.55  of  the
        Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

The grounds of appeal and the grant of permission

     9. The Appellant sought permission on two grounds. Firstly, the  judge
        was not entitled to conclude that GY would face  no  real  risk  of
        being perceived as a Rwandan/Tutsi in light  of  an  expert  report
        from Dr Seddon and that the  judge's  conclusion  was  consequently
        unsustainable. If GY's appearance suggested  he  was  Rwandan/Tutsi
        then, following AB and DM (Risk categories reviewed - Tutsis added)
        DRC CG [2005] UKIAT 00118, there  was  a  real  risk  he  would  be
        subjected  to  persecution   based   on   his   distinct   physical
        characteristics.

    10. Secondly, the judge failed to take account of a letter  written  by
        Laura Ukegheson of the Waltham  Forest  Children's  Services  which
        stated, "the Department would be concerned if at this stage [NW] is
        required to return to the  Congo...  The  impact  of  this  on  her
        children is extremely concerning and it would be safe to  say  that
        if her mental health deteriorates and is not monitored the children
        will be at real risk of significant harm". It was  said  that  this
        evidence went to the heart  of  the  issues  before  the  judge  in
        relation to s.55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act
        2009 and whether or not it would be  unduly  harsh  to  return  the
        children to the DRC. The failure by  the  judge  to  consider  this
        evidence rendered her decision flawed and unsustainable.


    11. In granting permission Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer stated,


          The First-tier Tribunal has arguably erred in law  by  failing  to
          give adequate reasons for rejecting the expert evidence  that  the
          Appellant's son [GY] may be at risk of being identified  as  Tutsi
          upon return to the DRC given the likely scrutiny he will face upon
          his return together with his tall and slender frame and  the  fact
          that he has a brother clearly  identifiable  as  Tutsi  (paragraph
          27). Although the  brother  is  not  returning  to  the  DRC,  his
          appearance is relevant  in  assisting  the  difficult  process  of
          assessing  how  [GY's]  appearance  is  reasonably  likely  to  be
          perceived in the DRC.


          It is arguable  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has  irrationally
          concluded that it was "not satisfied that the children  would  not
          have a close relative... To care for them in the UK and would have
          to leave the EAA" given the other findings in para 47.  Given  the
          uncertainty surrounding the  evidence  of  other  carers  for  the
          children, the findings at para 53 were arguably not  open  to  the
          First-tier Tribunal.


          All grounds are arguable.

Discussion

    12. In her oral submissions Ms  Head  adopted  and  expanded  upon  the
        Grounds of Appeal and submitted that the judge failed  to  properly
        apply the relevant CG case-law. It was  submitted  that  the  judge
        should have asked herself whether the identified characteristics in
        the report by Dr Seddon would cause the DRC  authorities  to  think
        that GY was  Tutsi.  The  judge's  conclusion  that  GY's  physical
        traits, without more, would not distinguish  him  from  many  other
        African men was said to be the wrong test.


    13. In AB and DM (Risk categories  reviewed  -  Tutsis  added)  DRC  CG
        [2005] UKIAT 00118 the Tribunal found (at [39]), that returnees  of
        Tutsi ethnicity or those believed to be of this ethnicity could  be
        at real risk of persecution. The headnote states that an assessment
        of risk in an individual case will depend upon a  careful  analysis
        of that individual's origins, background and profile. At  [40]  the
        Tribunal stated,


         However, we would emphasize that a person cannot expect to succeed
         in a refugee or Art 3 claim merely by asserting that he or she  is
         a Tutsi or would  be  perceived  as  one.  Given  that  there  are
         distinct physical characteristics typical of a Tutsi  -  see  CIPU
         report October 2004 para 6.71 - a highly significant consideration
         will  be  the  extent  to   which   a   person   possesses   those
         characteristics. If a person claims to be of mixed Tutsi ethnicity
         it will be relevant to examine to what extent he or  she  will  be
         seen to have taken the ethnic identity of their father or  mother.
         Furthermore, given the importance in the  DRC  context  of  tribal
         links,  geographical  location,  linguistic   identity,   customs,
         traditions and other factors,  there  may  be  valid  reasons  for
         finding that  a  person,  albeit  lacking  entirely  the  physical
         characteristics of a Tutsi, will be perceived as one.


    14. GY has no political background given his young age and, in light of
        the judge's comprehensive rejection of the Appellant's credibility,
        it was not suggested that he had taken the ethnic identity  of  his
        father (whose alleged half  Tutsi  ethnicity  was,  in  any  event,
        rejected by the judge (see [38]).


    15. The judge referred to AB and DM at  [26]  and  considered  the  two
        expert reports from Mr Seddon at [26] and [27]. In his 2013  report
        Mr  Seddon  indicated  that  the  photograph  said  to  be  of  the
        Appellant's husband (GY's father) suggested he  was  not  typically
        'Tutsi' in appearance. The photograph of the child said to  be  the
        Appellant's oldest son living in France did seem to  have  some  of
        the supposedly typical Tutsi characteristics  i.e.  tall,  slender,
        long face, long nose and light colouring.


    16. In his 2016 report at 6.3  Mr  Seddon  described  how  he  examined
        photocopies of a  set  of  photographs  sent  to  him  showing  the
        Appellant and GY,  four  photographic  head  shots  of  GY,  and  a
        photograph of someone said to be  the  Appellant's  oldest  son  in
        France. At 6.4 Mr Seddon stated that the photographs of  the  child
        in  France  "would  certainly  appear  to   have   the   supposedly
        characteristic  features  of  the  Tutsis  -  long  overall  facial
        features with a long relatively thin nose, and slender build."


    17. At 6.5 the expert stated, "[GY] has less evidently  'Tutsi'  facial
        features but he appears from the photograph in which he is standing
        to be relatively tall for his age and quite slender. In my opinion,
        given that both would, as returnees,  be  subject  to  scrutiny  on
        return to the DRC, [the child in France] would certainly be at risk
        of being identified on the streets as 'Tutsi' or  'Rwandan',  while
        [GY] might well also be at risk of being so identified." At 7.13 Mr
        Seddon  indicated,  in  his  opinion,  that  GY  'might  well'   be
        identified as a Rwandan, if not only  by  virtue  of  his  physical
        features and characteristics  but  because  he  will  be  returning
        together with his  mother  who,  according  to  her  evidence,  has
        already been arrested and detained by the DRC authorities  and  she
        was very likely, as a result, to be on record as a former detainee,
        in which case the association  with  her  former  husband  and  his
        father will be made clear. The judge of course completely  rejected
        the Appellant's claim to have been arrested and detained by the DRC
        authorities.


    18. The expert therefore identified GY's relative height and  the  fact
        that he was 'quite slender' as the characteristics that may lead to
        him being perceived as Tutsi. At [27] the  judge  considered  these
        characteristics and noted that the risk as described by  Mr  Seddon
        was in lower terms in comparison to that facing the person  claimed
        to be GY's older brother. In AB and DM the Tribunal noted (at [40])
        that a highly significant consideration was "the extent" to which a
        person possessed physical Tutsi characteristics. The judge properly
        considered that GY only exhibited  two  such  characteristics.  The
        question of a likelihood of risk is ultimately one for the Tribunal
        taking into  account  all  relevant  factors  and  having  attached
        appropriate weight to any expert report. The  judge  did  not  find
        there was sufficient evidence that the person claimed  to  be  GY's
        brother was in fact his brother. No issue has been taken with  this
        finding or the reasons supporting this finding. The person  it  was
        claimed was GY's  brother  had  a  number  of  additional  physical
        characteristics (longer oval facial features, light colouring) that
        were not identified as being present in GY. Mr Seddon's  conclusion
        at 6.5 was based on GY  being  returned  together  with  his  older
        brother but, as accepted by Ms Head, this would  not  occur.  Given
        the more qualified nature of  the  expert's  conclusions,  and  the
        comprehensive adverse  credibility  findings  made  by  the  judge,
        including her finding that GY's father was not half Rwandan,  I  am
        not satisfied that the judge applied the wrong test in reaching her
        conclusion or that the judge failed to accord proper and sufficient
        weight to the conclusions of the expert. As  she  was  entitled  to
        conclude that GY was not at risk, as a 14  year  old  returnee,  of
        being perceived to be Tutsi, the judge's conclusion that  he  would
        not face a real risk of persecution on  account  of  any  perceived
        ethnicity was one rationally open to her.


    19. Ms Head next submitted that the judge failed to take  into  account
        of the Waltham Forest letter of  support,  dated  6  January  2014,
        written by Lara Ukegheson of the Safeguarding  and  Family  Support
        Team. It was submitted that  the  Appellant  continued  to  receive
        mental health treatment and that the  concerns  identified  in  the
        January 2014 letter had not dissipated or been  superseded  by  any
        subsequent report.


    20. The letter from Laura Ukegheson of the  Waltham  Forest  Children's
        Services was based on  an  assessment  of  the  Appellant's  mental
        health and the consequences on the children if  her  mental  health
        deteriorated. Although referring to  the  January  2014  letter  of
        support (at [23(f)]) I accept that the judge did not make reference
        to the concerns identified in the letter in respect of  the  impact
        on the Appellant's children if she were deported. The judge did not
        however find that the Appellant had been subjected  to  torture  in
        the DRC and found that the Appellant had not been truthful with  Dr
        Cohen. The judge found that the Appellant was  not  suffering  from
        PTSD, an unchallenged finding of fact. The judge noted  Dr  Rawat's
        opinion that the Appellant's description of the  voices  she  heard
        were not consistent with psychotic symptoms and had  a  flavour  of
        pseudo-hallucinations. The judge noted that  the  Appellant's  most
        current  mental  state   examination   indicated   that   cognitive
        assessment was grossly intact, that although tearful at  times  she
        had  an  easy  rapport,  good  eye  contact  and  no  evidence   of
        perplexity, her speech was low in volume but  normal  in  rate  and
        tone and her insight was good. Dr Rawat found the Appellant was  at
        low risk of harm to herself and to others, including her  children.
        The judge accepted that the Appellant had had recurring episodes of
        depression since July 2013 but not of the severity  or  nature  and
        extent that she claimed.  The  judge  found  that  the  Appellant's
        depression was attributable  to  her  immigration  status  and  the
        birth/raising of the children in difficult circumstances. The judge
        considered the September 2014 letter from Newham Intervention  Team
        which  voiced  no  concerns  regarding  the  Appellant's  parenting
        capacity. The judge noted the  independent  social  workers  report
        from 2016 indicated that the Appellant was  managing  the  children
        well in difficult circumstances.


    21. The Waltham Forest letter was written approximately 1� years  prior
        to the judge's decision  and  related  to  the  Appellant's  mental
        health as it was then understood. The  concerns  expressed  in  the
        letter were premised on the absence of any "assurance"  as  to  the
        Appellant's safety, and the absence of any assurance that she would
        receive the care she required for her mental health needs.  To  the
        extent that the concerns related to  the  Appellant's  safety,  the
        judge found that the Appellant fabricated her claim and was not  at
        risk of ill-treatment in the DRC.  Nor  was  there  any  reason  to
        believe that the Appellant's health could not  be  monitored  given
        that medical facilities and treatment were available in the DRC and
        in light of the judge's rejection of the Appellant's claim to  have
        no family support in the DRC. In these circumstances  I  find  that
        the  concerns  expressed  in   the   January   2014   letter   were
        substantially based on  a  set  of  circumstances  that  have  been
        subsequently undermined and  any  failure  by  the  judge  to  have
        considered  those  concerns  could  not  have  made  any   material
        difference to her conclusion.


    22. Ms Head  submitted  that  the  judge  failed  to  assess  the  best
        interests of the  children  and  ignored  the  conclusions  of  the
        independent social worker who found it was in the  children's  best
        interests to remain in the UK. The judge did however  consider  the
        best interests of the two British children at [52] and  found  that
        it was in their best interests to continue living with their mother
        who was their primary carer. In light of case law  referred  to  by
        the judge at [45] and [46] this was a conclusion rationally open to
        her. The judge was entitled to  form  her  own  view  of  the  best
        interests of the children  and  the  decision,  read  as  a  whole,
        indicates that proper consideration was given  to  the  independent
        social worker's report. The two youngest children were aged 4 years
        old and 1 year old at the date of  the  decision,  their  primarily
        care was provided by the Appellant, and the September  2014  letter
        from the Newham Intervention Team indicated there were no  concerns
        regarding   the   Appellant's   parenting   capacity.   The   judge
        additionally considered the best interests of GY at [54]  and  took
        account of his circumstances including his age, the length of  time
        he resided in the UK, the absence of specific information  relating
        to his academic progression other than  various  certificates,  and
        the fact that he was in good health and appeared to have no special
        needs. The judge was not satisfied that he could not  speak  French
        and/or Lingala and this finding has not been challenged. The  judge
        found that GY  would  have  significant  cultural  links  with  his
        Congolese heritage and that the Appellant was his primary carer. In
        light of this assessment I see no merit  in  Ms  Head's  submission
        that  the  judge  failed  to  assess  the  best  interests  of  the
        Appellant's three UK based children or that her conclusions  as  to
        their best interests were not rationally open to her.


    23. Based on the grant of leave to appeal to the Upper Tribunal Ms Head
        finally submitted that the judge's conclusions at paragraph 47 were
        inconsistent and irrational when considered against her conclusions
        at paragraph 53.


    24. I am not satisfied  there  is  any  inconsistency  in  the  judge's
        conclusions at [47]. On the basis of the evidence  before  her  the
        judge was entitled to find that  there  was  insufficient  evidence
        enabling her to make a positive finding that  the  British  citizen
        children would be able to live with and  be  cared  for  by  either
        their father or aunt(s). It is for the Appellant to prove that  she
        has established a derivative right of  residence  under  regulation
        15A of the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006
        and, in light of the  fact  that  the  children's  father  and  the
        persons described as their aunts resided in the UK, the  judge  was
        entitled to conclude that this burden was not discharged.  Even  if
        there was a contradiction in the judge's findings this  could  have
        no material bearing on her conclusion that it  would  not  have  an
        unduly harsh effect on the British citizen children if they were to
        go to the DRC with their mother. At [52] the judge gave a number of
        reasons in support of this conclusion including the very young ages
        of the children and their  adaptability,  and  at  [53]  the  judge
        reiterated her rejection of the Appellant's claim to have no  close
        relatives in the DRC to whom she could turn for additional support.
        The judge was entitled to find that the UK family would be able  to
        assist the Appellant and her children both emotionally  (by  modern
        methods of  communication  and  visits)  and  financially.  It  was
        rationally open to the judge to conclude,  based  on  her  holistic
        assessment of the evidence, that it would not have an unduly  harsh
        effect on the Appellant's children were they to  accompany  her  to
        the DRC, and that this would not be disproportionate under  Article
        8.


    25. For the reasons given above I am satisfied that the  decision  does
        not disclose any material error of law. The decision of the  First-
        tier Tribunal stands and the Appellant's asylum  and  human  rights
        appeals are dismissed.



Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal decision is not vitiated by any  material  error  of
law. The Appellant's asylum and human rights appeals are dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

[pic]

Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum               06 December 2016


