
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00776/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|on 26th July 2019                  |On 21st August 2019                |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                           MR MOHAMMED BAQY RASHID
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Caskie, Advocate, instructed by Latta & Co,
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This appeal is brought by the Secretary of State against a decision
       by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal McGrade allowing an appeal by Mr
       Mohammed Baqy Rashid (hereinafter referred to as "the Claimant") on
       the grounds of humanitarian protection.

    2. The claimant is a national of Iraq of Kurdish ethnicity.  He claimed
       asylum on the day of his arrival in the UK in July 2015 but his claim
       was refused and an appeal against the refusal was dismissed in 2017.
       The claimant made further submissions to the Secretary of State in
       October 2017.  These were refused in January 2019.  This appeal was
       made to the First-tier Tribunal against the refusal.

    3. It does not appear to have been disputed that the claimant originates
       from a village known as Dara Bag in the district of Daquq in the
       Kirkuk Governorate.  According to the claimant he could not return
       there because of difficulties he had experienced with ISIS, the
       Peshmerga and the Iraqi security forces.  In his 2017 appeal to the
       First-tier Tribunal the claimant's evidence about his alleged
       difficulties in Iraq was not believed.

    4. In the current appeal the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal observed
       that ISIS now controlled almost no territory in Iraq but violence was
       still a regular feature of life in Kirkuk, where ISIS targeted
       civilian as well as military targets.  The judge considered the
       possibility of relocation to the KRG, or IKR.  At paragraph 21 the
       judge recorded two concessions by the claimant's counsel.  The first
       of these was that it would be open to the claimant to obtain a CSID.
       The second was that there were direct flights from the UK to IKR.
       Accordingly the judge noted that there was no suggestion of the
       claimant returning via Baghdad.

    5. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal had regard to the decision in
       AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) [2018] UKUT 00212 on the
       viability of relocation to IKR.  The judge found, at paragraph 23,
       that the claimant has no family or other contacts in IKR.  He was a
       farmworker with few specialist skills.  While he was capable of
       working, unemployment in IKR was very high, particularly among IDPs.
       There was also considerable pressure on accommodation, and rent was
       very high.  Any funds the claimant received to assist him on his
       return would be quickly exhausted.  In accordance with AAH, without
       family support the claimant would have limited options for
       accommodation.  Without family support or employment there was a
       substantial likelihood that the claimant would find himself in a
       critical housing shelter, without access to basic necessities such as
       food, clean water and clothing.  The judge concluded that it would be
       unduly harsh to expect the claimant to relocate to IKR.

    6. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on four grounds.
       The first of these was that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal had
       not taken as his starting point the findings in the previous appeal,
       in accordance with Devaseelan [2001] UKIAT 00702.  The finding that
       the claimant would be destitute ran contrary to the findings in the
       previous appeal and was neither properly substantiated nor properly
       reasoned.  Secondly, the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made
       contradictory findings on the existence of the claimant's family and
       on whether the claimant would be able to avoid destitution by
       working.  Thirdly, the judge failed to take into account that Kirkuk
       is no longer a contested area.  The judge should have departed from
       the relevant country guidance and did not give adequate reasons for
       not accepting the Secretary of State's evidence in relation to this.
       Fourthly, in summary, the judge was wrong not to admit a Home Office
       Country Information and Policy Note (CPIN) of 2108 because it was not
       lodged before the Tribunal.  Permission to appeal was granted on all
       these grounds.

Submissions

    7. Before me Mr Govan state that he would not be relying on the last
       ground, which he described as being based upon procedural
       irregularity.  I observed that although in theory as all CPINs were
       available online it was not necessary for them to be produced on
       paper, the fourth ground as drafted would not succeed.  Mr Caskie
       objected that in the fourth ground he was said to have described the
       CPIN as "spin".  Mr Caskie explained that each CPIN was composed of
       several sections.  The second section, which contained policy of the
       Secretary of State, was what he had described as "spin".  The third
       section, which contained country information, he would not at any
       time have described as "spin".  I accept Mr Caskie's clarification of
       this point.

    8. Mr Govan addressed me on the remaining three grounds.  In response Mr
       Caskie submitted that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal had
       referred to the Devaseelan principle and had had regard to it.  The
       judge accepted the claimant's evidence that he was from Kirkuk, which
       was a matter which was not addressed in the previous appeal decision.
        Mr Caskie observed that at paragraph 23 of his decision the judge
       drew a negative inference from an attempt by the claimant to trace
       his family.  Nevertheless there was no submission from the Secretary
       of State that the claimant had family in IKR and there was no finding
       by the judge that he had.  The judge did not accept, however, that
       the claimant had done everything possible to trace his family.  Mr
       Caskie acknowledged that the burden of proof was on the claimant to
       show what his family circumstances were.  Nevertheless the Judge of
       the First-tier Tribunal had taken into account all the relevant
       evidence and given adequate reasons for his decision. It was the lack
       of adequate accommodation, even if the claimant found employment,
       which led the judge to find relocation would be unduly harsh.  Mr
       Caskie further submitted that the judge was entitled to find that
       Kirkuk was not a safe area.

Discussion

    9. As the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal recorded at paragraph 26, in
       order to find that the claimant would not have adequate accommodation
       in Iraq, in accordance with AAH, it had to be established that the
       claimant would be without the assistance of family there.  In this
       regard the findings made by the judge at paragraph 23 are crucial.
       The judge noted that in a statement of 27th February 2019 the
       claimant stated that he had not been in touch with his family but the
       last he knew they were living in Kirkuk.  Then in a statement of 4th
       March 2019 the claimant wrote that a few months previously he had
       contacted the Red Cross with a view to making contact with his
       family.  He had no documents to support this and he had not told his
       solicitor about it until that day.

   10. The judge observed that the claimant had been in the UK for more than
       three years but had not taken any steps to trace his family until a
       few months ago.  The claimant had given no explanation for his delay
       in attempting to trace his family.  The judge did not accept that if
       the claimant genuinely did not know the whereabouts of his family he
       would have delayed taking steps to trace them for three years.  The
       judge concluded that the claimant knows where his family is.

   11. The judge then recorded the following, in the remainder of paragraph
       23: "However, it is not possible for me to reach any conclusion as to
       where his family is, nor is it possible for me to make any assessment
       as to the level of financial support he might receive from them.  It
       is possible the Appellant's family may be in the KRG.  However, I
       have no evidence before me to indicate that this is the case.  There
       was no submission by the Respondent that he has family there.  Given
       the low standard of proof that applies in these appeals, I am
       prepared to accept that the Appellant has no family or other contacts
       in the KRG."

   12. In writing this the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal reversed the
       burden of proof.  It was for the claimant to show that it would be
       unduly harsh to expect him to relocate to IKR.  It was for the
       claimant to show, in particular, that he has no family there to
       assist him.  The judge's finding in the first part of paragraph 23
       was that the claimant knows where his family are.  Once this finding
       was made, it was not then for the Secretary of State to show the
       claimant has family in IKR, or for the judge to ponder about whether
       or not the claimant might have family there.  Once the judge found
       that the claimant knew where his family were, the burden was on the
       claimant to show that his family were not in IKR and would not be
       able to provide him with assistance there.

   13. The judge erred in law when he stated that he could not make a
       finding on the possibility of family support because there was no
       evidence before him to indicate where the claimant's family were or
       whether they could assist him.  Upon the judge finding that the
       claimant knew the whereabouts of his family, it was for the claimant
       to show where they were and whether they could assist him.  By not
       adducing any evidence upon these matters the claimant failed to
       discharge the evidential burden upon him.  By not recognising that
       the burden of proof on this issue fell upon the claimant, the judge
       erred in law.

   14. There was a discussion at the hearing about how to respond to the
       error by the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal.  It was suggested that
       there might be a further hearing before the Upper Tribunal to allow
       the claimant to give evidence about the whereabouts of his family.
       In response to this suggestion Mr Govan pointed out that the First-
       tier Tribunal did not hear any oral evidence at the hearing on 4th
       March 2019 which gave rise to the decision under appeal.  The hearing
       proceeded on the basis of submissions upon written evidence.

   15. It seems inappropriate that where the First-tier Tribunal made a
       conclusive finding based upon written evidence the Upper Tribunal
       should then seek to go behind this finding by inviting the claimant
       to give oral evidence in an attempt to explain it or diminish its
       importance.  The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made a finding he
       was entitled to make upon the evidence to the effect that the
       claimant knows the whereabouts of his family.  The judge then erred
       by not applying the correct reasoning following from this finding,
       but this was a deficiency in the judge's reasoning, not in the
       evidence.  Even supposing there is evidence on this issue which was
       not adduced before the First-tier Tribunal when there was an
       opportunity to do so, why should another opportunity be given to
       adduce such evidence?  An adequate justification for holding a
       further hearing has not been established.  This is not a case in
       which there is readily available new and apparently credible evidence
       of the type discussed in Ladd v Marshall [1954] 1 WLR 1489.

   16. What of the other alleged errors in the judge's decision?  In
       relation to the first ground of the application for permission to
       appeal I accept a submission by Mr Caskie that the judge recognised
       and applied the Devaseelan principle so far as it was necessary for
       him to do so.  The judge was seeking to apply country guidance in AAH
       which was not available at the time of the previous appeal and
       therefore had to some extent different issues to consider.  I also
       accept, as Mr Caskie submitted, that the judge was entitled to follow
       the still current country guidance in finding that Kirkuk would not
       be a safe area.

   17. I have, however, found that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       erred in law in relation to the finding that the claimant would not
       have family support in IKR.  This issue arises from the second ground
       of the application, although I have characterised it as the judge
       reversing the burden of proof rather than making contradictory
       findings.  Had he not made this error the judge could not have found
       upon the available evidence that it would be unduly harsh to expect
       the claimant to relocate to IKR to avoid a risk of serious harm in
       Kirkuk.  Once this finding is set aside, it is clear that the
       claimant has not shown it would be unduly harsh to expect him to
       relocate to IKR.  Because the claimant has a viable alternative of
       internal relocation, his claim for protection will not succeed and
       the appeal falls to be dismissed.

Conclusions

   18. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the
       making of an error of law.

   19. The decision is set aside.

   20. The decision is re-made by dismissing the appeal.



Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make a direction for anonymity.  I have not
been asked to make such a direction and I see no reason of substance for
doing so.


M E Deans   14th August 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

