
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00351/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 29th September 2017                     |On 23rd October 2017             |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                    [b s]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J. L. Blair (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Staunton (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Colvin, promulgated on 3rd March 2017, following a  hearing  at  Taylor
    House on 10th February 2017.  In the determination, the judge dismissed
    the appeal of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the  Appellant  subsequently
    applied for, and  was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female, a citizen of Afghanistan, and was born on  [
    ] 1981.  She appealed, with her  four  dependent  children,  against  a
    decision of the Respondent made on  19th  December  2016,  refusing  to
    grant her asylum or humanitarian protection.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that her husband  was  arrested
    after the seizure of her father-in-law's land.

The Judge's Findings

 4. This was a case where there had been a previous determination by  Judge
    McDade, so that the principles in  Devaseelan  applied  in  this  case.
    However, the previous decision with respect to the  Appellant  did  not
    take into account the latest country guidance case  of  TG  and  Others
    [2015] UKUT 00595, to which the judge now made reference (at  paragraph
    31).  The judge held, however, that no new matters were raised  in  the
    appeal now, which  suggested,  on  the  basis  of  the  fact  sensitive
    findings made in the  previous  decision  by  Judge  McDade,  that  the
    appellant would be persecuted upon return to Afghanistan for ethnic  or
    religious grounds.  Judge McDade was not satisfied that  the  Appellant
    was a reliable witness and that she would not have  access  to  a  male
    supporter upon return in the form of either her husband or her  father-
    in-law (see paragraph  34).   The  appeal  of  the  Appellant  and  her
    children was refused, with the exception of  her  eldest  child,  [DS],
    whose appeal was allowed on the  basis  of  human  rights  (Article  8)
    because the judge found that there was harassment and ill-treatment  in
    the school system, where the Appellant, now  aged  14,  would  have  to
    return to, and this would involve the risk of abduction as  well  as  a
    female sick child, who had different cultural attitudes and  behaviour.
    (Paragraph 52).

Grounds of Application

 5. The Grounds of Appeal state that the judge had erred  in  allowing  the
    appeal of the eldest female child, [DS], but not that of the  Appellant
    and her other children.   Most  importantly,  however,  the  judge  had
    evidence from the Appellant and her oldest child, in the form of  their
    witness statements, which was referred to by the judge at paragraphs 36
    to 41 of the determination, and this had  led  the  judge  to  conclude
    that, "I am satisfied that, in principle, these matters may  give  rise
    to a serious breach of human rights so as to  cross  the  threshold  of
    persecution ... I nevertheless do not find that there has been adequate
    expert evidence ..." (paragraph 42).  It was submitted in  the  Grounds
    of Appeal that the requirement by the judge of  expert  evidence  being
    produced considerably elevated the threshold that the appellant had  to
    satisfy.  This was exacerbated by his further statement that,

         "In my opinion these are serious  and  important  issues  based  on
         gender  that  require  more   extensive   background   and   expert
         information in order to support a more developed argument than that
         which was presented before me.  I am therefore  satisfied  even  to
         the lower standard of proof that the Appellant has not  shown  that
         she is at real risk  of  persecution  or  treatment  in  breach  of
         Article 3 on this new ground" (paragraph 43).

 6. On 24th July 2017, permission to appeal was granted on the  basis  that
    if the judge considered there was insufficient evidence then the  judge
    could have adjourned the hearing for additional expert evidence  to  be
    obtained but that it was incumbent upon the judge to make a finding  in
    relation to the appeals of the Appellant and the other three  children,
    just as the judge had made a finding in relation to the  eldest  child,
    [DS], but the judge could not reject the  appeals  on  the  basis  that
    there was a requirement that there should be a production of an  expert
    report.

The Hearing

 7. At the hearing before me on 29th September 2017, Ms Blair, appearing on
    behalf of the Appellant, submitted that there were two essential points
    here.  First, that on the facts as accepted by  the  judge  the  appeal
    should have been allowed.  Secondly, that on the basis of  the  country
    guidance case of TG and Others [2015] UKUT  00595,  the  appeal  should
    have been allowed on  the  basis  that  the  Appellant  and  her  other
    children were refugees.  She proceeded to develop both points.

 8. First, she stated that it was clear that the Appellant, as a Sikh woman
    could not access her cultural, religious, and  sociological  rights  in
    Afghanistan, and  the  determination  of  the  judge  did  not  suggest
    otherwise.

 9. Secondly, the case of TG and Others makes it clear that  the  Appellant
    cannot openly live as a Sikh woman in Afghanistan.  Ms Blair went on to
    state that the facts of TG and Others were similar to this case in that
    the Tribunal there accepted that where, a girl with similar aspirations
    as [DS], stood to face discrimination outside the family home, then her
    mother would also similarly face the  same  discrimination,  such  that
    both qualified for asylum refugee status.  The judge had  ignored  this
    aspect of TG and Others.  Instead the judge had gone on to say that, "I
    nevertheless do not find that there has been adequate  expert  evidence
    before me  on  other  aspects,  such  as  restrictions  of  Sikh  women
    practising their religion and being fully housebound"  (paragraph  42),
    when TG and Others had addressed precisely this same issue.

10. For his part, Mr Staunton submitted that he was in difficulty in  being
    able to side step what was stated in the country guidance  case  of  TG
    and Others because this case clearly  indicated  that  the  facts  here
    stood to fall in favour of the Appellant's application for  asylum  and
    refugee status.

11. Second, he submitted that it  was  unclear  what  the  judge  meant  at
    paragraph 43 in stating that "These are serious  and  important  issues
    based on gender that  require  more  extensive  background  and  expert
    information ...".

12. To require anything further, submitted Mr Staunton  was  to  raise  the
    threshold that the Appellant had to satisfy, given that TG  and  Others
    addressed these very issues in its decision.

Error of Law

13. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.  This is a  case  where,  on  the
    facts before the judge, if  the  claim  of  the  eldest  child  of  the
    Appellant, [DS], was to succeed, then the claim of  the  Appellant  and
    her other children would also fall to succeed, and it was irrational to
    conclude otherwise.

14. First, the judge required there to be  "adequate  expert  evidence"  on
    matters "such as restrictions on Sikh women practising  their  religion
    and being fully housebound" (paragraph 42), whereas in TG and Others it
    had  already  been  established  that  Afghan  Sikh  women  face  being
    housebound (see paragraph 91 and paragraph 135).

15. Second, the judge's findings in any  event  appeared  to  suggest  that
    there existed here a well-founded  fear  of  persecution  attracting  a
    viable protection claim.  This is  clear  in  relation  to  the  eldest
    child, [DS], where the judge refers to her  "returning  with  different
    cultural attitudes and behaviour" and with a strongly held wish "not to
    be returned to being a prisoner in her own home and being  required  to
    wear a burka when she does go out in public" (paragraph 52).

16. In TG and Others it was accepted by the Tribunal that  the  deprivation
    of education or employment opportunities for both boys  and  girls  can
    itself give rise to a viable refugee protection  claim  in  Afghanistan
    (see paragraph 94).

17. Third, it was irrational for the judge to require  that  the  Appellant
    herself provide expert evidence on this very  issue,  whilst  accepting
    the same in relation to [DS], her eldest daughter.

Remaking the Decision

18. I remake the decision on the basis of  the  findings  of  the  original
    judge, the evidence before her, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  I am allowing this appeal for the reasons that I have  set  out
    above.

19. I also, in particular, allow this appeal because of what  was  said  at
    paragraph  132  of  TG  and  Others,  which  involved  the  Appellant's
    daughter, who was studying in year 13, and had achieved good grades  at
    GCSE, and was in education  in  the  United  Kingdom,  would  put  good
    prospects of reaching her full potential in this country.

20. She  had  said  that  Afghan  Sikhs  have  very  limited  secondary  or
    university level opportunities and the Tribunal had concluded that "The
    evidence  indicates  there  is  a  high   degree   of   likelihood   of
    discrimination and the possibility of  such  a  person  being  targeted
    based upon their religious beliefs, which may include abduction, forced
    marriage, or other forms of ill-treatment".

21. The Tribunal, however, had then gone on to state at paragraph 135 that,
    "The situation of the fourth Appellant's wife  and  daughter  would  be
    similar with the additional factor that they are unlikely to be able to
    leave the very difficult conditions at the temple without male  support
    to provide a form of protection ...".

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal is  allowed.


No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 19th October 2017



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have made a full fee award.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 19th October 2017
