
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/00052/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 8th March 2016                         |On 30th March 2016                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                                      P
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Schwenk, instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs C Johnstone, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.

 1. The parties before the Tribunal both agreed that an anonymity direction
    should be made as detailed above.

 2. The Appellant seeks permission to appeal against the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Heynes) who, in a determination  promulgated
    on 2nd September 2015 dismissed his appeal against the decision of  the
    Respondent to make a deportation order.

 3. The immigration history of the Appellant can be set out  briefly.   The
    Appellant is a citizen of Iran who claims to have  arrived  in  the  UK
    unlawfully.  An application for asylum was made which  was  refused  by
    the Secretary of State and came before  an  Immigration  Judge  on  2nd
    September 2010.  In the determination  promulgated  on  15th  September
    2010 the Appellant's appeal against the decision  to  refuse  to  grant
    asylum was dismissed.  The judge set out  the  findings  of  fact  made
    concerning the two significant incidents relied upon.   In  respect  of
    the first at [28] the judge accepted that he had been arrested in 2005,
    had been detained and tortured but at [29] rejected his claim  that  he
    was subsequently required to report to the authorities and  found  that
    he had remained there between 2006 and  2009  with  no  interest  being
    shown in him.  He also rejected the second strand of his claim that  he
    had been arrested in 2009 following the demonstrations.   He  concluded
    on the information in 2010 and applying the relevant  country  guidance
    case of SB (risk on return - illegal exit) Iran CG [2009] 0053 he would
    not be at risk on return.

 4. The Appellant has a number of criminal convictions.  They were set  out
    at paragraphs [10] to [12]  of  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.   The  most  recent  conviction  gave  rise  to  the  present
    proceedings.  They are correctly summarised at paragraphs [11] to  [12]
    and it is not necessary for me for the purposes of  this  determination
    to set out those details.

 5. On 26th January 2015 the Respondent made a deportation order by  virtue
    of Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.  The Appellant  lodged  an
    appeal against that decision and as recorded in  the  determination  at
    [5] there was no Article 8 appeal but his claim was based on Article  3
    grounds.

 6. At the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal,  the  Appellant  relied
    upon an expert report which was summarised at paragraphs [13]  to  [21]
    and the report dealt with a number of issues namely  the  risk  to  the
    Appellant based on the nature of  the  crimes  he  had  committed,  and
    whether he would be at risk of further prosecution as a result of those
    crimes  ("double  jeopardy"),  and  the  consequences  of  any  adverse
    interest in him by reason of those offences and his illegal  exit  from
    Iran  when  seen  in  the  context  of  this   particular   Appellant's
    circumstances.

 7. The judge's findings of fact were set out at paragraphs [24] to [35] in
    which he reached the conclusion that it was not reasonably likely  that
    the nature of those  convictions  would  become  known  [28]  to  [29];
    furthermore, that the information provided by  the  Home  Office  which
    would accompany a temporary travel document (referred to  as  a  "barge
    obour") would not provide any basis for disclosure of the nature of the
    offences [31] and that the report  did  not  determine  what  level  of
    interest the Iranian authorities would show on the basis of information
    in the barge obour.  At [33] the judge considered the  issue  of  those
    who exit Iran  illegally  and  any  risk  on  return  but  reached  the
    conclusion that the expert report was "not sufficiently  comprehensive"
    to depart from the country guidance.  Thus he dismissed the appeal.

 8. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision and  permission
    was granted on 9th November 2015 by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  McWilliam.
    Permission was granted on all grounds.

 9. The appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.  Mr Schwenk who appeared  on
    behalf of the Appellant and who had drafted  the  grounds  relied  upon
    those written grounds set out in the papers before me.  He supplemented
    those submission by reference to the expert report  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and highlighted the  areas  in  which  it  was  said  the
    determination did not engage with the  issues  raised  in  that  expert
    report, namely how the Iranian authorities would become  aware  of  the
    conviction and in what circumstances and also the evidence relating  to
    the procedures at  the  airport.   Thus  he  highlighted  a  number  of
    questions that were relevant to any analysis by the First-tier Tribunal
    which were the likelihood of the Iranian authorities knowing of the  UK
    conviction and its circumstances, (relying on the matters  set  out  in
    the report), what the Iranian authorities would be able to find out  as
    set out in the expert report and also in the light of the nature of the
    interrogation process.

10.  As to second issue, he relied on the written grounds in which  it  was
    asserted that the judge's consideration of  this  issue  at  paragraphs
    [33] to [34] was inadequate in the light of the  matters  set  out  not
    only in  the  expert  report  but  the  skeleton  argument  which  made
    reference to the more up-to-date  country  material  relating  to  this
    issue which demonstrated that there had been changes since the  country
    guidance case referred to  in  the  determination.   This  required  an
    analysis of that material and that the  short  paragraph  at  [33]  was
    inadequate to demonstrate such analysis.

11.  Mrs Johnstone on behalf of the Secretary of State relied upon the Rule
    24 response in which it is submitted that the judge considered the risk
    on return due to the Appellant's criminal activities in the UK and that
    the findings at paragraph [29] to [32] that he would  not  be  at  risk
    were sufficiently open to him.  She also  submitted  that  the  refusal
    letter did challenge his credibility and that there were no concessions
    made by the Secretary of State.  However she accepted that at paragraph
    [6], there was no cross-examination of the Appellant's account  at  the
    hearing and thus no findings of fact were made.

12. She made reference to the previous judge's findings of  fact  and  that
    whilst the judge accepted he had been arrested, detained  and  tortured
    in 2005 there was no evidence such a conviction would put him  at  risk
    on return now.  She further submitted it was not clear  if  the  expert
    report dealt with that issue but the risk form  his  earlier  detention
    had not been accepted by Judge Levin.  She further submitted that there
    was no direct evidence of any infiltration or "spies" in the UK and the
    evidence relating to Interpol was  not  detailed  sufficiently  in  the
    expert report thus the judge was  correct  in  his  assessment  of  the
    expert evidence.  She further submitted that  the  offences  themselves
    even if they were disclosed would not necessarily refer to  the  nature
    of them and in this respect the judge's finding that it would be so  at
    [31] as speculative was a finding that it was open  to  him  to  reach.
    She also submitted that whilst the  conclusions  reached  to  issue  of
    illegal exit, whilst brief, were open to him.

13. I reserved my determination.

14.  The First-tier Tribunal set out the two factors that were said to give
    rise to Article 3 mistreatment or risk on return which related  to  the
    nature of the crimes committed and his illegal exit. It could  also  be
    stated from the way the case was advanced that his  past  circumstances
    relating to the findings of fact made by the previous Immigration Judge
    were also relevant in this regard.  The Appellant relied upon an expert
    report dealing with those specific issues.

15. The judge set out his findings of fact on those  issues  identified  at
    paragraphs [24] to [35] of the determination.  As  summarised  earlier,
    he accepted the earlier findings of the First-tier  Tribunal  that  the
    Appellant  was  arrested,  detained  and  tortured   by   the   Iranian
    authorities in 2005 but that there was no interest thereafter.   As  to
    the modus operandi of the offence he concluded that little evidence  of
    this would be known to the Iranian authorities upon return and at  [29]
    made reference to an internet search undertaken by the expert which did
    not disclose any relevant information.  The judge made reference to the
    contents of the expert report and the methods upon which such a  person
    would be returned making reference to a  document  known  as  a  "barge
    obour", a temporary document.  In this regard, he did not find that the
    report explained why travel documents obtained by the  Home  Office  in
    order to affect his deportation or removal would not overcome the  need
    for such a temporary document and at [31] that even if  a  barge  obour
    was required,  there  was  no  evidence  to  suggest  that  information
    accompanying it would identify the nature of the convictions.  He found
    that it would require no dishonesty on the part of  the  Appellant  and
    that the report did not assist in determining the level of interest the
    authorities would show in him on that basis.  At [33] as  to  the  risk
    upon return for those who exited Iran illegally, he  recorded  that  he
    was being asked to depart from  the  country  guidance  but  that  "the
    report is not sufficiently comprehensive to take this  step  not  least
    because, as noted above, the few examples that he has  given  have  not
    been placed in the context of the number of such failed asylum  seekers
    returning to Iran."  At [34] the judge also stated that the report  did
    not explain why his "claimed detention" would arouse an  interest  upon
    return when it did not when he was in Iran.

16. As set out earlier, Mr Schwenk on behalf  of  the  Appellant  submitted
    that the findings do not  adequately  deal  with  a  number  of  issues
    supported by objective information and evidence that was  contained  in
    the expert report and referred to in the skeleton argument.  By way  of
    reply Mrs Johnstone submits  that  sufficient  reasons  were  given  by
    reference to the expert report and were open to the judge to make.

17. I have considered those submissions  and  have  reached  the  following
    conclusions.  The expert report sets out a  number  of  issues  dealing
    with risk on return and whether the conviction  would  be  investigated
    upon return  to  Iran  and  that  despite  having  been  convicted  and
    sentenced in the UK whether he would be at risk of  further  punishment
    on account of that crime and therefore "double jeopardy" applied and if
    so, the extent and liability of  punishment  under  Iranian  law.   The
    expert judge cited a number of articles of the  Islamic  Criminal  Code
    and this  was  an  issue  also  raised  in  the  refusal  letter.   The
    background of the Appellant in particular in the light of his  previous
    accepted detention was also of relevance.  Secondly  the  report  dealt
    with the  likelihood  of  the  convictions  being  discovered  and  the
    particular nature of the circumstances of  the  crimes  committed.   In
    this context, the expert report referred to a number of ways  in  which
    it could be disclosed or discovered by the Iranian  authorities.   They
    are described as follows namely, the return process itself and the  use
    of a barge obour and  the  information  that  would  accompany  such  a
    document.   Secondly,  the  Iranian  Government's   relationship   with
    international agencies such as Interpol and  the  cooperation  in  this
    regard and the objective material cited  in  support  and  thirdly  the
    Iranian Government's abilities in  "intelligence  gathering"  not  only
    including the internet but also the use  of  Iranian  infiltrators  and
    those in the Iranian community.  This being a case where was  expressly
    asserted on behalf of the Appellant that the particular nature  of  the
    crime had been made known to the Iranian community and also that it had
    been become known to neighbours in Iran.

18. The findings of fact set out at paragraphs [24] to [35]  do  make  some
    assessment of the issues of discovery of his conviction and the  return
    process.  However I am satisfied having heard the submissions  of  both
    parties that the analysis does not deal with all  the  relevant  issues
    set out above and in the light of the matters set out in  the  expert's
    report.  Whilst it was open to the judge  to  consider  the  method  of
    return via a barge obour and the contents of the letter  and  to  reach
    the  conclusion  that  the  information  would  reveal  no  more   than
    dishonesty, there was no further analysis of  whether  the  details  of
    that conviction and the nature of the crimes would be reasonably likely
    to be known by the other methods outlined by the expert, including  the
    cooperation between  the  Iranian  authorities  and  the  international
    organisation such as Interpol.  In the report  the  expert  set  out  a
    number of examples of that  cooperation  and  in  particular  that  the
    Iranian Government had access to Canadians' criminal history records.

19. Furthermore the second  route  of  discovery  related  to  the  Iranian
    Government's efforts of intelligence  gathering.   This  did  not  only
    relate to the internet searches which were considered by the  judge  at
    [29] but also the information that would be likely to be available from
    other methods.  In this respect it is of note that  the  expert  report
    specifically considered the issue  of  infiltration  on  the  basis  of
    express evidence from the Appellant set out in his witness statement at
    paragraphs [14] to [15].  Mrs Johnstone made it plain on behalf of  the
    Secretary of State that there were no concessions made  on  credibility
    and referred to the refusal letter in this regard.  Whilst the evidence
    and the witness statement was not known to the Secretary of State until
    the after the refusal letter was drafted, the issues  contained  in  it
    were issues of fact that  required  determining.   The  judge  was  not
    assisted in this regard as it  is  recorded  at  [6]  that  whilst  the
    Appellant had adopted his witness statement as  his  evidence-in-chief,
    he was asked no questions in cross-examination and  this  included  the
    issues raised at paragraphs [14] to [15] concerning  the  knowledge  of
    the Iranian community and the knowledge of those in Iran.  The  factual
    basis of this was plainly an issue that required  determining.   If  it
    was concluded that there was no factual basis for the  assertions  made
    by the Appellant that it would have been open to the judge to reach the
    conclusion that the factual basis had not been  demonstrated  and  thus
    would affect the expert's conclusions on this issue.   However  as  set
    out above no factual findings were made either way and thus it  remains
    an issue that has not been determined.

20. Dealing with the issue of risk and illegal exit, the findings  on  this
    issue were set out at paragraphs [33] and [34] and are given  in  brief
    terms on the basis that the report was not "sufficiently comprehensive"
    to depart from the country guidance decision of SB (as  cited)  on  the
    basis that there were few examples given had not  been  placed  in  the
    context of the number  of  failed  asylum  seekers  returned  to  Iran.
    However as Mr Schwenk  submitted,  the  report  went  into  significant
    details (as did the skeleton argument) as to the more  recent  evidence
    on this issue and had to be considered in the light of the  Appellant's
    history as a whole.

21. Further contrary to the finding that there is no  evidence  to  signify
    either that there were significant numbers of asylum seekers  that  had
    been returned, the decision of AB and Others (internet activity - state
    of evidence)  Iran  [2015]  UKUT  0257  at  paragraph  [466]  makes  it
    difficult to establish any kind of clear picture  as  very  few  people
    seem to be returned unwillingly and it makes it  difficult  to  predict
    with any degree of confidence what fate if any, awaits them.  Thus  the
    issue of numbers themselves was not a  sole  criterion  upon  which  to
    dismiss the report. There  was  objective  material  cited  from  other
    sources including that from the Secretary of State and  it  would  have
    been open to the judge to reject that objective material  with  reasons
    however such an analysis was not undertaken.

22. As for the finding at [34] it failed to  take  into  account  what  the
    decision in AB (refers to as the "pinch point"  on  return)  whereby  a
    person is brought into direct contact with the authorities in Iran  who
    have the time and inclination to interrogate them (see decision  of  AB
    at [467], [470[ and [471]).

23. I am therefore satisfied that the grounds are made  out  and  that  the
    determination should be set aside.  Both advocates agreed that  in  the
    event of an error of law being found and on the basis  that  a  country
    guidance case is pending to be heard on 18th  March  that  the  correct
    course would be for the appeal to  be  reheard  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal as it will require further oral evidence and analysis  of  the
    relevant issues in the light of the country guidance decision.

Decision:

24. Therefore the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside; none of
    the findings shall stand and the case is to be remitted to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal at Manchester for  hearing  in  accordance  with  Section
    12(2)(b) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act and paragraph 7.2
    of the Practice Statement of 10th February 2010 (as amended).  The case
    should not  be  listed  until  promulgation  of  the  relevant  country
    guidance decision.  The parties will be expected to file any additional
    evidence they wish to rely upon fourteen days before the hearing before
    the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed
                                Date 11/3/2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
