
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/00401/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision and Reasons           |
|                                             |Promulgated                    |
|On 21 June 2016                              |On 15 August 2016              |
|                                             |                               |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     SN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Layne, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal comes back before me  following  a  hearing  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal on 5 January 2016 at which I found that the  First-tier  Judge
    ("FtJ") erred in law in his decision on the appellant's appeal.  I  had
    set his decision aside for it to be re-made in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. I incorporate the error of law decision  here,  in  order  to  put  the
    further proceedings into context.

         "1.  This is an appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  against  the
             decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge I. S. Lamb  who  allowed
             the appellant's appeal on asylum grounds after a hearing on 14
             August 2015.  Although the appellant in these  proceedings  is
             the Secretary of State I will continue to refer to the parties
             as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

         2.   The appellant is a national of Pakistan,  born  on  23  August
             1985.  He made a claim for asylum on 22 May 2015.   The  basis
             of his claim is that he is bisexual and that his family got to
             know about a relationship that he had with a man  in  the  UK.
             The First-tier Judge made a number of findings  in  favour  of
             the appellant, in essence accepting all aspects of his account
             with one exception.  The judge rejected the reasoning  of  the
             respondent in the refusal letter, which did  not  accept  that
             the  appellant's  account   of   having   had   a   homosexual
             relationship with someone in the UK was true.

         3.   At [65]  of  his  decision,  Judge  Lamb  concluded  that  the
             appellant had not been inconsistent  in  his  account  of  his
             relationship with a person in the UK identified as M.  He  did
             not agree that the appellant's account was inconsistent  about
             his having informed his parents of his  sexuality.   What  the
             judge found was that  after  having  been  told  that  he  was
             homosexual  and  planning  to  marry  his  male  partner,  the
             appellant's family were verbally and physically hostile to him
             and his father had disinherited him.

         4.   He did not however, accept  the  appellant's  account  in  its
             entirety, for the reasons given at [74] of the decision.  What
             he found was that when his relationship with M was  blossoming
             and they intended to marry, he had been so long in the UK  and
             influenced by a  social  culture  of  tolerance  of  same  sex
             marriage, he thought he  could  tell  his  family  about  this
             development and that they  would  accept  it.   The  appellant
             disclosed this in a police report,  that  report  having  been
             made to the police as a  result  of  the  treatment  that  the
             appellant had received at the hands of his family.  The  judge
             concluded that the appellant had given a credible  account  of
             having been subjected to physical attacks; one on the  day  of
             his arrival in Pakistan and another on about 9 May (2015).

         5.   He found that the appellant had given a  credible  account  of
             then returning to the UK, but that was because  he  was  at  a
             loss to know where he could go in his home  area  and  yet  be
             safe.  The judge found that it  was  equally  because  he  was
             drawn back to the United Kingdom  and  the  society  and  life
             which had become familiar to him.

         6.   The judge considered the decision of the House of Lords in  HJ
             (Iran) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  department  [2010]
             UKSC 31, and in answering the questions posed by Lord Hope  he
             concluded at [79] that the appellant is  not  homosexual.   He
             stated that whether it is  related  to  his  feelings  towards
             other men, or whether it is  related  to  the  possibility  of
             developing any physical relationship with a man, the  question
             is to be answered in the negative.

         7.   However, he also went on to  consider  whether  the  appellant
             would be at risk because he was suspected of being homosexual,
             and he accepted that he will be at some degree of risk because
             of past events,  that  is  to  say  the  verbal  and  physical
             hostility  from  his  family.   He  also  noted  at  [80]  the
             appellant's  evidence  that  his  friend  now  knows  of   his
             sexuality.  He concluded at [81] that the appellant would  not
             conduct himself as a homosexual man because he has no wish  to
             do so, and indeed that was the  appellant's  evidence  in  the
             asylum interview.  He went on to conclude that even if he  has
             experiences of being attracted to men, he  will  conceal  them
             because of his response to social  pressure  and  cultural  or
             religious reasons of his own choosing, not because of the risk
             of persecution.

         8.   Going on at [82] to consider  what  would  happen  if  he  was
             directly challenged by his family, he  stated  that  the  only
             evidence he had to guide him on this was his previous  conduct
             which was to try  to  persuade  his  family  that  he  is  not
             homosexual. However, their reaction was one of  disbelief  and
             intolerance.   He  said  that  that  would  be  likely  to  be
             repeated.

         9.   He concluded at [83] that the  appellant  does  have  a  well-
             founded fear of persecution because of  his  perceived  sexual
             orientation.  He took into account that Pakistan is a strongly
             Islamic state and that the appellant, as a man perceived to be
             homosexual, is subject to a real and substantial risk of being
             persecuted for that reason and could expect no protection from
             the state authorities.

         10.  In terms of the foregoing, the respondent makes  no  complaint
             about the judge's decision, but the grounds are really focused
             on what was said at [84] of the  decision  which  consists  of
             five lines.  In that paragraph the judge stated as follows:

                  'I do not accept that he can avoid this risk by living  in
                  Pakistan somewhere other than Karachi.  He would  have  to
                  find employment, accommodation, go to the mosque, and  mix
                  with people, and at some time, there will be a  real  risk
                  that he will come to the attention of friends or relatives
                  of  his  family;  or  the  attention  of   the   religious
                  authorities'.

         11.  The respondent's grounds contend, in essence, that  the  judge
             failed to explain why the appellant  would  attract  attention
             given his earlier finding that he would not conduct himself as
             a homosexual man; or how or why the appellant's  family  would
             trace him throughout the vast and highly populated country  of
             Pakistan.

         12.  It is  significant  to  note  that  in  cross-examination  the
             appellant was asked about  whether  he  could  live  in  other
             areas, as recorded at [57].  He was  asked  whether  he  could
             live elsewhere other than Karachi,  such  as  Islamabad.   The
             appellant's answer was that  he  has  relatives  who  live  in
             Islamabad, Peshawar and Hyderabad, and that it is easy to find
             someone.  He also said that his father's and brother's friends
             live in Lahore.

         13.  He went on to state that they have filed a  case  against  him
             and there were adverts concerning him in newspapers.  However,
             the suggestion that there is a case filed against him was  not
             in actual fact an issue that was resolved  in  his  favour  by
             Judge Lamb. At least that did not seem to be  a  part  of  the
             appellant's case and it has not been  argued  before  me  that
             there is  any  case  against  the  appellant  filed  with  the
             authorities.

         14.  Mr Layne in submissions directed my attention to [57]  of  the
             decision and the appellant's reasons for stating that he would
             not be able to live elsewhere in Pakistan.  He reminded me  of
             the  background  evidence  in  relation  to  the  conservative
             society in Pakistan and suggested that the  judge's  reasoning
             when taken as a whole was satisfactory,  albeit  that  in  the
             final conclusion at [84] the judge did not refer to [57].

         15.  Mr Wilding relied on the  grounds,  which  were  amplified  in
             submissions.  One of the matters advanced was that  the  judge
             had failed to articulate how the family would find him, or how
             they would even know that he had ever come back  to  Pakistan,
             let alone to a particular  place  of  relocation.  Aside  from
             that, the judge had not  dealt  with  the  question  of  undue
             harshness or reasonableness of relocation.

         16.  I  consider  that  the  submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the
             respondent have merit. In my judgement, in the short paragraph
             at which  the  judge  dealt  with  the  question  of  internal
             relocation there is a failure to give  legally  sufficient  or
             adequate  reasons  as  to  how  it  could  be  said  that  the
             appellant's friends or family would find him in any  place  of
             relocation, aside from the places mentioned at [57], or indeed
             how  he  would  come  to  the  attention  of   the   religious
             authorities  bearing  in  mind   the   appellant's   expressed
             intention not to live as an openly gay man.

         17.  The judge did not explain how it is the case that anyone would
             perceive him  to  be  gay  and  therefore  why  a  risk  would
             eventuate in any place  of  relocation.   Notwithstanding  the
             very detailed and comprehensive findings of fact made  by  the
             First-tier Judge, I am satisfied  that  in  dealing  with  the
             question of internal relocation he  erred  in  law,  and  that
             error of law is such as to require  the  decision  to  be  set
             aside.

         18.  Having regard to the Practice Statement at paragraph  7.2,  it
             is not appropriate for the matter to be remitted to the First-
             tier Tribunal. Accordingly, the re-making will be  dealt  with
             in the Upper Tribunal.

         19.  The appellant did not attend the  hearing  before  me.  I  was
             informed that this was because he required hospital  treatment
             for diabetes, which it is accepted  that  he  has.   In  those
             circumstances, and in the light of  the  submissions  made  on
             that issue to me by Mr Layne, supported by Mr Wilding,  it  is
             appropriate  for  the  matter  to  be  adjourned  for  further
             hearing. It  is  likely  that  the  further  hearing  will  be
             confined to submissions  only  but  I  do  not  rule  out  the
             possibility that further evidence may be called.  To that  end
             I make the following directions as to the further progress  of
             the appeal.

                                   DIRECTIONS

             1.   Any further evidence relied on by either party is  to  be
                 filed and served no later than 14 days before the next date
                 of hearing.

             2.   In relation to any person  to  be  called  to  give  oral
                  evidence, there must  be  a  witness  statement  drawn  in
                  sufficient detail to stand as evidence-in-chief such  that
                  there is no need for any examination-in-chief  beyond  the
                  adopting of the witness statement."

 3. It is apparent therefore, that the only issue to  be  resolved  at  the
    renewed hearing was the question of internal relocation.

 4. The FtJ made comprehensive findings of fact which can be summarised  as
    follows.

       . In his 20s the appellant felt  an  attraction  towards  other  men,
         although that was not manifested by any action on his  part,  being
         confined only to a disclosure to his doctor.

       . In the UK in 2013 the  appellant  became  involved  in  a  same-sex
         relationship with M.

       . The appellant told his family on the phone about his sexuality  and
         his plan to marry M.

       . His relationship with M ended in 2014.

       . When the appellant told his family about his  relationship  with  M
         they verbally abused him and threatened  that  if  he  returned  to
         Pakistan they would kill him.

       . The appellant returned to Pakistan  in  the  hope  of  achieving  a
         reconciliation with his family.   His  father  took  out  newspaper
         advertisements disowning him.  The newspaper cuttings provided were
         genuine.

       . A police document said to be a report made to  the  police  by  the
         appellant about his  being  attacked  is  not  an  official  police
         document.

       . A disinheritance deed and the newspaper articles came about because
         the appellant told his family that he was gay and was  planning  to
         marry his male partner.

       . In Pakistan when he returned from the UK, he was  attacked  on  the
         day of his return, being 13 April 2015.  He was attacked  again  on
         or about 9 May 2015.

       . The appellant returned to the UK because he was at a loss  to  know
         where he could go in his home area and be safe, but also because he
         was drawn back to the United Kingdom and the society,  culture  and
         life which had become familiar to him.

       . The appellant's last relationship was with a woman.  He returned to
         Pakistan in order to be reconciled with his family and that was  on
         the  basis  that  he  had  put  behind  him  any  manifestation  of
         homosexuality.

       . The appellant had only ever had one relationship with a  man  which
         he voluntarily ended.

       . The appellant is not gay, whether in terms of his feelings  towards
         other men or in terms of the possibility of developing any physical
         relationship with a man.

       . He would be at risk in his home area in the light of past events.

       . The appellant would not conduct himself as a gay man because he has
         no wish to do so.  It is not a case of having to conceal  his  true
         nature and sexuality because of the risk of persecution.  He  would
         conceal any feelings of  attraction  towards  men  because  of  his
         response to social pressure and cultural or  religious  reasons  of
         his own choosing, but not because of the risk of persecution.

       . The appellant's family would be likely to act towards him  as  they
         had previously.

       . He would be at risk of persecution because of his perceived  sexual
         orientation.

       . He could expect no protection from the state authorities.







    Submissions

 5. Mr Layne referred  in  general  terms  to  the  decision  in  Januzi  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] UKHL 5.  He submitted
    that  Pakistan  is  a  traditional  country  where  there  are  hostile
    attitudes  towards  homosexuality.   It  was  submitted  that  internal
    relocation was not viable for the appellant.

 6. I was referred to the Home  Office  Country  Information  and  Guidance
    entitled "Pakistan: Sexual orientation and gender  identity"  of  April
    2016 ("the CIG report").  Various paragraphs were referred to.

 7. Mr Kotas pointed out that the FtJ had found that the appellant  is  not
    gay.  At [81] the FtJ found that he would  not  conduct  himself  as  a
    homosexual man because he would not wish  to  do  so.   Notwithstanding
    what is recorded at [57] of the FtJ's decision  about  the  appellant's
    answer as to why he could not live elsewhere in Pakistan other than his
    home area,  there  were  other  big  cities,  such  as  Faisalabad  and
    Rawalpindi that he could go to and be anonymous.

 8. Various aspects of the appellant's background bundle were referred  to,
    to the effect that homosexuality  appears  to  be  tolerated  and  that
    regardless of the legal position, prosecutions are not common.

 9. The contention that the religious authorities would  somehow  find  out
    who the appellant is was contrary to the background evidence.

10. Notwithstanding the appellant's diabetes, it would not be unduly  harsh
    for him to relocate in Pakistan.  He was receiving treatment there  for
    20 years before he came to the UK and could receive treatment there  on
    return.

    My Conclusions

11. It is clear that the FtJ found that the appellant could not  return  to
    his home area, which on the evidence before the FtJ was in Karachi.  It
    is also clear that the FtJ found that the appellant  was  not  gay  and
    would not manifest or act on  any  sexual  attraction  towards  men  in
    Pakistan, out of choice and not out of a fear of persecution.

12. The very narrow question therefore, is whether the appellant  would  be
    able to relocate to another area of Pakistan, away from his home  area,
    where he would not be at risk of persecution and to which it  would  be
    reasonable to expect him  to  go  (Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department v AH (Sudan) and Others [2007] UKHL  49,  in  particular  at
    [5]).

13. Mr Layne's references to the CIG report included reference to paragraph
    2.3.4 which states that lesbian, gay and bisexual persons  in  Pakistan
    can be subject to societal discrimination as  well  as  harassment  and
    violence, most commonly within the family, and that  depending  on  the
    facts of the case are unlikely to be able to seek effective  protection
    from  the  authorities.   Paragraph  2.5.3  states  that   given   that
    homophobic attitudes are prevalent throughout  the  country,  there  is
    unlikely to be any place in Pakistan to which an LGBT person "who would
    be identified as such" could safely relocate.  That paragraph  goes  on
    to state that if the person would  not  be  identified  as  LGBT  in  a
    different location, internal relocation may be viable.

14. I further note that at 2.5.2 it states that decision makers  must  also
    take into account that the Supreme Court (in HJ (Iran) v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home department [2010]  UKSC  31)  made  the  point  that
    internal relocation is not the answer  if  it  depends  on  the  person
    concealing their sexual orientation in the proposed  new  location  for
    fear of persecution.

15. Mr Kotas'  references  to  background  material  related  more  to  the
    question of the extent to which there was some degree of  tolerance  of
    homosexuality and the understanding of the  relationship  between  same
    sex male behaviour and  the  availability  of  female  partners.   That
    background material however, does not seem to  me  to  be  particularly
    germane to the question in issue.

16. It was not submitted on behalf of the appellant that his diabetes is  a
    factor in the question of internal relocation.   As  Mr  Kotas  pointed
    out, he had received treatment for that condition in  Pakistan  for  20
    years before coming to the UK.

17. It seems to me that the submissions made on behalf  of  the  appellant,
    with respect to Mr Layne, fail to grasp the crucial fact that  the  FtJ
    found that the appellant is not gay, and would not  manifest  behaviour
    as a gay man because he did not wish to do so.  That was not out  of  a
    fear of persecution but because that was his choice,  for  the  reasons
    explained by the FtJ.

18. I accept that if  the  appellant  would  be  required  to  conceal  his
    sexuality in  order  to  avoid  persecution  in  an  area  of  internal
    relocation, then there would be a strong, if not irresistible, argument
    in favour of his being found to be a refugee.   However,  there  is  no
    basis from which to conclude that anyone  in  the  area  of  relocation
    would know about his past.  No evidence was advanced either  before  me
    or before the  FtJ  to  the  effect  that  his  family  has  sufficient
    influence or reach, let  alone  incentive,  to  pursue  him  throughout
    Pakistan; that is even aside from the question of  whether  they  would
    know that he had returned, again about  which  there  is  no  basis  to
    conclude that they would.

19. At [57] the FtJ recorded what the appellant said in  his  interview  to
    the effect that he has relatives who live in  Islamabad,  Peshawar  and
    Hyderabad and that it was easy to trace someone  in  Pakistan.   As  to
    Lahore, the appellant said that his father's friends and brothers  live
    there.  However, even if there are friends or relatives of  his  family
    in those places, there are other cities in which  the  appellant  could
    live and in which he would be able to be anonymous.

20. On the question of whether any case had been filed against him  as  the
    appellant also said in his interview, there did not appear  to  be  any
    evidence about that before the FtJ.  The FtJ said at [80] that he  knew
    little about that matter and it was not referred to in the  appellant's
    evidence.  Accordingly, he concluded that it did not  add  anything  to
    his reasoning.  Again, it was not submitted to me  that  there  is  any
    case against the appellant such that he  would  be  at  risk  from  the
    authorities.  It was similarly not contended that the  FtJ's  reasoning
    on this issue was defective, or incomplete.

21. On the basis that the appellant has been found not to be gay, would not
    act in a way that would suggest that he is gay, and where there  is  no
    reason to conclude that any member of his family or  anyone  associated
    with them would be able to locate the appellant,  I  am  not  satisfied
    that there is any basis from which to conclude that he would be at risk
    of persecution at a place of internal relocation in Pakistan.  The fact
    that the FtJ  accepted  that  the  appellant's  father  had  taken  out
    newspaper advertisements disinheriting him does not indicate  that  the
    appellant would thus be able to be identified wherever he went.

22. No factors particular to the appellant  were  advanced  on  his  behalf
    which suggested that  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  to  expect  him  to
    relocate.  Neither his diabetes nor any other factor was relied on.

23. In these circumstances, I am satisfied that  the  appellant  does  have
    available to him the option of internal relocation to one of the  major
    cities, or elsewhere, in Pakistan, where there would not be a  risk  of
    persecution and to which it would be reasonable to expect him to go.

24. It was conceded on behalf of the appellant that human rights grounds in
    terms of Articles 2 and 3 stand or fall with the asylum ground.

    Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  Its decision having been set aside, I  re-make  the
    decision by dismissing the appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek          12/08/16

