
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00918/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 October 2018                           |On 17 December 2018           |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                                 SALEEM [Q]
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:                  Mr. A. Reza, solicitor, JKR Solicitors
For the Respondents:                      Mr. N. Bramble, Home Office
Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS






BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellant is a national of Iraq, who arrived in the United  Kingdom
    on 21 August 2008 and who applied for asylum on 22  August  2008.   His
    application was refused and his  subsequent  appeal  was  dismissed  by
    Immigration Judge Camp in a decision promulgated on  30  January  2009.
    He became appeal rights exhausted on 14 April 2009.

2.    The  Appellant  made  further  submissions  on  12  August  2014.  The
    Respondent accepted that the Appellant  had  made  a  fresh  claim  but
    refused his asylum and human rights  claim  on  13  December  2017.  He
    appealed against this decision.

3.   His appeal  was  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Parkes  on  19
    February 2018 and he dismissed his appeal in a decision, promulgated on
    12 March 2018. The Appellant appealed against his  decision  and  on  9
    April 2018 First-tier Tribunal Judge Birrell granted him permission  to
    appeal.





ERROR OF LAW HEARING

4.   The solicitor for the Appellant said that he  relied  on  his  skeleton
    argument and then made some further  oral  submissions,  which  I  have
    referred to below, where relevant. The Home  Office  Presenting  Office
    then  replied  and  conceded  that  First-tier  Tribunal   Parkes   had
    misapplied section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

5.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes  dismissed  his  appeal  on  both  his
    international protection and human rights but  the  grounds  of  appeal
    relied upon by the Appellant are restricted to the dismissal  on  human
    rights grounds.

6.   The first ground submits  that  the  manner  in  which  the  First-tier
    Tribunal applied section 117B(6) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 was unlawful.

7.   Section  117B  is  headed  Article  8:  public  interest  consideration
    applicable in all cases and states that:

         "(1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
         public interest.


         ...


         (4)  Little weight should be given to -


             (a)  a private life, or


             (b)  relationship formed with a qualified partner,


             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.


         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life is established
         by a person at a time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
         precarious.


         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-


             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child".

8.   In paragraph 23 of  his  decision,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Parkes
    accepted that there was now DNA evidence which confirms that he is  the
    father of his partner's child. There was  a  copy  of  the  Appellant's
    partner's passport in the Appellant's Bundle that confirmed that she is
    a British citizen. It is accepted that the Appellant's child  was  born
    in the United Kingdom, therefore he is also a British citizen.

9.   Section 117D of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    defines a "qualifying child" as

         "a person who is under the age of 18 and who -


             (a)  is a British citizen"

10.  Therefore, the Appellant's  child  is  a  "qualifying  child"  for  the
    purposes of section 117B and 117D. In addition, in paragraph 27 of  his
    decision, First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes found that "given the caring
    responsibilities that  the  Appellant  undertakes  he  has  a  parental
    relationship with a British citizen child".

11.  However, in paragraph 28 of  his  decision  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Parkes said:

         "I do struggle with the wording  of  ...  section  117B(6)  because
         there is no suggestion that the Appellant's  child  would  have  to
         leave the  UK  if  he  were  to  be  returned  to  Iraq.  In  those
         circumstances the question of reasonableness does not arise ...  As
         there is no question of the Appellant's  child  being  expected  to
         leave the UK and given the ambiguous working of  the  provisions  I
         find that the Appellant does not meet the requirements and  is  not
         assisted by them".

12.  In the recent reported case of SR  (subsisting  parental  relationship,
    s117B(6)) [2018] UKUT 334, the Upper Tribunal found that:

         "The question of whether it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  a
         child to leave the United Kingdom ('UK') in section 117B (6) of the
         2002 Act does not necessarily require a  consideration  of  whether
         the child will in fact or practice leave the UK.  Rather, it  poses
         a straightforward question: would it be reasonable "to expect"  the
         child to leave the UK?"

13.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes's decision cannot stand in the  light
    of this reported case, which confirms that he misapplied  section  117B
    (6).

14.  In paragraph 28 of his decision, First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes  also
    found that:

         "The public interest in his removal outweighs the best interests of
         his child which are demonstrated by the application  of  the  usual
         principles and not by any evidence to show  that  there  are  needs
         over and above that which would be expected".

15.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge was required  to  treat  the  Appellant's
    child's best interests as a primary consideration and there is  nothing
    in his decision to indicate that he had done so. It was not  sufficient
    to merely state that the  usual  principles  had  been  applied.  These
    principles may or may not have included treating his best interests  as
    a primary consideration.

16.  In addition, he was required to follow the process approved of in  Kaur
    (children's best  interests/public  interests  interface)  [2017]  UKUT
    00014, where the Upper Tribunal found that:

         "(1) The seventh of the principles in the  Zoumbas  code  does  not
             preclude an outcome whereby the best interests of a child must
             yield to the public interest.


         (2)  This  approach  has  not  been  altered  by  Part  5A  of  the
             Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.


         (3)  In the proportionality balancing exercise, the best  interests
             of a child must be assessed in isolation from  other  factors,
             such as parental misconduct.


         (4)  The best interests assessment should normally be  carried  out
             at the beginning of the balancing exercise".

17.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge failed  to  adopt  this  approach  or  to
    provide any reasons for  finding  that  "the  public  interest  in  his
    removal outweighs the best interests of his child".

18.  It was not necessary to consider the  case  of  Treebhawon  and  Others
    (NIAA 2002 Part 5A - compelling circumstances test) [2017]  UKUT  00013
    (IAC) as in paragraph 28 of his decision the First-Tier Tribunal  Judge
    only went on to consider sub-section 117B(1) to (5) when he  had  found
    that sub-section 117B(6) did not apply.

19.  As a consequence, I  find  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  made
    material errors of law in his decision.


DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

(2)  The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes is set aside.

(3)   The  appeal  is  remitted  to  the   First-tier   Tribunal   for   the
    consideration  of  the  Appellant's  human  rights   appeal   and,   in
    particular, the application of  section  117B(6)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum 2002, to be heard de novo  before  a  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes.


Nadine Finch

Signed                                  Date 16 October 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch

