
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00989/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 23 February 2021                 |On: 5 March 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     CLP
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M West, instructed by F R Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This has been a remote hearing to which there has been no objection  by  the
parties. The form of remote hearing was skype for business.  A  face-to-face
hearing was not held because it was not practicable, and  all  issues  could
be determined in a remote hearing.

The appeal comes before me following the grant of permission  to  appeal  to
the Upper Tribunal.

The appellant is a national of India,  born  on  10  July  1969.  She  first
entered the UK on 18 December 2005  with  a  visit  visa,  with  the  stated
intention of attending the wedding  of  the  sponsor  (CS)'s  daughter,  the
sponsor being a friend of her father. She returned to India  on  2  February
2006 and then came back to the UK on 22 June 2006, again as  a  visitor  and
again to attend the sponsor's daughter's wedding  which  was  said  to  have
been cancelled previously due to illness. The appellant overstayed and on  3
November 2008 she applied for leave to remain under Article 3 and 8  on  the
basis of her family life with  AS  and  a  fear  of  return  to  India.  Her
application was refused on 21 December 2009 and she was served with  removal
papers. Her appeal against that decision was dismissed on 24 June  2010  and
she became appeal rights exhausted on 6 July 2010.

From  24  January  2012  the  appellant  made  a  number   of   unsuccessful
applications for leave to remain, outside the immigration  rules  and  under
Article 8, including an  application  for  an  EEA  residence  card  as  the
partner of an EEA national and an appeal against the decision refusing  that
application, and then finally on 9 March 2018 she  lodged  an  asylum  claim
which is the subject of these proceedings.

The appellant claimed that she was forced into an arranged  marriage  on  30
May 1991 with a man whom she met only at the time of the  marriage  and  she
moved in with her husband and his  mother.  Her  husband  and  mother-in-law
fired their maid and forced her to do the household chores  in  addition  to
her employment as a tailor. Her husband was unemployed and would  drink  and
gamble and both her husband and his mother beat her and verbally abused  her
and she was forced to hand over her wages  to  her  husband.  The  appellant
said that she became pregnant and had a son, but the abuse  continued  after
the baby was born. In August 2002, when her son was  9  years  of  age,  her
husband came home drunk and demanded money.  When  she  told  him  that  she
could not give him money as she was saving for their son's school  trip,  he
pushed her into the stove and her clothes caught  on  fire.  Her  son  threw
water on her to extinguish the flames and she had to go hospital  where  she
was admitted for 15 days. She told her brother what  her  husband  had  done
and he went to the police to lodge a report, but they  would  not  take  any
action because her husband was  a  member  of  the  Bharatiya  Janata  Party
(BJP). She then moved in with her mother, together with her son.  Her  burns
did not heal and she had go back into hospital for skin grafts  and  further
treatment until July  2003.  Some  time  after  July  2003  she  attended  a
religious event with a friend and she was seen by BJP members who  told  her
husband and he came and attacked her and threatened to kill her if  she  did
not return to him. The appellant then went to  stay  with  her  brother.  At
that time she met a friend's family member, CS, who was visiting India  from
the UK and she confided in him. He offered to sponsor her visit  to  the  UK
so that she could escape.

The appellant claimed that she came to the UK in  December  2005,  sponsored
by CS, intending to find a job and bring her son to join her,  but  she  had
to return to India when her brother told her that her son was not eating  as
he was missing her too much. After settling her son she returned to  the  UK
and in the end her son decided to stay in India. The appellant  stated  that
she began a relationship with a Portuguese national in January 2010 and  she
submitted  an  EEA  residence  card  application  on  the  basis   of   that
relationship, but the relationship broke down. She  claimed  asylum  when  a
friend saw her scars and advised her to make a claim. Her mental health  had
deteriorated and she  suffered  from  flashbacks,  depression  and  suicidal
ideations. Her son had completed his studies and  was  attending  university
in Toronto, Canada. She feared her estranged  husband  if  she  returned  to
India.

With the application, the appellant submitted a psychiatric report  from  Dr
George Stein, a retired  consultant  general  psychiatrist  at  Hayes  Grove
Priory Hospital in Kent, and a medico-legal report from Dr Phyllis  Turvill,
together with other supporting evidence.

The appellant's application was refused by  the  respondent  on  21  January
2020. The respondent did not accept that the appellant's claim  engaged  the
Refugee Convention, but in any event  rejected  her  account  of  events  in
India, although accepting that she had scars  on  her  body  resulting  from
burns and skin grafts, and considered that  she  would  be  at  no  risk  on
return to India. The respondent considered that there was a  sufficiency  of
protection available to  her  and  that  she  could  safely  and  reasonably
relocate to another part  of  the  country,  if  she  genuinely  feared  her
estranged husband. The respondent considered that  the  appellant's  removal
to India would not breach her human rights.

The appellant appealed that decision and her appeal came  before  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Bulpitt on 3 August 2020. The appellant  gave  oral  evidence
before the judge, as  did  her  three  witnesses.  The  judge  accepted  the
evidence that the appellant had suffered severe burns in the  past  and  had
skin grafts, but he did not accept that they were caused by an  abusive  ex-
husband whom she feared would cause her harm. The judge considered that  the
fact that the appellant  had,  admittedly,  made  false  statements  in  her
applications for entry clearance, undermined her credibility in general  and
the fact that she returned to India after her  first  visit  undermined  her
claim to be at risk from her ex-husband. The judge noted that the  appellant
had not pursued her previous application and appeal on the  basis  of  abuse
from her husband and had made no mention of burns  resulting  from  violence
from her husband. The appellant's application  in  2008  had  been  made  at
least in part on the basis of her family life in the UK  with  AS,  yet  she
had made no mention  of  that  relationship  to  the  two  doctors  who  had
prepared the  medical  reports  for  the  current  appeal.  There  was  also
conflicting evidence  about  the  claimed  relationship  with  a  Portuguese
national. The  judge  considered  that  each  of  the  appellant's  previous
applications  had  been  designed  to  mislead  and  that  was  therefore  a
significant matter in assessing the credibility of the current account.  The
judge also referred to various inconsistencies in  the  appellant's  current
account, inconsistencies between the appellant's evidence and  that  of  her
witnesses and a lack of corroborative evidence where it would be  reasonable
to obtain such evidence and he concluded that the appellant had concocted  a
story after her previous attempts to remain in the UK had failed. The  judge
found that the appellant was at no risk on return  to  India  and  that  her
removal to India would not breach her human rights. He dismissed the  appeal
on all grounds.

The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  that  decision  to  the  Upper
Tribunal on four  grounds,  namely  the  judge's  arguable  failure  in  his
approach to the medical/ psychiatric evidence, the judge's arguable  failure
in making  adverse  findings  based  on  matters  not  put  to  her  or  her
witnesses,  the  judge's  arguable  failure  in  inferring  matters  from  a
document not before the Tribunal  in  evidence,  and  the  judge's  arguable
failure  correctly  to  apply  section  8  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
(Treatment of Claimants etc) Act 2004.

Permission was refused in the First-tier Tribunal,  but  was  granted  on  a
renewed application to the Upper Tribunal by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Canavan
on 17 November 2020.

Hearing and submissions

The matter then came before me. Both parties made submissions.

Mr West submitted that the first ground  was  a  challenge  to  the  judge's
treatment of the medical evidence, namely the reports of  Dr  Stein  and  Dr
Turvill and the letter from the appellant's GP, Dr  Vipin  Patel  which  was
submitted for the appeal. The challenge was  threefold:  firstly,  that  the
judge failed to apply the approach in Mibanga v Secretary of State  for  the
Home Department  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  367,  as  approved  in  SA  (Somalia)  v
Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ  1302;  secondly,
a perversity challenge, namely that the judge had failed  to  give  adequate
reasons for rejecting the medical opinions of the experts when they had  all
given an opinion of the appellant suffering from  complex  PTSD  and  severe
depression and having sustained horrific, repetitive and prolonged  domestic
violence; and thirdly, that the judge erred by giving undue emphasis to  the
appellant's immigration history and using that to reject the  core  elements
of an account which was otherwise substantiated by the medical  evidence  at
the very least to the lower standard of proof. Mr West relied  on  the  case
of JL (medical reports-credibility) China [2013] UKUT 145 in  that  regard.
Mr West submitted that the judge failed to accord a liberal  application  of
the benefit of doubt in the  assessment  of  the  appellant's  evidence,  in
light of her vulnerability.

Mr West's fourth ground repeated the challenge to the judge's  over-reliance
on the appellant's immigration history, a matter considered arguable by  UTJ
Canavan  when  granting  permission.  Mr  West  submitted  that  the   judge
repeatedly  used  the  appellant's  immigration  history  to  undermine  her
credibility, referring at [30] to her  history  'substantially'  undermining
her credibility and as being 'significant'.  He  submitted  that  the  judge
had erred in law by adopting such an approach. In relation to ground  three,
Mr West submitted that the judge erred by relying  at  [26]  and  [27]  upon
evidence  which  was  not  in  fact  before  him,  namely  the   appellant's
application of 3 November 2008 to which  FTTJ  Baldwin's  decision  related,
and  extrapolated  his  own  view  of  that  application,  making  his   own
inferences and assumptions  without  any  rational  basis  and  without  the
document being before the Tribunal.

As for the second ground, Mr West submitted that the judge erred  by  making
findings on matters not put to the appellant, the starkest example of  which
was at [35] where the judge referred to  one  of  the  witnesses  mentioning
that the appellant told him that her husband had raped her. The  judge  held
that against her without giving her an opportunity  to  respond,  which  was
contrary to the principles of fairness and natural  justice.  Mr  West  also
relied on the grant of permission  which  referred  to  the  judge  arguably
erring by failing to consider whether the appellant's claim  was  consistent
with the background evidence as to gender-based violence. In  conclusion  Mr
West submitted that there was ample evidence for the judge to  have  allowed
the appeal to the lower standard of proof.

Mr McVeety submitted that whether or not there was evidence that could  have
led to the appeal being allowed, the relevant issue was  whether  the  judge
erred in law and he did not. He gave valid reasons why he did not  find  the
appellant's account credible. He was entitled to give  the  weight  that  he
did to the medical reports as there were  considerable  differences  between
what the appellant told the doctors and her evidence  for  the  appeal.  The
appellant had given the doctors the impression that she lived alone with  no
friends or support, which was completely not the case and she had  therefore
misrepresented the truth. It was never in dispute  that  the  appellant  had
suffered terrible burns, but the medical experts were not able  to  say  how
the burns were caused, other than by reference to the  appellant's  account.
Mr McVeety submitted that the grant of permission  seriously  misrepresented
what the judge had said at [35] about the appellant's disclosure  of  having
been raped, as it was never held against her as a late  disclosure.  As  for
the appellant's immigration history, the judge was fully  entitled  to  take
into account the fact that the appellant only made her  asylum  claim  after
12 years and had never previously mentioned being  abused  by  her  husband.
The section 8 issues in this case were extremely  relevant.  Whilst  it  was
clear that something terrible had happened to the appellant, it was for  the
judge to decide whether or not it happened in the circumstances claimed.

Mr West reiterated the points previously  made  in  response  and  submitted
that there was a fundamental lack of reasoning by the judge  and  a  failure
to put matters to the appellant which were relied upon  as  undermining  her
credibility, to the extent that his conclusions were perverse. He  submitted
that  the  judge  failed  to  follow  the  approach   in   Chiver   (Asylum;
Discrimination; Employment; Persecution) (Romania) [1994] UKIAT  10758  when
making his adverse  credibility  findings  and  failed  to  give  a  liberal
application of the benefit of the doubt in the case of a vulnerable  person.


Discussion and Findings

Despite the very lengthy and detailed grounds and submissions from Mr  West,
it seems to me that his challenge  to  the  judge's  decision  is  simply  a
disagreement with the adverse credibility findings dressed up as  a  reasons
and perversity challenge.

The first ground challenges the judge's approach to  the  medical  evidence.
The submission made in that regard was effectively that the judge was  bound
to accept that the appellant's burns were  caused  by  her  husband  in  the
circumstances claimed in light  of  the  medical  reports.  However,  as  Mr
McVeety properly  submitted,  the  medical  reports  went  no  further  than
concluding that the appellant had been  severely  burned  and  had  suffered
psychologically as a result of the  trauma,  but  they  could  not  possibly
confirm from the scarring that the burns  were  caused  by  the  appellant's
husband pushing her into a stove. That was a matter  for  the  judge  on  an
assessment of the evidence in the round.

That was precisely what the judge did - he  assessed  the  evidence  in  the
round and accorded the weight to it that he considered appropriate in  light
of the various inconsistencies and discrepancies in  the  evidence  and  the
significant delay by the appellant in raising the matter  and  applying  for
asylum. The judge was not unsympathetic to the appellant and  he  recognised
and accepted that she had suffered traumatic experiences  in  her  life  and
had mental health issues and treated her as a vulnerable  witness.  However,
this was not a simple matter of a  vulnerable  witness  being  reluctant  to
disclose a traumatic past of gender-based violence and rape, but there  were
numerous inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence  and  there  was  clear
evidence of misrepresentations by the  appellant  which  were  not  properly
explained or justified. The judge was perfectly entitled to find that  those
inconsistencies and  misrepresentations  could  not  be  overlooked  and  to
consider them as undermining the appellant's credibility  as  a  witness  of
the  truth  and  undermining  the  conclusions  reached   by   the   medical
professionals.

Mr McVeety referred in particular to  the  misrepresentations  made  by  the
appellant to the doctors about her circumstances, portraying  herself  as  a
lonely individual with no friends or family and no means  of  support,  when
it was clear from the many statements and letters of support  produced  that
she had a good support network and close friends, some of whom  appeared  to
be residing at the same address as her.  Dr Turvill, at [99] of  her  report
described the appellant as having reported that "for most of the  time,  she
feels lonely and isolated and ...she has no friends or  anyone  to  turn  to
for support" and Dr Stein said of the appellant,  at  [12]  of  his  report,
that "she has stayed with friends here but basically she lives on  her  own.
She has no one to support her and she's been on her own the  whole  time  in
the UK." Yet, as the judge said at [27], the  appellant  had  made  a  human
rights claim in 2008 based partly on her family life  with  a  partner  with
whom she was renting a house and, at [29], had made an  EEA  residence  card
application and appeal in 2013/ 2014 on the basis of her  relationship  with
her Portuguese partner which, according to  her  witness  statement,  was  a
four-year relationship.

Accordingly, on that  basis  alone  and  even  aside  from  the  many  other
concerns the judge  had  about  the  appellant's  evidence,  the  judge  was
perfectly entitled to be cautious when considering the doctors' views  about
the appellant's history and about the causes of her burns and to accord  the
reports the weight that he  did.  There  was  nothing  inconsistent  in  the
judge's approach with the guidance in Mibanga, SA (Somalia) and  JL  (China)
and I find no merit in the grounds and in  Mr  West's  submissions  in  that
regard.

Likewise, I find no merit in the grounds challenging  the  judge's  reliance
on the appellant's immigration history. Mr McVeety  submitted  that  caselaw
establishes that if immigration history has  an  effect  on  an  appellant's
narrative, then it can go  to  credibility,  and  clearly  that  has  to  be
correct. The judge was perfectly entitled to consider that  the  appellant's
failure previously to mention abuse from her husband, the 12 year  delay  in
her asylum claim  and  her  previous  misrepresentations  and  unmeritorious
applications had an impact on  the  assessment  of  her  current  claim  and
adversely affected her credibility. I do not agree with  Mr  West  that  the
judge's reference to the appellant's 2008 application, at [26] and  [27]  of
his decision, was unlawful  in  any  way.  The  judge  was  not  making  any
assumptions or speculating unjustifiably in considering, as he did at  [26],
that the appellant had failed to mention in that application domestic  abuse
from her husband resulting in catastrophic burns. Judge  Baldwin's  decision
confirms at [5] that he had the appellant's application, the refusal  letter
and her submissions and bundle before him when  he  made  his  findings  and
Judge Bulpitt was perfectly entitled to conclude  that,  if  that  had  been
part of the appellant's Article 3 claim, Judge Baldwin would have  mentioned
it in his decision rather than stating that the appellant had not  explained
the 'dispute' upon  which  she  based  her  claim.  The  fact  that  such  a
significant matter had never been mentioned by the appellant in any  of  her
previous applications, in her previous Article 3 claim and  in  her  written
evidence before a previous Tribunal was undoubtedly  a  matter  which  Judge
Bulpitt was entitled to conclude  as  undermining  the  credibility  of  her
claim.

I do not accept that there was any error by  Judge  Bulpitt  in  relying  on
late disclosure by the appellant and I entirely agree with Mr  McVeety  that
the grant of permission is misconceived in that respect and is based upon  a
misunderstanding  and  misinterpretation  of  the  appellant's  claim.   The
reference by the judge at [35] to the appellant's disclosure to her  witness
of being raped was not made in the context  of  adverse  findings  based  on
late disclosure and was not a matter from which the judge made  any  adverse
observations or findings. The reference was  made  in  the  context  of  the
appellant having close friends in whom she could confide  and  to  whom  she
could turn for support, which was contrary  to  the  account  given  to  the
medical professionals, as discussed above. The  question  of  a  failure  to
consider background evidence relating to  violence  against  women  and  the
consistency of late disclosure with gender-based violence,  as  referred  to
by UTJ Canavan in granting permission, was never a ground of  appeal  relied
upon by the appellant, as Mr West conceded, and was not  an  issue  relevant
to the challenge actually made to the judge's decision.

As for the assertion in the second ground  that  the  judge  failed  to  put
matters to the appellant which were  later  considered  as  undermining  her
credibility, in so far as the example is given at [34]  of  the  grounds  in
relation to the appellant's failure to  mention  rape  in  her  evidence,  I
refer to my observations above, that there was  never  any  adverse  finding
made by the judge on  that  basis,  either  against  the  appellant  or  her
witnesses. In any event, the judge was not required  to  put  every  adverse
point to the appellant.  The  appellant  was  legally  represented  and  her
representatives would have been fully aware of the issues taken against  her
by the respondent and therefore had ample opportunity to  address  those  at
the hearing. The appellant was fully aware that the respondent had  concerns
about the credibility of her  claim  arising  from  the  extended  delay  in
mentioning abuse from her husband and it was therefore for the appellant  to
explain why she had not expressed a fear or  made  a  claim  on  that  basis
previously. In so far as Mr West submitted that the appellant may well  have
mentioned the abuse from her husband in her 2008 application in the  Article
3 grounds and that the judge was wrong not so to find, I do not  agree  that
the judge was required to speculate or had any justifiable basis upon  which
to do so. It was clear from the refusal  decision,  in  particular  at  [4],
which referred to the basis of the Article 3 claim made in  2008/9,  and  at
[26], that the respondent did not consider that to have been  the  case  and
drew adverse conclusions from the appellant's 12-year delay in  stating  her
problems and claiming to have been subjected to horrific  domestic  violence
by  her  husband.  It  was  therefore  for  the  appellant  to  provide   an
explanation for that at the hearing and it was entirely open  to  the  judge
to draw adverse conclusions from her failure to do so.

What is  apparent  from  the  grounds,  furthermore,  is  that  whilst  they
criticise the judge for making  adverse  credibility  findings  in  general,
they avoid making any proper response to the judge's specific concerns.  The
judge noted that the appellant had made false statements when  applying  for
a visa for the UK on two occasions and had returned to India at a time  when
she had a visa for the UK and was claiming to be in danger from her  husband
(at [25]). The judge also identified inconsistencies in the  evidence  about
the  appellant's  previous  relationships,  her  current  circumstances  (as
mentioned above), where she stayed after the incident when  she  was  burned
(at [32]), her hospital treatment and the  funding  of  that  treatment  (at
[33]), whether she was working in the UK (at [36]) and the care of  her  son
(at [38] and [39]).  Other  than  criticising  the  judge  for  not  putting
discrepancies to the appellant for her response, which I do not accept  that
he was required to do in any event, there is no proper challenge to  any  of
these matters which the judge was perfectly entitled to  consider  and  take
into account. The judge also made observations at  [35]  about  the  witness
statements leading him to accord them little weight and  again  the  grounds
provide no response to those adverse findings. The judge  referred  to  some
of the statements being identical and that is indeed the  case.  Aside  from
the example given by the judge at [35] I note that  the  statements  from  S
Husain and S Afzal are almost identical. The judge  was  perfectly  entitled
to consider that that undermined the reliability of the  statements  and  to
conclude as he did at the end of [35].

For all of these reasons I find that the grounds disclose no errors  of  law
in the judge's decision. The judge, having due  regard  to  the  appellant's
previous traumatic experiences in India and  her  vulnerability  and  mental
health issues, undertook a detailed and careful assessment of  the  evidence
and provided cogent reasons for making the adverse findings that he did.  He
was fully and properly entitled to reach the conclusions that he did and  to
dismiss the appeal on the basis that he did.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision.  The  decision  to
dismiss the appeal stands.


     Anonymity

   The anonymity direction made by the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.


Signed:  S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                               Dated: 24
February 2021
