
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00562/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17 October 2018                            |On 12 November 2018          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY


                                   Between

                                  MR P S N
                        (Anonymity has been directed)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Muzenda, Longfellow Solicitors, Beckenham
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen  of  Zimbabwe  born  on  9  June  1977.   He
    appealed the respondent's decision of  29  December  2017  refusing  to
    grant him asylum and humanitarian protection and refusing his claim  on
    human rights grounds.  His appeal was heard by Judge of the  First-Tier
    Tribunal Dhinji on 7 February 2018 and dismissed on all  grounds  in  a
    decision promulgated on 12 March 2018.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Chapman  on  20  August  2018.   The
    permission states that the First-Tier Tribunal Judge made an error,  as
    having found the appellant to be bisexual she disregarded his  evidence
    that concealment of his sexual orientation  would  solely  be  for  the
    purpose of avoiding the insurmountable obstacles that would follow non-
    concealment and in misunderstanding the evidence  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's intention that on  return  he  would  enter  into  same-sex
    relationships.  The appellant's former partner is wanted by the  police
    in Zimbabwe and has had to relocate to South Africa but he could easily
    be extradited to face prosecution and the appellant would be treated as
    socius criminis.  The permission states that the Judge  also  erred  in
    her conclusion that the appellant would not  face  persecution  on  the
    basis of his MDC activities in  light  of  the  fact  that  these  were
    accepted. She failed to consider future risk on the basis of  continued
    MDC activities and she rejected the letter from the MDC and  failed  to
    apply the risk assessment guidelines with respect  to  arrival  at  the
    airport.  The permission states that the Judge appeared to  be  fixated
    with the phrase  'significant  MDC  profile'  and  overlooked  relevant
    political involvement.

 3. There is no Rule 24 response.

The Hearing

 4. The appellant's representative submitted that  on  return  to  Zimbabwe
    this appellant is likely to continue to have sexual relationships  with
    men.  He submitted that although he has made up with his  wife  and  is
    going to stay with his wife he has not changed his sexuality.  The only
    reason he went back to his wife was because of the consequences  if  he
    did not do that as his family members have threatened to report him  to
    the police because of a relationship he states he had  with  Andrew  in
    Zimbabwe.  His family members did not report him because he said he was
    going to stay with his wife.  The  representative  referred  to  Andrew
    having had to flee to South Africa because of the relationship  and  he
    submitted that the Judge missed the point of these consequences in  her
    decision.  He submitted that on return  the  appellant  would  have  to
    conceal his sexuality and I was referred  to  the  case  of  HJ  (Iran)
    [2010] UKSCV31.  His  representative  submitted  that  the  appellant's
    sexuality is part of his DNA and at  7.3  of  the  decision  the  Judge
    accepts that  he  is  bisexual.   He  submitted  that  the  reason  the
    appellant will have to  conceal  his  sexuality  is  because  he  fears
    persecution in Zimbabwe.

 5. With regard to the appellant's political activities the  representative
    referred to the Judge accepting that the appellant  has  been  involved
    with the MDC and the Judge accepts that he came to the attention of the
    authorities in November 2016 when  he  was  captured  and  beaten.   He
    submitted that the Judge also accepts that his MDC activities have been
    continued in the United Kingdom and he submitted  that  the  Judge  has
    failed to reach a conclusion about this, which must be an error as this
    would put him at additional risk on return.

 6. He submitted that the Judge did not engage with the risk assessment  of
    what would happen to the appellant at the  airport  on  return  and  he
    submitted that this has not changed since the country guidance case  of
    HS (Zimbabwe) [2007] 00094 (Civ).  He submitted that every returnee  to
    Zimbabwe is interviewed at the airport.  He submitted that the COI have
    taken over immigration control at the airport and have  a  manifest  so
    they know who is travelling to Zimbabwe and are able to identify people
    with a significant MDC profile.  He submitted that  the  Judge  accepts
    that the appellant has a political profile but states that  it  is  low
    level.  He submitted that the Judge has not explained what she finds  a
    significant level would be.  He submitted  that  as  the  appellant  is
    continuing with his political activities in  the  United  Kingdom  this
    must make his political profile significant.

 7. I was referred to the case of HS (Zimbabwe) [2007]  UKAIT  00094  (IAC)
    about returning asylum seekers to Zimbabwe.  He submitted that the Zanu-
    Pf have people in the United Kingdom infiltrating MDC groups  and  this
    must affect the appellant on return when he goes through the  screening
    process.  He submitted that it is not  just  the  leaders  who  are  in
    danger on return.  I was referred to 2018 when nine people were  killed
    by the Army in Zimbabwe.

 8. The representative referred me to the case of CM (Zimbabwe) [2013] UKUT
    00059 (IAC) which deals with the position being different for returnees
    who have no Zanu PF profile and he submitted  that  this  appellant  is
    therefore likely to be at risk on return and will certainly be at  risk
    if he continues to carry on with his MDC activities in  Zimbabwe  which
    he states he will do.

 9. The representative submitted that this is an appellant  who  approached
    the police about an attack and was detained and beaten and he  will  be
    at risk on return if  his  sexuality  and  his  political  opinion  are
    considered together.

10. He submitted that on return the appellant may well be  associated  with
    his ex-boyfriend Andrew who has had to  flee  to  South  Africa.   This
    could be a problem for him.  He submitted that although the  background
    evidence states that there are rare prosecutions of Zimbabweans because
    of their sexuality, this is because they hide  their  sexuality.   They
    know the consequences if they do not do that.

11. He submitted that the appellant's wife has told her relatives about his
    sexuality and although she did not report this to the police his friend
    Andrew was reported and this is why he had to flee.  He submitted  that
    this increases the appellant's risk on return.  The appellant was  also
    involved with a number of  pressure  groups  and  it  was  after  these
    activities that he was beaten and  detained.   He  submitted  that  the
    Judge was wrong to state that this happened to the  appellant  in  2016
    for reasons other than his MDC activities.  He submitted that the Judge
    did not understand the evidence before her and this was an  error.   He
    submitted that what the appellant was doing before he  was  beaten  was
    connected with his MDC activism.

12. I was asked to find that  there  are  errors  of  law  in  the  Judge's
    decision and allow the appeal.

13. The Presenting Officer submitted that the representative's  submissions
    seem to be telling me I have to come to a different conclusion in  this
    claim but he submitted that no error of law has been raised.

14. With regard to the appellant's sexuality, the  Judge  states  that  she
    accepts he is bisexual.  She states that the case  of  LZ  [2011]  UKUT
    00487 (IAC) makes it clear that in general Zimbabwean men  are  not  at
    risk of persecution solely  because  of  their  sexuality.   The  Judge
    refers to this at 7.9 of the decision. The Presenting Officer submitted
    that this appellant is not openly gay,  he  is  bisexual  and  will  be
    staying with his wife.  I was  referred  to  his  asylum  interview  at
    questions 205 to 210 when he was asked about his relationship with  his
    wife and he described it as good and that since he came to  the  United
    Kingdom he has not had any relationships with men and he is  trying  to
    be faithful to his wife.  He submitted  that  he  has  not  joined  any
    bisexual support groups although he admits to  watching  porn.   It  is
    clear from his evidence that he wants to try to be faithful to his wife
    and he is not saying that the reason he will stay faithful is, that  if
    he does not, the authorities will persecute him.  His intention is that
    he will not have any other relationships and that the  authorities  are
    not aware of his being bisexual.  He  submitted  therefore,  that  this
    appellant on return will not be at risk because of his  sexuality.   He
    referred to the said case  of  LZ  which  deals  with  homosexuals  not
    bisexuals. With regard to Andrew having to flee to  South  Africa,  the
    Presenting Officer submitted that there would  be  no  reason  for  the
    Zimbabwean authorities to pursue Andrew in South Africa  and  link  the
    appellant to him.  He submitted that the Judge  has  not  misunderstood
    the evidence and the Judge has given proper reasons  for  the  findings
    she has reached.  Her findings are based on the  evidence  before  her,
    including the objective evidence and the appellant's oral evidence.

15. With regard to the appellant's political activities, he submitted  that
    he accepts that the said case of HS is the  relevant  country  guidance
    case but this case was  decided  in  2007  and  it  is  now  2018.   He
    submitted that this  is  the  country  guidance  case  that  should  be
    followed but the CIO took over  Harare  Airport  because  of  President
    Mugabe who is no longer in office.  He submitted  that  the  Judge  has
    dealt with the country guidance in his decision at paragraph  5.10  and
    has referred to  the  pressure  groups  the  appellant  states  he  was
    involved in.  He submitted that it is clear that it was because of  his
    involvement in one these pressure groups that he  went  to  Chiota  and
    campaigned and that  evening  was  attacked  by  Zanu  PF  youths.   He
    submitted that it seems that his arrest and detention were not  related
    to the MDC but was related to his political  presence  in  a  different
    category.  There has been nothing further about this there have been no
    repercussions.  At paragraph 7.11 of the decision the Judge deals  with
    this incident which took place in November 2016.  The  police  did  not
    open an official complaint and the Judge finds that there do not appear
    to have been any significant difficulties because of this.   The  Judge
    finds that the appellant is not on a wanted  list  and  the  Presenting
    Officer  submitted  that  the  appellant   did   not   experience   any
    difficulties before leaving Zimbabwe or on leaving Zimbabwe on his  own
    passport. The Judge at paragraph 7.11 states  that  it  is  implausible
    that the appellant's name would appear on the list, only after he  came
    to the United Kingdom.  The Judge states that had he  been  on  a  list
    before he left he might well have encountered difficulties leaving.

16. The Presenting Officer submitted that the Judge has considered at  7.14
    of the decision the appellant's sur  place  activities  in  the  United
    Kingdom and the Judge notes that the appellant did not join the MDC  in
    the United Kingdom until after he  received  the  refusal  letter.   He
    submitted that at 7.17  of  the  decision  the  Judge  deals  with  the
    appellant's extent of participation in the MDC in  the  United  Kingdom
    and the Judge accepts that the CIO do send infiltrators to  the  UK  to
    discover who is opposing the regime, but in the case of HS it is  clear
    that  all  low-level  activities  are  unlikely  to  be  known  to  the
    authorities.  The Judge states that no evidence has  been  produced  to
    support the appellant's assertion that his name  and  photo  have  been
    published  in  media  disseminated  in  Zimbabwe.   He  has  only  been
    attending MDC meetings in the  United  Kingdom  for  five  months.   He
    submitted that the Judge has given proper reasons for finding that this
    appellant will not be of interest to the authorities because of his MDC
    profile.  He submitted that the appellant will be returning as a failed
    asylum seeker and the Judge has grappled with all the relevant  matters
    in his findings.  He submitted that the Judge has not  mischaracterised
    the evidence and there is no material error of law in the decision.  He
    submitted that the application should be dismissed.  Risk on return  at
    the airport has been considered by the Judge at 7.20 of the decision.

17. The appellant's representative submitted that the Judge is  fixated  on
    the appellant's MDC profile and whether it is significant or not and he
    submitted that it does not require to be significant for the  appellant
    to have a problem on return.  If the appellant goes to a rural area  he
    will be subjected to a loyalty test, although he may be able to  return
    to Harare with less problems.

18. He submitted that it is likely that this appellant is on a list and  it
    is likely that he will engage in political activities on his return  to
    Zimbabwe.  He submitted that he wants to continue  with  his  political
    activities and maintain his sexuality and he submitted that  the  Judge
    does not deal with these  matters  properly  and  does  not  apply  the
    relevant country guidance case law.  The appellant states that he  will
    continue with these activities and there must be a  material  error  of
    law in the Judge's decision.

Decision and Reasons

19. Firstly, in connection with the appellant's bisexuality the  Judge  has
    accepted that he is bisexual but  has  noted  that  the  appellant  has
    confirmed in his asylum  interview  that  he  will  be  continuing  his
    relationship with his wife and he wishes to be faithful  to  his  wife,
    and although he may consider himself to be bisexual the Judge does  not
    believe that the authorities will be aware of  this,  particularly  as,
    since he has been in the United Kingdom where being bisexual is  not  a
    problem, he has not had any sexual relationships with men or women.  At
    interview  the  appellant  stated  that  he  did  not  think  that  his
    bisexuality would put him at risk on return to  Zimbabwe.  Prosecutions
    against gay men are rare in Zimbabwe and the Judge  states  that  there
    would be no reason for the appellant to be in danger because Andrew has
    gone to South Africa. As I find that the authorities are unaware of the
    appellant's sexuality there will be no risk to the appellant on  return
    and based on his answers at interview  it  is  clear  that  he  has  no
    intention of having relationships  with  men  or  women  on  return  to
    Zimbabwe.  I accept that he will remain bisexual but  he  wants  to  be
    faithful to his wife and will do all he can to continue with this.

20. The Judge has dealt with the appellant's sexuality in the decision  and
    has explained her findings properly.  The Judge at 5.8  refers  to  the
    appellant's asylum interview where the appellant stated: "The  bisexual
    thing isn't really  anything.   I  was  thinking  of  withdrawing  it."
    Clearly any threat has subsided.

21. With regard to the appellant's political activities and his support  of
    the MDC, the Judge finds and explains why she finds that the  appellant
    is an extremely low-level member of the MDC  in  Zimbabwe  and  in  the
    United Kingdom.  His beating was because  of  the  pressure  groups  he
    belonged to and the Judge noted that he only  joined  the  MDC  in  the
    United Kingdom after his asylum application was refused.  The Judge has
    also noted his low-level membership of the MDC in  the  United  Kingdom
    and does not believe that his  name  would  be  on  a  list.   She  has
    explained why in her decision.

22. The Judge accepts that MDC groups in the United Kingdom are infiltrated
    by informers but finds that based on the evidence the appellant has  no
    significant post or profile.  The appellant will not be  in  danger  on
    return to Zimbabwe because of his political opinion.

23. The Judge therefore accepts that the appellant is bisexual and  accepts
    that he is a member of the MDC but finds that he will not be at risk on
    return because of either of these things and gives proper  reasons  for
    all her findings.  She notes in  particular  that  the  appellant  will
    conceal his sexuality because he wants to be faithful to his wife,  not
    because he fears persecution.  The appellant is not openly gay and  his
    intention is not to pursue  relationships  with  men.  The  appellant's
    evidence is that the police did not open an official complaint after he
    was beaten in 2016 and the Judge explains why the appellant will not be
    at risk on return because of his political activities.

24. I have noted the country guidance cases referred to.  If this appellant
    returns he will go to Harare where he came from and where his wife  and
    children live. Based on  the  objective  evidence  he  is  unlikely  to
    encounter any difficulties at the airport or subsequently and  this  is
    referred to by the Judge at 7.15 of the decision.

25. I find that there is no error  of  law  in  the  First-Tier  Tribunal's
    decision promulgated on 12 March 2018  and  that  that  decision  shall
    stand.

26. Anonymity has been directed.

Signed                                  Date 2 November 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge IAM Murray
