
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00431/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 16 January 2019                      |On 15 February 2019                |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY


                                   Between

                                    HMAA
                           (Anonymity Order Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Swain of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born  in  1983.   He  appealed
    against a decision of the respondent made on 22 December 2017 to refuse
    him asylum.

 2. The basis of his claim is that he is a member of  a  particular  social
    group, a gay man who would face a real risk  of  persecution  for  that
    reason if returned.

 3. The respondent did not accept that the  appellant's  sexuality  was  as
    claimed.  He had not provided a reliable account of his discovering his
    sexual identity in Bangladesh.  His account was vague and  implausible.
    His claim to have been disowned by his father to whom he had  disclosed
    his sexuality was not believed nor that his father's  membership  of  a
    fundamentalist party would put him at further risk.

 4. He appealed.

First-tier Hearing

 5. Following a hearing at Taylor House on 12 July 2018 Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Traynor, who heard evidence from the  appellant  and  two
    male witnesses, ND and AH, dismissed the appeal.

 6. He found for the  reasons  he  gave  at  paragraphs  [60-69]  that  the
    appellant is gay.

 7. He found that the appellant, who first came to the UK with leave  as  a
    student in 2009 and subsequently  gained  leave  as  a  Tier  1  Highly
    Skilled Migrant, has been in a committed gay relationship with ND since
    2015. He accepted the evidence of the appellant and ND about how  their
    relationship had developed.  The evidence of AH was also  accepted.  He
    had given evidence of  his  knowledge  of  the  appellant's  developing
    sexuality in Bangladesh and of the  appellant's  relationship  with  ND
    here.

 8. Whilst accepting that he may have been disowned by his father  when  he
    disclosed his sexuality to his  family  in  2015,  the  judge  did  not
    believe that his father would make the matter  public  thereby  putting
    him at risk. His claim  to  have  received  threats  from  unidentified
    persons was considered to be an attempt, falsely, to bolster his claim.

 9. Despite finding that the appellant is a gay man, the  judge  determined
    that the appellant would not be at risk of  persecution  in  Bangladesh
    for the reasons set out at [70 to 83].

10. In summary, it was a relevant  factor  when  determining  the  risk  of
    persecution  on  return  that  the  appellant's  first  and  only   gay
    relationship before he left Bangladesh for the UK and which lasted  for
    several   years,   had,   because   Bangladesh   prohibits   same   sex
    relationships, been conducted [70] "in a very discreet  manner  to  the
    extent that no one, apart from them, knew of its existence"  which  did
    not cause the appellant any difficulty.  That was a relevant factor  to
    be taken into account when applying the guidance in HJ  (Iran)  and  HT
    (Cameroon) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 31.

11. There was no  evidence  to  suggest  that  the  appellant  is  an  LGBT
    activist. He and ND [72] "do not socialise a great deal, rarely  go  to
    nightclubs  due  to  lack  of  funds  and  otherwise   continue   their
    relationship discreetly." They are "living a relatively quiet life."

12. The question posited by HJ (Iran) is whether it would be  possible  for
    the appellant to return to live in Bangladesh and live a discreet  life
    as a gay man.  He stated he would not be able to do so as he wishes  to
    live an openly gay lifestyle as in the UK [76].

13. The judge, repeating that the appellant "has, to a large extent, led  a
    relatively discreet gay existence" in the UK, had no doubt  that  there
    are places in Bangladesh where  the  appellant  could  do  so  and  the
    background information supported that proposition [79].

14. The judge had to be "satisfied that if the appellant is  to  return  to
    Bangladesh he would be able to conduct himself as a discreet gay man in
    that country."  No evidence had been provided to show why the appellant
    and ND would not be able to conduct  their  same  "quiet  and  discreet
    lifestyle in Dhaka, a large city which has a growing  LGBT  community,"
    despite the killing of LGBT activists by  Islamic  extremists  in  2016
    [80].

15. Moreover, the background evidence indicated that the  police  in  Dhaka
    are  likely  to  take  action  when  a  threatened  gay  person  sought
    protection.  There was no evidence to suggest that the law relating  to
    same sex relationships is being enforced to suppress all LGBT  activity
    in Bangladesh, and in particular, in Dhaka [80].

16. No  evidence  had  been  provided,  therefore,  to  establish  why  the
    appellant and ND could not live in Bangladesh [81].

Error of law hearing

17. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  which  was  granted  on  26
    November 2018.

18. At the error of law hearing Mr Swain's main  submission  was  that  the
    judge misapplied the guidance in HJ (Iran) when determining whether the
    appellant should be expected to live discreetly in Bangladesh as a  gay
    man.  He should not be expected to live discreetly if the  reasons  for
    doing so would be to avoid persecution.  His evidence was that he would
    not wish to live discreetly there but feared that if he lived openly he
    would be persecuted.  Also, contrary to  the  judge's  conclusion,  the
    background material, which was before the  judge,  indicates  that  the
    appellant would be at likely risk of persecution as an openly  gay  man
    and that state protection and  internal  relocation  would  be  neither
    adequate nor viable. He invited me to set the decision aside and remake
    it by allowing it.


19. Ms Cunha's response was not wholly clear.  She said  that  the  judge's
    decision showed material error (at [72]) by apparently suggesting  that
    the appellant not being an LGBT activist was  relevant  in  finding  he
    would not be at risk.   She  said  the  case  should  be  remitted  for
    rehearing.

20. I pointed out that there was no challenge to the judge's findings  that
    the appellant is gay and that the appropriate  course  was  for  me  to
    remake the decision in light of the findings as to how he would seek to
    lead his life and the background  material.   She  agreed.   Her  final
    comment was that she "was not strongly opposing"  Mr  Swain's  position
    which I took to be a lack of opposition to the decision being remade as
    allowed.

Consideration

21. I agree with Mr Swain.  HJ (Iran) paragraphs 78 to 83 made  clear  that
    an appellant should not be expected to live discreetly in Bangladesh if
    the reasons for doing so would be to avoid persecution.

22. Lord Rodger said this: (at [82]): "When an applicant applies for asylum
    on the ground of a well-founded fear of persecution because he is  gay,
    the tribunal must first ask itself  whether  it  is  satisfied  on  the
    evidence that he is gay,  or  that  he  would  be  treated  as  gay  by
    potential persecutors in  his  country  of  nationality.   If  so,  the
    tribunal must then ask itself whether it is satisfied on the  available
    evidence that gay people who live openly would be liable to persecution
    in the appellant's country of nationality. If so the tribunal  must  go
    on to consider what the  individual  applicant  would  do  if  he  were
    returned to that country.  If the applicant would in fact  live  openly
    and thereby be exposed to a real risk of persecution,  then  he  has  a
    well-founded fear of persecution - even if he could avoid the  risk  by
    living 'discreetly'.  If on the other hand, the tribunal concludes that
    the applicant would in fact live discreetly and so  avoid  persecution,
    it must go on to ask itself why  he  would  do  so.   If  the  tribunal
    concludes that the applicant would choose  to  live  discreetly  simply
    because that was how he himself would  wish  to  live,  or  because  of
    social  pressures,  e.g.  not  wanting  to  distress  his  parents,  or
    embarrass his friends, then his application should be rejected ..."

23. As indicated it is clear that the judge accepted the  evidence  of  the
    appellant and the witnesses as to his sexuality and his wish to live an
    openly gay lifestyle in Bangladesh as he  does  here,  albeit  somewhat
    restricted by a lack of funds. Such includes going to gay clubs [35,45]
    and being a member of an LGBT support group called Imaan  for  whom  he
    undertakes voluntary work [27]. By concluding that the appellant  could
    live discreetly in Bangladesh and not taking account of his  desire  to
    live openly, the judge erred in his construction of HJ (Iran) such that
    the decision must be set aside.

24. I proceed to remake the decision.

25. I note the Country  Policy  and  Information  Note  Bangladesh:  sexual
    orientation and gender identity (November 2017) and in  particular  the
    following: At [2.3.7] "[Legal provisions] ... have reportedly sometimes
    been used by police as a pretext  to  arrest,  harass,  intimidate  and
    extort LGBT persons, primarily gay men ... There have also been reports
    of physical and sexual assaults against LGBT persons."

26. At [2.3.8] "Whilst same sex sexual activity between men is illegal, the
    state rarely arrests and prosecutes gay  and  bisexual  men.   However,
    other  laws  are  sometimes  used  as  a  pretext  to  arrest,  harass,
    intimidate and ill-treat gay men ..."

27. At [2.3.12] "There have been some reports of violent behaviour  towards
    LGBT persons, who are open about  their  sexual  orientation...by  non-
    state actors. Among  the  perpetrators  are  'mastans'  (local  thugs),
    family members and Islamist groups."

28. At [2.3.14 and 2.3.15] "There is an indication that the rise in  social
    media has led to an increase in hate speech against LGBT people. Whilst
    there are support groups for LGBT  persons,  some  have  reduced  their
    activities following the murder of two gay rights  activists  in  2016.
    There is evidence that the LGBT 'community' is closed and private  ....
    Bangladesh's first Rainbow ('gay pride') rally took place in  Dhaka  in
    April 2014 and was repeated in April 2015.  The event planned for  2016
    had to be  cancelled  due  to  threats  and  opposition  from  Islamist
    groups."



29. At [2.3.16] "In general LGBT persons are not open due to social stigma,
    pressures and norms,  and  to  avoid  a  level  of  discrimination  and
    violence arising from this.  LGBT  persons  who  openly  express  their
    sexual orientation  or  gender  identity  are  likely  to  be  socially
    excluded, receive threats of violence and, in some cases, (particularly
    gay men), may be attacked by non-state actors ..."

30. And at [2.3.17] "Therefore, in general, an LGBT  person  who  does  not
    conceal their sexual orientation ... may be at risk of treatment, which
    by its nature and repetition amounts to persecution or serious harm."

31. I note further (under "Protection") at [2.4.5] "In  general  the  state
    appears able but unwilling to offer effective protection and the person
    will not  be  able  to  avail  themselves  of  the  protection  of  the
    authorities."

32. As for internal relocation [2.5.3] "... internal relocation will not be
    an  option  if  it  depends  on  the  person  concealing  their  sexual
    orientation ... in the proposed new location for fear of persecution."

33.  Finally,  (under  "Public  opinion")  at  [7.3.3]  "The   gay   rights
    publication LGBT Weekly noted in April 2014 that 'any discussion around
    sex and sexuality is taboo'.  In  December  2014  the  Dhaka  Telegraph
    observed that 'homosexuality is still considered  taboo  in  Bangladesh
    ... More than 50 per cent [of  people  surveyed]  said  they  lived  in
    constant fear of their sexual orientation being out.'" And  at  [8.1.5]
    (under "Societal violence and discrimination") Human  Rights  Watch  in
    April 2016, having interviewed LGBT people  in  Bangladesh  noted  they
    "...faced threats of violence,  particularly  after  homophobic  public
    comments by Islamic leaders...In recent years, LGBT  people  have  also
    been targeted with extremist rhetoric..."

34. I find the appellant's situation, in summary, to be  as  follows.   The
    appellant is gay, he has lived openly as a gay man in the UK  with  his
    partner, going to gay clubs and being involved in a LGBT support group,
    and if returned to Bangladesh would wish to life openly as  a  gay  man
    there.  He does not wish and is not  required  to  conceal  his  sexual
    identity or otherwise live discreetly for  fear  of  persecution.   The
    background material indicates that were he to live openly as a gay  man
    in Bangladesh he would be at real risk of persecution as a member of  a
    particular social group and that there is no sufficiency of  protection
    and no internal relocation option.

35. The appeal, thus, succeeds.

Notice of Decision

36. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shows material  error  of  law.
    It is set aside and remade as follows:-

      The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.



Signed                                             Date 11 February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway


An anonymity order is made.  Unless and until a tribunal  or  court  directs
otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.  Failure to comply with  this
order could lead to contempt of court proceedings.








