
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00692/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 May 2019                       |On 05 June 2019                      |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     a s
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Bustani, Counsel, instructed by Chancery
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge N M K Lawrence ("the judge"), promulgated  on  14  March
    2019,  by  which  he  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's decision of 11 January 2019, which in turn had refused his
    protection and human rights claims.

 2. The core of the  Appellant's  protection  claim  was  as  follows.   He
    asserted that he had been and continued to be an active member  of  the
    Bangladeshi National Party (BNP) and that this had led to him coming to
    the adverse attention of the Bangladeshi authorities.  He said that his
    stepfather was a prominent member of the Awami League and that this too
    caused him problems.  As a  result  of  his  activities  the  Appellant
    asserted  that  legal  proceedings  had  been  issued  against  him  in
    Bangladesh leading to an arrest warrant.  He claimed that he  would  be
    at risk on return to his home country.




The judge's decision

 3. The judge sets out his findings on the evidence in some detail  between
    paragraphs 9 and 34 of his decision.  A number of  adverse  credibility
    findings are made but I  summarise  those  which  are  the  subject  of
    challenge by the Appellant only at this stage.

 4. The judge found that documentary evidence from the BNP  was  unreliable
    because of the absence  of  what  was  described  as  "contemporaneous"
    information relating to the Appellant's past activities in  Bangladesh.
    The judge found  that  the  Appellant  had  embellished  his  level  of
    involvement in politics over the course  of  his  claim.   He  was  not
    satisfied that footage of the Appellant at a demonstration  seen  on  a
    DVD at the hearing had in fact  been  broadcast  on  an  internet  news
    service, as claimed.  Documents including a  First  Information  Report
    and an arrest warrant were deemed to be unreliable even in light  of  a
    letter from a lawyer in Bangladesh.  The judge found that the timing of
    the  Appellant's  protection  claim  was   adverse   to   his   overall
    credibility.

 5. In light of the findings as a  whole,  the  judge  concluded  that  the
    Appellant was not of a sufficiently high political profile  to  warrant
    the adverse attention of the Bangladesh  authorities.   In  respect  of
    this profile the judge referred to "leaders" of the  BNP  as  being  at
    risk.




The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 6. The grounds of appeal make the following specific points.  It  is  said
    that the judge erred in his consideration of the evidence from the BNP;
    that he failed to properly consider the evidence from  the  Bangladeshi
    lawyer; that he did not raise concerns about the contents  of  the  BNP
    letters at the hearing; that the evidence of a particular  witness,  Mr
    Rahman, was not considered; that the judge erred in concluding that the
    DVD  footage  had  not  in  fact  been  broadcast;  and,  even  on  the
    Appellant's case at  its  lowest,  as  it  were,  the  judge  erred  in
    concluding that the Appellant was not of a sufficiently high profile to
    get risk on return.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Grimmett
    on 13 April 2019.



The hearing

 8. At the hearing before me Ms Bustani helpfully  provided  me  with  page
    references to the Appellant's bundle as regards the court documents and
    the lawyer's letter.   She  relied  on  the  grounds  of  appeal.   She
    submitted that the errors set out in the grounds were  made  out.   She
    submitted that the witness' evidence had not been properly  considered,
    that the video footage had in fact been broadcast,  and  that  the  BNP
    evidence was reliable.

 9. She sought to amend the grounds of appeal  during  the  course  of  her
    submissions in order to rely on an argument that the judge  had  failed
    to consider  a  letter  written  by  the  Appellant.   I  refused  this
    application on the basis that if it was as  material  as  suggested  it
    could and should have been included in the original grounds and that no
    application had been made between the grant of permission and the midst
    of the hearing before me.

10. Finally, Ms Bustani submitted that the judge had  applied  too  high  a
    threshold  as  to  the  existence  of  risk  on  return.   The  country
    information did not show that only "leaders" of the BNP were  at  risk.
    She referred me to paragraphs  6.1.1  and  6.1.2  of  the  Respondent's
    Country  Policy  and  Information  Notes  on  political  opponents   in
    Bangladesh, dated January 2018.

11. Mr Tufan submitted that the judge had considered all  of  the  relevant
    evidence and  had  made  sustainable  findings.   He  was  entitled  to
    conclude that the Appellant's profile, based  on  those  findings,  was
    insufficient to show risk.




Decision on error of law

12. Although certain points taken  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  are  not
    entirely without merit, and that there are certain shortcomings in  the
    judge's decision, overall I conclude that there are no material  errors
    of law in this case.

13. The first thing I would say is that I  have  endeavoured  to  read  the
    judge's decision holistically and in a sensible manner.  In so doing  I
    take account of the fact that a number of  adverse  credibility  points
    have not in fact been challenged by  the  Appellant  (see  for  example
    paragraphs 13-19 and 28-29).

14. Second, it is clear that the judge has expanded a good deal  of  effort
    and care in producing his decision, having set  out  and  considered  a
    fairly wide variety of sources of evidence that were placed before him.



15. Third, I do not purport to go through each and every specific  line  of
    this decision with a fine-tooth comb and to analyse it  in  unnecessary
    and unrealistic detail in order to discover claimed errors of law.

16. Proceeding with the above in mind, I now turn to the specific areas  of
    the challenge.  On my first reading of paragraph  20  and  the  judge's
    consideration of the BNP letters and emails, I had some concerns as  to
    whether he was requiring too much of the Appellant  and/or  was  taking
    points against the evidence that had not properly been  raised  at  the
    hearing itself.  However,  on  reflection  a  better  reading  of  this
    passage is that the judge was simply taking this evidence in  light  of
    matters as a whole and reflecting the uncontroversial proposition  that
    it was for the Appellant to prove the reliability  of  the  documentary
    evidence relied on.

17. Having looked at all of the BNP  letters  for  myself,  the  judge  was
    correct to say that no detail was provided and no reference as  to  how
    the authors of the letters knew that the Appellant had been involved as
    claimed.  There was no hint as to how the knowledge  expressed  in  the
    letters was obtained: whether, for example,  it  was  from  the  direct
    knowledge of the author or by reference to contemporaneous records kept
    by the party in Bangladesh.  In my view the judge's  approach  to  this
    evidence was open to him, notwithstanding the lower standard  of  proof
    and the absence of a requirement for corroborative evidence (it  is  of
    course the case that if corroborative evidence is produced a  judge  is
    bound to consider it).

18. I conclude that the judge was fully entitled to find that the Appellant
    had materially sought to embellish his claim over the course  of  time,
    purporting to elevate his role from being what had  been  described  as
    "just a member of the BNP" at one point to having subsequently  claimed
    to have had a leading role.

19. The detailed assessment of the evidence carried out at paragraphs 17-19
    and 21-23 is properly reasoned and was open to the judge.

20. On the issue of the DVD evidence, I accept that this was shown  at  the
    hearing itself.  I have not been referred to any evidence either before
    the judge, or indeed at all, to show  that  the  footage  was  in  fact
    broadcast as claimed.  It might have been that  the  footage  contained
    the logo of a particular news service that would not in of itself prove
    that broadcasting had taken place.  This particular adverse finding was
    also open to the judge.

21. In respect of the evidence from Mr Rahman, it  seems  to  me  that  the
    judge has considered this with appropriate care.   It  is  specifically
    referred to in paragraphs 25, 28 and 29 of  the  decision.   The  judge
    placed this evidence in the context of his findings as a whole,  in  my
    view he was entitled to conclude that this particular evidence did  not
    show any great assistance to the Appellant's claim as a whole.

22. In respect of the lawyer's letter I accept that more  could  have  been
    said by the judge.  However, that does not of course go to  disclose  a
    material error.

23. The specific reasons set out in paragraph 31 for the rejection of  this
    evidence is that  nothing  about  any  legal  proceedings  against  the
    Appellant was mentioned in any of the BNP letters.  To that extent, the
    judge was right: nothing whatsoever is contained in the letters  and  I
    note that one of these purports to emanate from the BNP in  Bangladesh.
    The judge was entitled to raise a serious concern about the  fact  that
    no representatives of the party had  mentioned  any  legal  proceedings
    against the Appellant in that country.  Beyond that,  and  having  read
    the lawyer's letter for myself, its contents are not only brief but  on
    what I consider to be a  sensible  reading,  do  not  even  purport  to
    suggest that the lawyer or anyone on his  behalf  actually  went  to  a
    relevant court or police station to have the documents (or at  least  a
    case file for the Appellant) verified.  It seems to me that on any view
    of the lawyer's letter,  it  offered  very  little,  if  any,  material
    assistance to the Appellant's claim.

24. The final point relates to the threshold set by the judge in respect of
    risk on return.  It is correct that he refers in paragraphs 30  and  34
    to BNP "leaders" being at risk in Bangladesh.   Having  looked  at  the
    country information that was before the judge and cited in  a  skeleton
    argument for that hearing, it seems to me as though  there  is  a  risk
    that the judge was setting the bar too high.  The  country  information
    does not state in terms that only "leaders" of the BNP are  subject  to
    arbitrary arrest and/or ill-treatment.

25. Having said that, the country information (including that at 6.1.1  and
    6.1.2 of the Respondent's CPIN) clearly does not indicate that any  and
    all "ordinary" or "low level" members of the BNP would be  at  risk  on
    return to Bangladesh.  On the evidence that  was  before  the  judge  I
    would conclude that would simply  be  setting  the  bar  far  too  low.
    Furthermore, from what I can see, the Appellant's case was not  put  on
    the footing that he  would  either  be  perceived  by  the  Bangladeshi
    authorities or actually known as a person  of  sufficient  interest  to
    warrant  persecution  and/or  Article  3  ill-treatment  solely  as   a
    supporter or ordinary member of the BNP.

26. Therefore, whilst the judge may have erred in respect of the setting of
    the risk threshold, in my view this  could  not  have  had  a  material
    bearing on the outcome of the appeal.  I  say  this  in  light  of  the
    multiplicity of sustainable adverse  findings  made  by  the  judge  in
    respect of all core elements of the Appellant's account, as it was  put
    forward to him.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain material errors  of
law and it shall stand.

The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.



Signed        [pic]             Dated: 31 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
