
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00974/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Fox Court                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th February 2019                         |On 7th March 2019             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                                     d k
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K McCarthy, instructed by Sunrise Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a  national  of  Albania,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State of 21st  December
    2017 to refuse his application for protection in  the  UK.   First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Burnett dismissed his appeal in a  decision  promulgated
    on 3rd October 2018 and the Appellant now appeals to this Tribunal with
    permission granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Rintoul  on  11th  January
    2019.

 2. Three grounds of appeal are put forward on the Appellant's behalf.   It
    is contended in the first ground that the judge  erred  in  failing  to
    make clear findings in relation to the Appellant's  claimed  sexuality.
    It is contended in the second ground that the judge fell into error  in
    his consideration of the Appellant's account of past sexual encounters.
     The third ground contends that the judge erred  in  relying  upon  the
    Appellant's  late  disclosure  of  his  claimed  sexual   identity   as
    undermining his credibility.  It is further contended that none of  the
    errors identified are rendered immaterial  by  the  judge's  conclusion
    that the Appellant would be  able  to  negate  any  risk  via  internal
    relocation or obtaining a  sufficiency  of  protection  because  it  is
    contended that neither are conclusive of any question as to whether the
    Appellant  is  entitled  to   international   protection.    In   these
    circumstances it is contended  that  any  determinative  assessment  of
    those issues would need to be made on the basis of clear findings as to
    the Appellant's sexuality.

 3. Having considered the evidence the  judge  found  at  paragraph  61  "I
    conclude that the Appellant is not open  in  the  UK  as  he  is  still
    exploring his sexual identity and who he  is".   At  paragraph  66  the
    judge concluded "that the appellant is not  open  about  his  sexuality
    because he is unsure about his sexual identity not because he fears any
    persecution." And at paragraph 67 the judge again reiterated  that  the
    Appellant "is still exploring his  sexuality  and  is  not  comfortable
    expressing himself as a  gay  man".   The  judge  concluded  that  this
    reticence "is not due to a fear of persecution or serious harm".

 4. It was accepted by Mr Walker at the hearing before me  that  the  judge
    erred in failing to make definitive findings on this matter.

 5. Both parties agreed that it was not the case before the judge that  the
    Appellant was exploring his sexuality identity.  It is clear  from  the
    papers before me, as confirmed by the parties, that the case put to the
    judge was that the Appellant is gay.  The judge  erred  in  failing  to
    make a clear finding on this matter which goes  to  the  heart  of  the
    Appellant's asylum claim.  Had the judge concluded that  the  Appellant
    had not established this key part of his claim it was open  to  him  to
    reach reasoned conclusions that he was not satisfied that the Appellant
    had demonstrated this. However, instead the judge  made  open  findings
    which neither completely accept nor completely reject this part of  the
    Appellant's claim.

 6. The judge failed to make clear findings on a matter that is central  to
    the Appellant's claim. This is a material error and I set the  decision
    aside in its entirety.

 7. I  agree  with  the  view  of  both  parties  that,  in  light  of  the
    Presidential Practice Statements the nature or extent of  the  judicial
    fact finding which is necessary for the decision in the appeal to be re-
    made is such that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule  2
    of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008,   it   is
    appropriate to remit the asylum appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of  law
and I set it aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  considered  afresh.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date: 5th March 2019

A Grimes
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 5th March 2019

A Grimes
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

