
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Number: PA/00154/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 February 2016                   |On 28th April 2016                   |
|Prepared on 26 February 2016          |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    A. I.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                             SECRETARY OF STATE
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Markus, Counsel instructed by Elder Rahimi,
                       Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mangion, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Somalia. He claims to have  entered  the
      UK illegally as  an  unaccompanied  minor  on  24  January  2005.  The
      Respondent refused that claim, but granted him discretionary leave  to
      remain until 19 October 2007 because she accepted that he was a minor.
      His upgrade appeal against the refusal of his asylum claim  was  heard
      and dismissed in a decision promulgated by First Tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Barrie on 2 June 2005.
   2. In due course the Appellant sought to vary  his  leave,  renewing  his
      asylum claim. Initially no decision was made  upon  that  application,
      and the Appellant committed a number of offences whilst awaiting  one.
      As a  result,  although  his  application  remained  outstanding,  the
      Respondent invited him in November 2011 to explain why he  should  not
      be deported from the UK. His response prompted a re-assessment of  his
      circumstances, which led to a further refusal of his asylum claim, and
      the grant of a further period of DLR to 11 December 2012.
   3. The Appellant continued to commit offences. He made an application  to
      vary his  leave,  and  a  further  asylum  claim  in  September  2012.
      Ultimately a decision was made on that application on 14 May 2015 when
      the Respondent decided to make a Deportation Order in relation to him,
      and to reject once more his asylum claim.
   4. The Appellant's appeal against these immigration decisions was  heard,
      and allowed on asylum grounds, in a decision promulgated by First Tier
      Tribunal Judge Gillespie on 14 July 2015.
   5. Upper Tribunal Judge  Martin  granted  the  Respondent  permission  to
      appeal that decision on 31 July 2015 on the basis that the  Judge  had
      arguably failed to give proper consideration to the risk  upon  return
      to Somalia and the relevant caselaw.
   6. Thus the matter comes before me.


   Error of law?
   7. The Respondent argues that although the decision does  make  reference
      to the current country guidance in MOJ & Others (return to  Mogadishu)
      Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 442, it fails to demonstrate that the Judge has
      actually applied the guidance contained therein  to  the  findings  of
      primary fact that he has made.
   8. No complaint is made before me by the Respondent about the Judge's re-
      appraisal of the findings of fact made by Judge Barrie in relation  to
      the Appellant's clan membership, or, the area of Somalia in which  his
      family had previously lived. Thus it is accepted (at least for present
      purposes) that the Judge was entitled to review the available evidence
      upon these issues, and reach contrary findings to those made by  Judge
      Barrie. Thus it is accepted that it was properly open to him  to  find
      that the Appellant is a member of the Ashraf minority clan,  and  that
      he had never lived in Mogadishu save for a short period as an  infant,
      because his family were actually based in the town of Qoriyoley in the
      province or region of Lower Shabelle. Those findings must stand.
   9. The decision does not address directly  whether  the  Appellant  could
      travel in safety from Mogadishu airport to the town of  Qoriyoley,  or
      to the province or region of  Lower  Shabelle.  Nor  does  it  address
      directly whether the Appellant could live in safety in  that  town  or
      that region. Indeed it is  not  at  all  clear  that  the  Judge  even
      addressed these issues by inference. Instead  he  looked  simply,  and
      very briefly, at the issue of whether  the  Appellant  could  live  in
      Mogadishu upon return to Somalia, and  concluded  that  he  could  not
      [17].
  10. Although the Judge did make a very brief reference to the decision  in
      MOJ, I accept that the decision falls well short of demonstrating that
      the Judge engaged with the careful guidance to be found  therein  upon
      the  complex  situation  within  Somalia,  which  the  Upper  Tribunal
      concluded had  changed  very  substantially  since  it  conducted  its
      assessment of the available evidence in  AMM  (conflict;  humanitarian
      crisis; returnees; FGM) Somalia CG [2011] UKUT 445.
  11. I accept that it was simply not enough  to  state  simply;  "He  would
      return to Mogadishu as a member of the Ashraf minority.  He  has  been
      absent from Somalia throughout his adult life. He  has  no  source  of
      protection from any influential or powerful  individual  or  body.  He
      would  arrive  from  the  UK  in  conditions   of   homelessness   and
      destitution. He has a criminal record. All these factors are such that
      their cumulative effect causes me to consider that he would be at real
      risk of persecution or of other serious harm on return to Somalia". It
      is  plain  that  the  careful  assessment  of  the  range  of  factors
      identified in MOJ did not occur, and it can reasonably be said that in
      a number  of  key  respects  the  Judge's  approach  is  quite  simply
      inconsistent with the guidance to  be  found  in  MOJ.  There  was  no
      evidence before the Judge to suggest  there  had  been  a  significant
      decline in the situation in Mogadishu for those returning  to  Somalia
      from Europe, since the Upper Tribunal had conducted its assessment  in
      MOJ.  No  such  decline  was  noted  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  MSM
      (journalists; political opinions; risk) Somalia [2015] UKUT 413, or by
      the European Court in RH v Sweden 4601/14. Thus, if the Judge intended
      to depart from the guidance to be found in MOJ it was in my  judgement
      not open to him to do so. Accordingly, although reference is  made  in
      the decision to MOJ the decision does disclose a material error of law
      that renders the decision upon the asylum ground of appeal unsafe.
  12. Having reached that conclusion it is unnecessary to deal further  with
      the other criticisms raised in the lengthy grounds of appeal.
  13. I have in these circumstances considered whether or not to  remit  the
      appeal to the First Tier  Tribunal  for  it  to  be  reheard.  In  the
      circumstances of the appeal I am satisfied that this  is  the  correct
      approach. In circumstances where it would  appear  that  the  relevant
      evidence has not properly been considered by the First Tier  Tribunal,
      the effect of that error of law has been to deprive the  Appellant  of
      the opportunity for his case to be properly considered  by  the  First
      Tier Tribunal; paragraph  7.2(a)  of  the  Practice  Statement  of  25
      September 2012. Moreover the  extent  of  the  judicial  fact  finding
      exercise that is required is such that  having  regard  to  the  over-
      riding objective, it is appropriate that the appeal should be remitted
      to the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statement
      of 25 September 2012.
  14. In my judgement the appeal must be remitted to the First Tier Tribunal
      for re-hearing with only the following  findings  of  Judge  Gillespie
      preserved;
               a) The Appellant is a member of the Ashraf.
               b) The Appellant spent two years as an infant  in  Mogadishu
                  with his family, but otherwise he lived with  his  family
                  in the town of Qoriyoley in the  province  or  region  of
                  Lower Shabelle.
               c) The Appellant has been unable to  trace  his  mother  and
                  sister.
               d) The Appellant has a maternal aunt, who lives in Kenya.
               e) The Appellant has a first cousin (the  daughter  of  that
                  maternal aunt) who lives in the UK with her family.
  15. Having reached that conclusion, I make the following directions;
           i) The decision upon the appeal is set aside and the  appeal  is
              remitted to the First Tier Tribunal for rehearing. The appeal
              is not to be listed before Judge Barrie or Judge Gillespie.
          ii) A Somali interpreter is to be booked for the hearing.
         iii) The appeal is to be listed on the first available date at the
              North Shields hearing centre after 25 March 2016.
          iv) The Anonymity Direction previously made  by  the  First  Tier
              Tribunal is preserved.




Decision

  16. The decision promulgated on 14 July 2015 did involve the making of  an
      error of law sufficient to require it to be set aside and  the  appeal
      to be reheard. Accordingly the decision upon the appeal is  set  aside
      and the appeal is  remitted  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  with  the
      following directions;
           i) The decision upon the appeal is set aside and the  appeal  is
              remitted to the First Tier Tribunal for rehearing. The appeal
              is not to be listed before Judge Barrie or Judge Gillespie.
          ii) A Somali interpreter is to be booked for the hearing.
         iii) The appeal is to be listed on the first available date at the
              North Shields hearing centre after 25 March 2016.
          iv) The Anonymity Direction previously made  by  the  First  Tier
              Tribunal is preserved.



Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal JM Holmes

Dated 26 February 2016


