
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00928/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 January 2018                            |On 23 April 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    s s k
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss P Yong, Wimbledon Solicitors
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 we make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the respondent.
    Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of  court.  We  make
    this order because this is a protection case and there is invariably  a
    risk in cases of this kind that publicity will itself create a risk.

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of the respondent,  hereinafter
    "the claimant" against the decision of the Secretary of State  refusing
    her asylum.

 3. The claimant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who says that she comes from  an
    LTTE supporting family and who has been seriously  ill-treated  by  the
    Sri Lankan authorities that she left Sri  Lanka.  Given  her  level  of
    family involvement and personal interest to  the  authorities  and  her
    continuing support to the cause of Tamil independence it  is  her  case
    that she is in the category of people who would be at risk in the event
    of her return.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge is particularly experienced and  believed
    the evidence.  The Secretary of State's challenge in the grounds is  to
    the findings of fact saying essentially that they are unlawful.  We  do
    not agree.

 5. The first point taken in the grounds is that the judge does not  factor
    into her analysis the delay of some nine years between arriving in  the
    United Kingdom and claiming asylum.  We are  not  impressed  with  this
    point.  We recognise that it is a  statutory  requirement  to  conclude
    that delay impacts adversely on credibility but it does not mean that a
    person cannot be believed because  the  claim  is  made  late.   It  is
    perfectly plain on the face of the Decision and Reasons that the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge had in mind that the claim  was  late  because  she
    refers to it being late.  What the Judge did not  do,  and  where  some
    criticism in this respect was due, is make  express  reference  of  the
    delay when she made her findings.  We do not regard this as  a  serious
    omission.  It was very clear, particularly from paragraph 38, the judge
    was very impressed with the evidence given by the claimant when she was
    talking about the assaults that she had experienced.  It is  trite  but
    possibly  worth  emphasising  that  it  is  indeed  recognised  by  the
    Secretary of State in her own policy documents that a  person  who  has
    been a victim of sexual assault can be very  reticent  about  making  a
    complaint and although it is rarely, if ever, a bad thing to raise such
    a claim at the earliest possible opportunity a decision maker  must  be
    exceedingly circumspect in disbelieving a claim of the  worst  kind  of
    sexual assault just because it was made late.

 6. When the complaint was made it was impressive. It was  consistent  with
    the evidence given to the psychiatrist which was consistent with  other
    evidence of physical harm. There is absolutely nothing wrong  with  the
    Judge's finding  that  the  claimant  was  sexually  assaulted  in  the
    circumstances she describes.  That of course does not  entitle  her  to
    asylum but it goes a very long way to establishing her case.

 7. Contrary to the impression created  in  the  grounds  there  was  other
    evidence before the Tribunal. There was evidence  in  the  form  of  an
    affidavit from the claimant's mother. Clearly affidavit  evidence  from
    overseas is from a person who is not subject to the jurisdiction of the
    United Kingdom courts and cannot be punished for telling lies. Further,
    evidence from a person so obviously inclined to  support  the  claimant
    must attract a degree of circumspection  but  there  is  no  reason  to
    assume that evidence is untruthful because it  comes  from  a  person's
    mother and supports the case that was before the Judge.

 8. The contention in the grounds that the  claimant's  sister  could  have
    supported her is purely speculative.  There is no basis for saying  the
    claimant's sister would know about the assault and the  evidence  about
    the involvement of the brother in the LTTE that was  supported  by  the
    mother.  Neither do we see any merit in the speculation that GP records
    might have thrown up something of value.  As indicated before,  matters
    of  sexual  assault  and  mental  ill  health  are  not  matters   that
    necessarily progress in the way that a lay person might expect  and  it
    is dangerous to say that there should have been mental health  evidence
    from the general medical practitioner. In any event there was  evidence
    in the records which was picked up by the  psychiatrist.   The  grounds
    really go nowhere in their challenge on credibility.

 9. There is a little more merit in the second point in  the  grounds  that
    the claimant satisfied the Judge that she was at risk  because  of  her
    activities in the diaspora.  Again more could have been said and,  with
    the benefit of hindsight, it might have been better if  more  had  been
    said but it is quite plain that  the  claimant  gave  evidence  of  her
    involvement.  There is no reason at all to disbelieve the claimant just
    because she is the claimant. There was sufficient evidence  before  the
    judge to support a conclusion that she has been  sufficiently  involved
    in diaspora activities to come to have come to  the  attention  of  the
    Tamil authorities and to be at risk on return.  In short,  the  grounds
    are no more than a challenge to the credibility findings which  are  at
    the very least adequately explained in the decision.

10. We dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal and uphold the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal.








|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins, Upper Tribunal     |Dated: 20 April 2018                 |
|Judge                                |                                     |

