
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/00170/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |      Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 4 May 2017                         |      On 16 May 2017                  |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                                     AH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Hodson, instructed by Elder Rahimi solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Iran born in 1977.  There is  a  dispute
    about his date of arrival which was either on 10 April or 10 June 2016.
     On 30 June 2016 he was encountered by police at a named location.   He
    was detained and claimed asylum.  The basis of his claim was that he is
    a  convert  to  Christianity,  that  he  had   become   interested   in
    Christianity whilst in Iran and since he arrived in the United  Kingdom
    he had begun attending a church and had been baptised.

 2. The Respondent refused his application for asylum in a  decision  dated
    23 December 2016.  The Appellant's appeal against  that  decision  came
    before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal M  A  Khan  for  hearing  on  7
    February 2017.

 3. The Judge heard evidence from the Appellant and  from  Reverend  H  who
    confirmed that the Appellant regularly attended at his church and  that
    he had been persuaded to baptise the Appellant not because he was asked
    to but because of his testimony and his behaviour.  There  is  a  Farsi
    interpreter  available  at  this  particular  church.    The   Reverend
    confirmed the Appellant has an understanding of Protestantism  and  has
    become close to his church and attended a number of meetings,  as  well
    as services.

 4. In a decision promulgated on 27 February 2017, the Judge dismissed  the
    appeal primarily on the  basis  that  he  found  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant to be  "vague  and  evasive"  and  he  did  not  accept  that
    evidence.  In relation to the evidence of Reverend H he  accepted  that
    the Reverend had an honest belief that the Appellant  was  a  Christian
    convert but this was based on "mistaken premises".

 5. An application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  made
    in time on 9 March 2017.  The grounds in support  of  the  application
    asserted

      1) the Judge materially erred in failing to give adequate reasons  for
         his repeated assertions that the Appellant's  evidence  was  "vague
         and evasive" (at [29], [30], [41], [42], [44], [45] and [48]).  The
         judge failed to explain in what way the  Appellant's  evidence  was
         supposedly vague and evasive and this was a bare assertion with  no
         adequate reasons provided  or  indeed  no  reasons  given  at  all.
         Reference was also made to the decision  of  the  president  in  MK
         (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC);

      2) the Judge failed to take  all  of  the  Appellant's  evidence  into
         account.  It was asserted the Judge materially erred in failing  to
         take account of the Appellant's detailed appeal statement,  despite
         the fact that this had been adopted at the outset of the hearing in
         order to stand as his evidence-in-chief.  In particular, the  Judge
         erred materially in taking account of the Appellant's  evidence  as
         to the date of his arrival, it having been asserted that  the  Home
         Office interpreter at his screening interview  made  a  mistake  in
         converting the date of arrival which was 10 Tir 1395, as  10  April
         2016, rather than 30 June 2016 which was the date the Appellant was
         encountered by West Mercia Police;

      3) the  Judge  erred  materially  in  law  in  his  treatment  of  the
         supporting evidence of the church witnesses.  It was submitted  the
         Judge erred materially in law in that  Reverend  H  makes  it  very
         clear in his letters of 13 December 2016 and 17 January 2017  that
         he believes the Appellant to be a sincere Christian convert and  he
         gives detailed explanations and reasons  for  his  assessment.   In
         finding that Reverend H's belief is based on mistaken premises  [at
         47] the Judge erred in that the events in Iran were not  the  basis
         of Reverend H's views and reasons for accepting the genuineness  of
         the Appellant's conversion, but were based on the evidence to which
         he could attest as to the Appellant's knowledge of Christianity and
         secondly the Judge erred in his approach in that having  found  the
         Appellant not to be credible, he then disregarded the testimony  of
         Reverend H and the Judge failed to take all  the  evidence  in  the
         appeal into account in the round before arriving at conclusions  on
         the matter of the Appellant's faith;

      4) the Judge materially erred in failing to carry out  any  meaningful
         assessment as to the risk to the Appellant on the point  of  return
         to Iran, given that which the Judge accepted the Appellant has been
         attending church regularly in the UK, has  been  baptised  and  has
         been undertaking Bible classes.

     (5) In light of the country guidance decision in SSH  and  HR  (illegal
exit: failed      asylum seeker)    Iran  CG  [2016]  UKUT  00308  (IAC)  as
regards practice at the         airport, the Appellant would  be  liable  to
be questioned on return and would  be          asked  about  his  activities
whilst in the United Kingdom and his reasons for           claiming  asylum.
It   was also clear in light of the principles upheld by  the        Supreme
Court  in  RT  (Zimbabwe)  and  Others  [2012]   UKSC   38   that   it   was
unreasonable to expect returnees to lie to would be persecutors in order  to
              protect themselves from ill-treatment. Consequently there  was
a risk to the          Appellant on the point  of  return  which  the  Judge
failed to address.

     Hearing

 6. At the hearing before me, I heard submissions from Mr Hodson which were
    in line with his grounds of appeal.  He provided a copy of the decision
    in MK (Pakistan) (op cit) and also documentary evidence as to the names
    of the months in the Iranian calendar and how  these  relate  to  dates
    within the Gregorian calendar.  He submitted that the Judge  has  taken
    the mistranslation of the date  from  one  calendar  to  another  as  a
    credibility point and this was thus a material error.  Mr  Hodson  also
    relied strongly on his third ground in relation to the treatment of the
    evidence from Reverend H.

 7. In response, Mr Norton submitted that the  point  in  relation  to  the
    translation of the date was not particularly  determinative,  that  the
    Judge was essentially entitled to place reliance on this in relation to
    an assessment of the credibility of the Appellant, given  that  it  was
    raised in  the  refusal  letter  at  C4  and  that  was  based  on  the
    Appellant's answers at his asylum interview at B2 which records that he
    said he arrived on 10 April 2016 and in any event,  this  was  not  the
    lynchpin of the Judge's credibility findings.

 8. In relation to the treatment by the Judge of the evidence  of  Reverend
    H, Mr Norton submitted  that  this  was  essentially  an  irrationality
    challenge and the Judge was not obliged to accept Reverend H's views of
    the genuineness of the Appellant's conversion and he had not  erred  in
    so doing.

 9. In relation to the adequacy of the reasons provided by  the  Judge,  Mr
    Norton drew my attention  to  paragraphs  39  onwards  of  the  judge's
    decision where reasons are given.  Mr Norton submitted  whilst  another
    Judge could have decided the case differently the Judge had  not  acted
    irrationally in rejecting the evidence before him.

10. In relation to the fourth ground, Mr Norton submitted  that  this  does
    not stand by itself and would fall in any event if the  Appellant  were
    not believed.

11.  In his reply, Mr Hodson denied that ground 3 was a rationality point,
in light of the   decision in Dorodian 01/TH/01537 that "no-one should be
regarded as a committed    Christian who is not vouched for as such by a
minister of some church established in this  country: as we have said, it
is church membership, rather than mere belief, which may lead to   risk."
He submitted that the evidence of the witness goes to the core issue in the
     appeal and must be taken into account along with the other evidence.
What the      Judge has done is in fact reverse the correct approach and
having found the witness   was not credible then rejected the evidence of
the Reverend and that finding in    respect of his rejection of Reverend
H's evidence on the basis he was mistaken was    an error of law.

12.  In relation to the first ground and the duty to give reasons Mr  Hodson
submitted     that it is not correct to just use the stock  phrase  such  as
"vague and evasive" without an  explanation as to why he found  this  to  be
the case. In relation to ground 4, Mr   Hodson indicated although he  placed
more reliance on the first three grounds, he  did       consider  that  this
was a standalone point because the questioning  that  the  Appellant   would
have to face upon return to  Iran  would  cover  activities  in  the  United
Kingdom, there would be a sur place element and  regardless  of  whether  or
not that      activity had been carried out sincerely it was  clear  in  the
light of the decision in   Danian [1999] EWCA Civ 3000 that this  would  not
make any difference, given that     the Appellant would have  to  endure  up
to two hours of interrogation and would be   unable  to  lie  in   order  to
protect himself.

     Notice of Decision

13.  I indicated to the parties that I found a material error of law in  the
decision of First-     tier Tribunal Judge M A  Khan  and  that  the  matter
would be remitted back to the   First-tier Tribunal for a hearing  de  novo.
I now give my reasons.

14.  I find there is merit in the grounds of appeal  upon  which  permission
to appeal was     granted.   It  is  the  case  that  the  Judge  found  the
Appellant not to be credible and the    reasons provided  for  that  finding
are from  [41]  onwards  viz  the  Appellant's  evidence     was  vague  and
evasive.  The difficulty is that that is not an end in itself, in  that  the
Judge failed to set out why the evidence was vague and evasive.

15.  The key issue in the asylum claim and the appeal is the  issue  of  the
Appellant's   conversion to Christianity     which was supported  materially
by the evidence of      Reverend  H  who  not  only  provided  two  detailed
letters in support of the Appellant's    claim  in  that  respect  but  also
attended before the First-tier Tribunal and gave oral     evidence  and  was
cross-examined by the Respondent.

16   I find that the Judge erred materially in law in failing to assess  the
credibility  of  the      Appellant's   account   of   his   conversion   to
Christianity in light of the evidence of     Reverend  H,  rather  than  the
other way round.  It is clear from  the  Judge's  findings  as      to  that
evidence at [47] that he fell into error in this respect.

17.  I further find that the Judge erred materially in  law  in  failing  to
properly assess and    take into account the  issue  of  the  conversion  of
dates from the Iranian to the   Gregorian calendar and I find  in  light  of
the Appellant's explanation and having had   sight of the calendar that  the
Appellant has not given an inconsistent account as to     the  date  of  his
arrival, which properly converted, is 30 June  2016,  thus  this  is  not  a
matter that should have  properly  impacted  upon  the  credibility  of  his
account.

18.  I further find that for the reasons  set  out  by  Mr  Hodson  both  in
ground 4 of the   grounds of appeal and in his oral  submissions,  that  the
Judge failed to consider the    separate albeit related  issue  of  risk  on
return  as  a  failed  asylum  seeker  in  light  of  the        Appellant's
involvement with Christianity in  the  United  Kingdom,  particularly  given
that if asked about this during the process of questioning  upon  return  he
cannot   reasonably be expected to lie about having attended  a  Church  and
Bible classes in the   United Kingdom, let alone the fact that he has  as  a
matter of fact been baptised as a   Christian.

19.  For these reasons I find that the Judge's  decision  cannot  stand  and
the appeal is     remitted for a  hearing  de  novo  before  the  First-tier
Tribunal to be heard by a Judge     other than First-tier Tribunal  Judge  M
A Khan.

20.  As indicated at the outset there is an anonymity order in place.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed   Rebecca Chapman                              Date 12 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman



