

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)               Appeal Number: PA/00448/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Columbus House, Newport |        Decision & Reasons        |
|                                  |Promulgated                       |
|On: 25 August 2017                |        On: 18 October 2017       |
|                                  |                                  |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS

                                   Between

                                    AOAF
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:           Ms S Alban, Fountain solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Order Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008


 1. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify them or any member of  their  family.   This  order
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




 2. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Richards-Clarke in which she dismissed the appeal of the  Appellant,  a
    citizen of Jordan, against the Secretary of State's decision to  refuse
    asylum and issue removal directions.


 3. The application under appeal was refused  on  21  December  2016.   The
    Appellant exercised his right of appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    This is the appeal  which  came  before  Judge  Richards-Clarke  on  16
    February 2017 and was dismissed. The Appellant applied  for  permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  The application was granted by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Pullig on 30 March 2017 in the following terms

       The  grounds  seeking  permission  complain  that  the   judge   had
       misdirected herself in relation  to  Country  Guidance  in  that  at
       paragraph 24 she refers to  a  case  without  identifying  it.  That
       paragraph appears to refer to converts. There is no Country Guidance
       case for Jordan. The grounds then refer to the judge setting out the
       guidance in HJ (Iran) and HT (Cameroon) v SSHD [2010]  UKSC  31.  It
       appears she did so in relation to the concept of living  discreetly.
       However, the appellant is  not  gay  but  having  been  born  Muslim
       rejects that faith. His credibility was accepted by the  respondent.
       His case is that he is compelled to speak out.  In  these  respects,
       the grounds are sustainable. The grounds  also  complain  about  the
       judge's findings on sufficiency of protection and prison conditions.
       I do not find those grounds  arguable.  The  last  ground  complains
       about the judge's inadequate reasoning in respect of  Article  8.  I
       find the judge  fails  to  address  adequately  the  issue  of  very
       significant obstacles.


       For the reasons given above I find  that  the  Judge's  decision  is
       vitiated by material error of law and I grant permission.






 4. By a rule 24 response dated 20 April 2017 the  Respondent  opposed  the
    appeal arguing that the Judge directed herself appropriately  and  gave
    adequate and well-reasoned findings.




 5. At the hearing before me Mr McVeety appeared to represent the Secretary
    of State and Ms Alban represented the Appellant.


Background

 6.  The  history  of  this  appeal  is  detailed  above.  The  facts,  not
    challenged,  are  that  the  Appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Jordan   of
    Palestinian descent born in Kuwait on 12 November 1970.  He  spent  the
    first 23 of his life in Kuwait before moving to Joran for 3 years to go
    to college. He then lived in the  United  States  for  9  years  before
    returning to Jordan in September 2008 where he remained, for  the  most
    part, until coming to the United Kingdom.




 7. The Appellant's credibility was not challenged by the  Respondent.  His
    account is given in detail in two statements comprising some  13  pages
    of the Appellant's bundle and in addition he gave oral evidence at  the
    First-tier Tribunal hearing. It is a complex account in which he claims
    to have been mistreated by the families of his first and  second  wife.
    His second wife's family arranged by him to be kidnapped and  seriously
    assaulted. The perpetrators of  this  action  were  prosecuted  by  the
    authorities but the Appellant  was  pressurised  to  drop  charges  and
    although he did they were nevertheless convicted  and  sentenced  to  a
    term of imprisonment. However, the perpetrators were let  out  on  bail
    pending appeal. Through this the  authorities  afforded  the  Appellant
    limited protection but nevertheless advised him to leave the country in
    order to be safe.  The  Appellant  did  so  but,  having  left  he  was
    prosecuted in his absence on fabricated charges and sentenced to a term
    of imprisonment. Although the Appellant says that he should  have  good
    prospects on appeal against conviction due to his  absence  his  lawyer
    advises (see first statement paragraph 33) that it  will  be  difficult
    for him to appeal because he did not attend the trial).  The  Appellant
    claims that the attacks on him were motivated by his lack of  adherence
    to Islam, about which he was open within his family,  and  that  prison
    conditions in Jordan would breach his protected Article  3  rights.  He
    also claims to have established a private life in  the  United  Kingdom
    and that he would not be able to reintegrate into Jordanian society due
    to his lack of religious belief.




Submissions

 8. For the Appellant Ms Alban referred to her skeleton argument. She  said
    that  the  unidentified  Country  Guidance  case  referred  to  in  the
    statement of reasons was not HJ (Iran) and HT (Cameroon) v SSHD  [2010]
    UKSC 31 because that was not a 'conversion' case. He may  be  perceived
    to be a convert if he is critical of Islam. The Judge has not  properly
    considered the risk. The Appellant's account was accepted as  credible.
    He spoke out and he was attacked.  His  witness  statement  gives  cull
    details. The Appellant did not hide his beliefs. The Judge was wrong to
    suggest that he espoused his beliefs privately and cautiously. That was
    not the evidence. He was critical of religion.  There  is  no  adequate
    finding on sufficiency of protection. The Appellant  was  harassed  and
    threatened. There was no finding on whether prison conditions  breached
    Article 3. The actors of persecution will know where he  is.  There  is
    also the question of past persecution. So far as Article 8 is concerned
    the Appellant gave evidence of his private  life  in  the  UK  and  the
    reasons why he will face  substantial  difficulties  in  reintegration.
    This was not properly considered.




 9. For the Respondent Mr McVeety said that  the  Appellant's  account  was
    accepted as credible. He has had an issue with non-state  actors.  When
    he complained the  Jordanian  authorities  prosecuted  the  individuals
    involved. They were found guilty. There were not released  early,  they
    appealed the  decision.  The  First-tier  tribunal  Judge  applied  the
    Horvath test. The Appellant was hung by  his  own  account.  The  state
    charged and convicted the family members who mistreated him. The  state
    helped. The state does not have to offer 100% protection, no state can.
    So far as  the  Country  Guidance  case  is  concerned  the  Judge  was
    referring to HJ (Iran). The issue of concern was the  Appellant's  lack
    of belief. He is not an evangelising atheist. He discussed issues  with
    his family. He is no major advocate of atheism. The Appellant has  been
    charged with an offence and he has good grounds  for  appeal.  He  says
    that he will get the conviction set aside. The harm meted  out  to  the
    Appellant was a criminal act, not persecution. It is not  supported  or
    condoned by the  state.   The  perpetrators  were  convicted  and  they
    appealed. People who appeal get  released.  That  is  not  evidence  of
    insufficiency of protection.




10. For the Appellant Ms  Alban  responded  to  say  that  the  Appellant's
    statement shows that the police told him to  leave  Jordan  to  protect
    himself. He was threatened by the family and their friends to drop  the
    charges. There is no sufficiency of protection. The  family  are  still
    free and threatening his family. He was not given  protection.  It  was
    not simply a criminal act it happened because of his  religion  or  his
    lack of it. He had to lie in court to say he was Muslim.  Speaking  out
    against Islam is regarded as apostacy.




11. I reserved my decision.




Discussion


12. The  immediate  difficulty  apparent  from  reading  the  decision  and
    statement of reasons prepared by the First-tier Tribunal Judge is  that
    there is almost no detail given of the basis of the Appellant's  claim.
    At  paragraph  7  the  Judge  refers  to  "the  salient  parts  of  the
    Appellant's evidence" in five  short  sentences  subdivided  into  four
    paragraphs. It is not clear if the  Judge  is  referring  to  his  oral
    evidence or if she is summarising his witness statements as  well.  The
    Appellant made two witness statements, the first dated 5 June  2015  is
    the most detailed, the second dated 3 February 2017 is described  as  a
    'statement in reply' and is the  only  statement  referred  to  by  the
    Judge. The 'salient parts of the Appellant's evidence' are anything but
    comprehensive and the impression given by the statement of  reasons  is
    that the Judge has not considered the  detailed  written  statement  at
    all.
13. The Judge goes on at paragraph 23 to summarise  the  Appellant's  claim
    when making her findings. It is a very brief summary that  misses  many
    of the pertinent facts  of  the  Appellant's  account.  The  cumulative
    effect of these two paragraphs (17 and 23) is  that  it  is  impossible
    from the statement of reasons to get a clear idea of the nature of  the
    Appellant's claim.  It  is  necessary  to  refer  to  his  two  witness
    statements and the statement made by his father  (pages  77-80  of  the
    Appellant's bundle) to understand the facts relied upon.




14. The difficulties continue with the findings in respect of  the  Refugee
    Convention claim. Therese are restricted to some very  brief  sentences
    in paragraphs 24 (to which I will return),  25  and  26.  Paragraph  25
    states


    "...the evidence before  me  supports  a  finding  that  the  Jordanian
    authorities are able to offer the Appellant protection".


    Paragraph 26 says even less finding that there is  no  likelihood  that
    the Appellant will suffer harm


    "...for the reasons above".


    There is no analysis of the Appellant's account against the law and the
    objective evidence and indeed no objective evidence is referred  to  at
    any point in the findings despite there being  a  wealth  of  objective
    evidence and country information  contained  in  both  the  Appellant's
    bundle and the Respondent's refusal letter.




15. So far as the remaining paragraphs  of  the  statement  of  reasons  is
    concerned there is again an absence of analysis. Paragraph 28 referring
    to Article 2 is otiose. Paragraph 29 refers  only  to  the  Appellant's
    mental health difficulties when it was an integral part  of  his  claim
    that he would be imprisoned on a  return  to  Jordan  and  that  prison
    conditions breach Article 3. Paragraph 30 deals with Article 8 and  the
    claim  that  the  Appellant  would  face   substantial   obstacles   on
    reintegration without any analysis of his private life  in  the  UK  or
    reference to his life history or the time spent outside Jordan. Indeed,
    it is factually incorrect stating that he was born in Jordan where  the
    accepted evidence is that he was born in Kuwait and spent the first  23
    years of his life there. This  adds  to  the  impression,  referred  to
    earlier, that the Judge has not considered the  Appellant's  first  and
    detailed witness statement.




16. In short there  are  significant  shortcomings  in  this  decision  and
    statement of reasons that  lead  to  the  inevitable  conclusion,  even
    before considering the grounds of appeal that it should not  be  relied
    upon. The Judge appears to have failed to take  into  account  or  made
    mistakes as to material facts which in accordance with  the  principles
    expounded R (Iran) v SSHD  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  982  would  amount  to  a
    material error of law.


Error of law

17. Turning to the grounds of appeal the first error  of  law  asserted  is
    that the Judge misdirected herself in law by  referring  to  a  Country
    Guidance case without identifying it.  It  is  said,  in  the  skeleton
    argument, that there is no Jordanian Country guidance case relating  to
    converts and that no Country Guidance case was referred  to  or  relied
    upon by either party. In submissions Ms Alban adds that  HJ  (Iran)  is
    not a 'conversion' case so could not be what the  Judge  was  referring
    to. Of course, HJ (Iran) is a Supreme Court  decision,  not  a  Country
    Guidance case.




18. In my judgment this is a disingenuous argument.  Firstly,  whereas  the
    statement of reasons is deficient in many ways as discussed  above  and
    the identification of HJ (Iran) comes after the reference to  the  'the
    Country Guidance case', it is nevertheless clear that HJ (Iran) is  the
    case being referred to. The fact  that  HJ  (Iran)  involved  different
    countries (Iran and Cameroon) and  a  different  issue  (homosexuality)
    does not make its principles  any  the  less  relevant.  HJ  (Iran)  is
    continuing guidance for the principle  that  a  person  should  not  be
    required to hide their sexual identity or their  committed  beliefs  in
    order to avoid persecution.  There is no error of law here.




19. The second error asserted is that there was  material  misdirection  in
    relation to HJ (Iran). It is said that the Judge was wrong to say  that
    the Appellant behaved privately and cautiously with respect his  belief
    and that his evidence  was  that  he  had  not  behaved  privately  and
    cautiously.




20. There is substance in this assertion. As referred to above there is  no
    analysis of the Appellant's evidence against the HJ  (Iran)  principles
    and there appears to be no consideration of the facts  put  forward  in
    his detailed statement and accepted as credible by the Respondent.  The
    Appellant says, for example, in his second statement


    " If I was to return to Jordan I would be unable to keep my own beliefs
    private as I am so passionate it would not be long before people  found
    out".


    Such a situation goes to the root of HJ (Iran) and at  the  very  least
    needs to be considered. In my judgment there is a material error of law
    in that the Judge has not addressed the accepted facts to the law.




21. The third ground is that the Judge failed to make adequate  finding  in
    relation to sufficiency of protection. This is detailed at paragraphs 8
    and 9 of the skeleton. It is said that the  Judge  found  that  on  the
    Appellant's own account appropriate action was taken by the authorities
    supporting a finding that the authorities could  offer  sufficiency  of
    protection. The complaint is that according to the Appellant's  account
    the Jordanian  authorities  action  had  been  totally  inadequate  His
    kidnappers had not served their sentence and were currently free.




22. In my judgment this is a further example of the facts not  being  fully
    considered. It is certainly the case that the Appellant  complained  to
    the authorities of a  criminal  act  and  that  the  perpetrators  were
    charged and convicted before a court of law and sentenced to a term  of
    imprisonment. It would be perverse of the Judge to find anything  other
    than that this constituted sufficiency of protection. The fact that the
    perpetrators appealed and were released pending appeal does  not  alter
    that inevitable conclusion. This is what happens in countries where the
    rule of law is followed and respected.




23. However, the Judge does not go on to consider the facts as put  forward
    by  the  Appellant.  Specifically,  the  Judge  fails  to  address  the
    appellant's claim that he was advised by the authorities to  leave  the
    country for his own protection, that his  father  has  been  threatened
    since he left (see the father's  statement),  that  fabricated  charges
    have been laid against him and that pressure was put upon him  to  drop
    charges and that he was advised that this was the only safe  course  to
    adopt. In my judgment the Judge has failed to take account of  material
    facts in reaching her conclusion.




24. The fourth ground is the  assertion  that  the  Judge  failed  to  make
    findings as to whether prison conditions in Jordan would be a breach of
    Article 3. This ground is clearly made out. The  prison  conditions  in
    Jordan were the basis of the Article 3 claim and are not referred to at
    all in the decision.  Objective evidence of the  prison  conditions  is
    included in the Appellant's bundle (US state Department Report at  page
    182). There is no analysis in the  statement  of  reasons.  This  is  a
    further error of law.




25. The final ground of appeal is that there was  inadequate  reasoning  in
    relation to Article 8. It is  said  that  there  would  be  significant
    obstacles to the Appellant's reintegration  in  Jordan  of  he  had  to
    return. This is again clearly made out for the reason given above.  The
    Appellant is a 46-year-old Jordanian citizen who has  lived  in  Jordan
    for only a relatively short period of his life. The Judge  starts  from
    the false premise that he is Jordanian born and  that  the  only  other
    country he has lived in is the USA. It as at least arguable that a full
    analysis of the facts may have led to a different conclusion.




26. My conclusion from all of the above is that the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal contains errors  of  law  material  to  the  decision  to
    dismiss the appeal.


  Summary

27. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
    material error of law.


28. I allow the Appellant's appeal. The error of law  is  such  that  I  am
    satisfied that the Appellant's appeal has not been fully considered  by
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  as  such  the  appropriate  course   in
    accordance with the President's guidance is to remit the matter to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for hearing de novo.



     Signed:                                 Date: 29 September 2017
[pic]


J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
