

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00362/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                           |Decision and Reasons           |
|                                           |Promulgated                    |
|on 21 February 2018                        |on 27 February 2018            |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                    S R B
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms H Cosgrove, of Latta & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a Kurdish citizen of Iraq from the KRG, aged 25.   The
    respondent refused his protection claim for reasons  explained  in  her
    letter dated 23 December 2015.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Mozolowski dismissed the  appellant's  appeal
    for reasons explained in her decision promulgated on 24 July 2017.

 3. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  to  the  UT.   His  grounds
    submit that the judge speculated unfairly and made  findings  which  no
    reasonable judge would have made, based on no evidence.   Case  law  on
    the  correct  approach  to  plausibility  in  asylum  cases  is  cited.
    Paragraphs 20, 25, 27 and 29 are said to  disclose  unfair  speculation
    about the actions of Daesh, the security forces of the KRG, and  people
    smugglers, without reference to country or expert evidence.

 4. On 30 October 2017 FtT Judge Pooler refused  permission,  on  the  view
    that the grounds showed disagreement on the facts not  misdirection  in
    law.

 5. The appellant applied to the UT on the same grounds.

 6. On 19 December 2017 Deputy UT Judge  Pickup  observed  that  the  judge
    might have indulged  in  speculation  at  paragraphs  20,  25  and  27,
    "importing a subjective assessment", and granted permission.

 7. A rule 24 response for the SSHD takes the line  that  the  grounds  are
    only disagreement; the judge considered the whole claim; at  paragraphs
    18 and 19 the judge noted vagueness in the appellant's  answers,  which
    has not been challenged; at paragraph 21 the judge was entitled to find
    it incredible that the appellant would not enquire about an injury to a
    soldier which was at the core  of  his  claim;  and  paragraph  25  was
    sustainable, given findings  at  paragraph  23  about  the  appellant's
    truck.

 8. Ms Cosgrove submitted along the lines of the grounds,  and  further  as
    follows.  As to the rule 24 response, paragraph 18  was  not  based  on
    vagueness  and  19  was  open  to  criticism  as  another   speculative
    plausibility finding.  There had been a failure  to  make  an  holistic
    assessment in context of background evidence, such that the case should
    be remitted for fresh hearing.

 9. Mrs O'Brien submitted thus.    The  rule  24  response  was  inaccurate
    about paragraph 18, but the reasoning  in  that  paragraph  was  sound.
    The  judge's  findings  were  reasonable  inferences  not   unjustified
    speculation, grounded in rather than detached from the  evidence.   The
    decision was based also on rejecting documentary evidence  produced  by
    the appellant at paragraphs 30 - 34,  for  good  reasons  of  which  no
    criticism was  made.   Paragraphs  17  -  34  together  constituted  an
    appropriate assessment of the evidence.

10. I reserved my decision.

11. Decisions are to be read fairly and as a whole.


12. This is a summary of the reasoning in the decision:

      Paragraph 18: the appellant said peshmerga uniform  was  distinguished
      only by a Kurdish flag sewn on the upper arm, about mobile phone size;
      that would not be recognisable to someone travelling in the  gloom  at
      60 - 80 kph.

      Paragraph 19:  it was culturally usual to  stop  at  the  roadside  to
      assist in case of need, but why would no-one else stop, how could  the
      appellant know that one of the four soldiers had an  injury,  and  how
      could the soldiers have arrived at a remote spot with no  vehicles  in
      the vicinity?

      Paragraph 20: it was the culture to give lifts to those in  need,  but
      why would Deash fighters dressed as Peshmerga  wish  to  betray  their
      activities, and why would they  not  hijack  the  appellant's  vehicle
      rather than taking the appellant and his companion with them?

      Paragraph 21: having stopped, it was not credible the appellant  would
      not have enquired about the injury  and  its  severity  while  at  the
      roadside, or while driving away.

      Paragraphs 22 - 24: improbable account of the making of threats, given
      the situation in the truck, separating the other three  soldiers  from
      the appellant.

      Paragraph 25: incredible that at the outset of the alleged ambush  the
      soldiers would bother with giving the appellant an explanation.

      Paragraph 26:  not accepted  that  an  ambush  planned  by  government
      forces would be so inefficient as to leave the appellant uninjured.

      Paragraph 27: improbability of appellant's  escape  from  the  ambush,
      then running for an hour without hindrance to his friend's house.

      Paragraph 28: not likely the appellant's friend  within  a  few  hours
      could have obtained a vast amount of information, to the  effect  that
      the appellant was blamed  for  the  incident  and  the  death  of  his
      companion.

      Paragraph 29: not credible the  appellant  could  plan  with  and  pay
      people smugglers within the next 48 hours.

      Paragraph 30:  arrest  warrant  referred  to  at  interview,  but  not
      produced for another year; no details on the warrant;  no  explanation
      for late production.

      Paragraph 31: warrant referred to by the appellant at a time  when  by
      his account it  was  not  clear  that  he  could  have  known  of  its
      existence.

      Paragraph 32: background evidence of corruption in government;  taking
      all factors into account, warrant not accepted as genuine.

13. It can be seen that the judge did take  account  of  the  cultural  and
    political context and did refer to background evidence.

14. The appellant refers to no cultural  features  or  background  evidence
    which should have led the judge to other conclusions, or which show she
    may have not been  entitled  to  find  as  she  did  about  the  likely
    behaviour  of  Daesh,  the  security  forces  of  the  KRG,  or  people
    smugglers.

15. The judge's reasons are multiple and specific.  Many of  them  are  not
    criticised at all.  None of them are shown to be wrong.

16.  The  grounds  and  submissions  for  the  appellant  rely   on   legal
    generalities and on an incomplete representation of the decision.  They
    resolve into no more than selective disagreement on the facts.  They do
    not show that the decision errs on any point of law.

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

18. The FtT made an anonymity direction.  The matter was not  addressed  in
    the UT.  Anonymity is preserved.

            [pic]

            21 February 2018
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




