
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00890/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 October 2016                   |On 27 October 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE COLLINS
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

                                 Saihou [S]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Lewis, Counsel, instructed by Wilson Solicitors
LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision of the  First-tier  Judge  which
    was promulgated on 27 June 2016 whereby he dismissed the  asylum  claim
    made by this appellant.

2.   The appellant is a Gambian national.  He came to this  country  and  he
    raised an asylum claim which was, as is now accepted, based upon a pack
    of lies. It is not necessary for us to go into the detail  because  his
    original claim did not disclose the  matter  that  he  now  relies  on,
    namely that he is a homosexual and the attitude in Gambia is  that  the
    observations of the president made it clear  that   this  is  something
    which is totally  unacceptable  and  prosecutions  of  homosexuals  and
    serious discrimination against them has occurred.

3.   The appellant  did  not  raise  that  issue.   He  sought  to  rely  on
    assertions that he had  been  involved  in  writing  articles  directed
    against the President. Unfortunately  for  him  the  articles  that  he
    relied on were shown not in fact to have been written  by  him  at  all
    when the matter was investigated and that aspect  was  totally  untrue.
    And indeed he appealed back in 2010 against the then refusal  and  that
    appeal was dismissed on the basis that he simply was not credible.

4.   Thereafter he raised the homosexuality issue and he made a fresh  claim
    based upon that and feared persecution and the  need  for  humanitarian
    protection in the alternative based upon that.

5.   That was a claim which was rejected.  It was at variance with,  it  was
    said, the fact that he had had a relationship for three  years  with  a
    lady. Furthermore it was something which was only raised  at  the  last
    moment as it was put and when his false claim for asylum was  rejected.
    And he said that he had been involved with another gay person when  his
    false claim for asylum was rejected  and  he  said  that  he  had  been
    involved with another gay person in  the  Gambia  but  had  not  as  it
    appears, suffered any persecution as a result of that.   But he  relied
    upon the claim that he was involved in a relationship with a person who
    he called to give evidence, Mr [R],  who  was  unfortunately  seriously
    disabled but was himself gay and actively involved in  the  furtherance
    of gay rights.

6.   What led largely to the leave to appeal was the matter  which  happened
    in the course of the hearing that whilst there was cross-examination of
    the appellant it was noted that the judge appeared to have been looking
    at some electronic device which was thought to be a  mobile  phone  and
    Counsel then appearing for the appellant sought to raise the issue with
    the judge because it appeared that he was not paying attention  to  the
    evidence that was being given.

7.   Rather than dealing with it in what on the face of it would  have  been
    the sensible way, indicating if that was the case that  he  was  merely
    using an electronic device  to  perhaps  make  notes  or  to  refer  to
    something or whatever the explanation  was,  it  is  said  the  judge's
    reaction was to get angry with Counsel and to threaten to report him to
    the Bar Council.

8.   That was unfortunate because it led and reasonably  led  the  appellant
    to believe the judge being thoroughly hostile to his representative was
    not going to give him a fair hearing.

9.   No doubt the judge was amply justified in deciding that this  appellant
    was a man who lacked credibility and indeed he had been convicted of  a
    number of offences of  dishonesty  whilst  in  this  country.   So  his
    credibility was clearly in  tatters  but  he  called  Mr  [R]  to  give
    evidence on his behalf.  The judge without giving any reasons  directed
    at why Mr [R] should come and give a dishonest account in favour of the
    appellant  simply  rejected  his  evidence  that  there  had   been   a
    relationship.  He accepted that the claimant knew and was a  friend  of
    Mr [R], but he said that this did  not  show  he,  the  appellant,  was
    homosexual, merely that he had gone to help Mr [R] because Mr  [R]  was
    disabled.

10.  It is important of course that justice must be  seen  to  be  done  and
    there was the episode which concerned the appellant's then  counsel  Mr
    Chirico, reasonably concerned him, and it is plain on what  appears  to
    be accepted that the judge had done something to indicate that  he  was
    referring to something which was not visible to those representing  the
    parties and that his reaction was  as  we  have  indicated.   In  those
    circumstances there must  be  some  concern  that  the  view  has  been
    reasonably taken on behalf of the appellant that he did not have a fair
    hearing.

11.  It may be that if the reasoning was  entirely  satisfactory,  we  would
    have been able to say that unfortunate though the judge's reaction was,
    it could not be said to justify allowing the appeal but when we add the
    refusal to accept Mr [R]'s evidence and the  failure  of  any  positive
    reasons to say that Mr [R] was himself not giving proper  evidence  and
    was effectively dishonestly seeking to support this appellant, does add
    to the concern.

12.   The  fact  is  of  course  that  the  appellant  did  not  raise   the
    homosexuality issue until after he failed on his other grounds.  On the
    other hand, there is material,  which  is  capable  of  supporting  the
    reluctance of homosexuals, particularly when they come from  a  society
    where that is thoroughly disapproved, to out in all the  circumstances.





Notice of Decision

13.  In all those circumstances and for the reasons that we  have  indicated
    we take the view that this is a case where  justice  requires  that  we
    allow this appeal and remit the matter to be reconsidered by the First-
    tier Tribunal who will hear all the relevant evidence.  We should  make
    it clear that we are not saying and do not say that the appellant  will
    necessarily succeed in his claim in due course.  But  it  is  important
    that he has a proper  fair  hearing  when  his  case  can  be  properly
    considered.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date: 25 October 2016

Mr Justice Collins



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is granted.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date: 25 October 2016

Mr Justice Collins

