
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00733/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 September 2018                             |On 23 November 2018           |
|                                                 |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY

                                   Between

                                     RAA
                           (Anonymity Order Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Spurling of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran born in 1984.  He appeals against  a
    decision of the respondent made on 17 December 2017 to refuse his claim
    for asylum.

 2. The basis of his claim is that he fears return due to his ethnicity  as
    a Kurd, due to his sur place activities; he is active on  Facebook  and
    has posted articles and videos which demonstrate  his  pro-Kurdish  and
    anti-Iranian regime political profile.  Also, he  fears  return  as  an
    undocumented failed asylum seeker.

 3. The respondent noted that his claim to fear return due to his political
    opinion was considered and dismissed by  the  Tribunal  in  a  decision
    promulgated in 2010.  He had been found to be not credible about events
    in Iran.  It was not considered that his  activities  on  social  media
    would bring him to the adverse attention of  the  authorities.  Illegal
    exit was not a significant risk factor.  Nor would he be at risk solely
    because of his Kurdish ethnicity.  Expert reports by Dr Joffe  did  not
    assist the claim.

 4. He appealed.

First-tier Hearing

 5. Following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 13 February 2018  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Martins dismissed the appeal.  Her findings are at paragraph
    [44] ff.

 6. In summary, it was agreed that the issue was whether the appellant  was
    at risk on account of  his  sur  place  activities.  She  took  as  the
    starting point the previous determination (2010)  where  the  appellant
    was found not credible.  His evidence on his involvement  with  Partiya
    Jiyana  Azad  a  Kurdistane  (PJAK)  was  inconsistent  and   had   his
    associations  with  PJAK  come  to  the  attention   of   the   Iranian
    authorities, his family would have found  it  difficult  to  remain  in
    their village without experiencing problems from the authorities.

 7. In respect of sur place activities those who face difficulties with the
    authorities regarding Facebook are those who personally post criticisms
    of the regime and insult religious leaders, and he had not done so; his
    posts appear to share events which have occurred in Iran. The appellant
    has not got a significant Facebook profile, he is cautious  when  using
    it. He has attended only three demonstrations in his years in  the  UK.
    The appellant has involved himself in sur place activities  to  bolster
    his asylum claim.

 8. There is no documentary evidence to  suggest  that  the  demonstrations
    attracted public interest.  There is no independent evidence  that  the
    Iranian authorities used surveillance and had the capacity to  identify
    demonstrators simply by their attendance.  He has no political  profile
    and will not be at risk on account of his illegal exit.

 9. He sought permission to appeal which  was  refused  but  granted  on  9
    August 2018                    on re-application to the Upper Tribunal.

    Error of law hearing

10. At the error of law hearing Mr Spurling's  main  attack  was  that  the
    judge failed to take into account material caselaw on the issue of risk
    on return in light of the use of social media, evidence  which  despite
    adverse credibility  findings  on  other  matters,  was  not  disputed.
    Specifically, she failed to  have  regard  to  AB  &  Others  (internet
    activity - state of evidence) Iran [2015] UKUT 0257  which  was  before
    her.

11. A further point was that the judge although she acknowledged the expert
    evidence before her made no findings on it.

12. Mr Lindsay's response was that the judge had made findings  which  were
    open to her on  the  evidence  including  that  the  appellant  has  no
    significant levels of political anti-regime activities.   As  such  the
    case law did not assist the appellant.

Consideration

13. I find merit in Mr  Spurling's  comments.   As  indicated  it  was  not
    disputed that the appellant had used social media to disseminate  anti-
    Iranian government/pro-Kurdish propaganda.  The judge's findings on the
    appellant's social media activities are solely at  [46],  namely,  that
    his posts "appear to share events which have  occurred  in  Iran";  and
    that his is "... not the most significant of profiles.  Those  who  are
    likely to face difficulties are those who personally  post  anti-regime
    posts and those who insult religious leaders."

14. I note the following comments from AB:-

           "... We find that the authorities do not chase everyone who just
           might be an  opponent  but  if  that  opponent  comes  to  their
           attention for some reason then that person  might  be  in  quite
           serious trouble for  conduct  which  to  the  ideas  of  Western
           liberal society seem of little consequence." [455]


15. Also, at [457]:-

           "... There is clear evidence that some people  are  asked  about
           their internet activity  and  particularly  for  their  Facebook
           password.  We can think of no reason whatsoever  to  doubt  this
           evidence. It is absolutely clear that blogging and activities on
           facebook are very common amongst Iranian citizens and it is very
           clear that the Iranian authorities are exceedingly twitchy about
           them... We find that the act  of  returning  someone  creates  a
           'pinch point' so that returnees are brought into direct  contact
           with the  authorities  in  Iran  who  have  both  the  time  and
           inclination to interrogate them.  We think it likely  that  they
           will be asked about their internet activity and likely  if  they
           have any internet activity for that to be exposed and if  it  is
           less than flattering of the government to lead to a real risk of
           persecution."


16. Further, AB makes express findings on the point that it is not relevant
    whether or not media use is opportunistic [464] and that a high  degree
    of activity is not necessary to attract persecution [466].

17.  The judge did refer to expert evidence which states that being a  Kurd
    may be an exacerbating factor for a returnee otherwise of interest  but
    she considered that having been away  for  many  years  and  given  the
    "insignificant level of political involvement in terms of  anti  regime
    activities" he would not be at risk. In  that  regard,  such  does  not
    appear to have been considered  in  the  context  of  the  respondent's
    policy summary (July 2016) CIG Iran: Kurds and Kurdish political groups
    (2.3.3) (which was before the judge and was referred to in the skeleton
    argument) and which states that for those perceived to be  involved  in
    Kurdish political activities the authorities have "no tolerance for any
    activities  connected  to  Kurdish  political  groups..."   which   the
    appellant claims to have been doing through his internet activity. More
    significantly, as indicated, AB was before the judge but  she  made  no
    reference to it and gave no consideration of its analysis. The onus is,
    of course, on the appellant to establish his claim. However, I consider
    that in failing to take account of material case law on  the  issue  of
    possible risk on return the judge materially erred such that  the  case
    must be reheard.  Mr Spurling said that in the event that error of  law
    was found he would wish to lead further evidence.

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside to be  remade.  No
    findings stand. The nature of the case is such that it  is  appropriate
    under section 12 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007  Act
    and Practice Statement 7.2 to remit to the First-tier Tribunal  for  an
    entirely fresh hearing.  The members of the First-tier Tribunal  chosen
    to consider the case are not to include Judge Martins.

19. The First tier Tribunal made an anonymity order.  The  matter  was  not
    addressed in the Upper Tribunal. Anonymity has been preserved herein.



Signed                                             Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway



