
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00138/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28th November 2016                         |On 20th December 2016         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                  Noel [B]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Patel of Counsel, instructed by Broudie Jackson
& Canter
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Heynes
    made following a hearing at Manchester on 26th May 2016.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Burundi who claimed asylum in the  UK  on
    30th April 2015, shortly after his arrival here.  He claims  to  be  at
    risk on return because he is the co-founding member of  a  music  band,
    called the Lion Story.  He composed songs criticising  the  government.
    As a consequence he was targeted and assaulted, his  house  burnt  down
    and, in August 2014 arrested and detained.  He fled to Rwanda  and  his
    wife now has refugee status in Uganda.

 3. Initially the claim was  dealt  with  under  the  detained  fast  track
    procedure.   Judge  Robinson,  on  29th  May  2015  accepted  that  the
    appellant was involved with the Lion Story but not  that  he  had  been
    persecuted as claimed.

 4. When the fast track procedure was found to be unlawful,  the  appellant
    served further documents on the respondent and asked that the claim  be
    reconsidered.  The respondent did not do so and the  appeal  then  came
    before Judge Heynes.

 5.  This  was  clearly  a  very  difficult  hearing.   The  representative
    submitted that, since the respondent had not complied with  directions,
    and she had not given any response to the documents, they should  stand
    as unchallenged.  The judge, unsurprisingly, rejected  that  submission
    but it seems that the representative continued to pursue  the  argument
    in a manner which the judge said "was disruptive and unhelpful".

 6. Judge Heynes disbelieved the appellant's account in its entirety.

 7. The appellant's representative filed lengthy grounds,  challenging  the
    judge's treatment of the evidence, arguing that he had dealt  with  the
    matter unfairly.

 8. Permission  to  appeal  was  initially  refused  by  Judge  Pedro,  but
    subsequently granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara on 29th July 2016.

 9. On 6th September 2016 the  respondent  served  a  reply  defending  the
    determination.  However, at the hearing, Mr Harrison told  me  that  he
    would not oppose a remittal of this matter to the First-tier.

10. As outlined in the grounds, and in the submissions by Ms  Patel,  there
    are a number of errors of law in this determination.

11. First, the judge has relied on a number of matters, when  reaching  his
    credibility findings, without putting them  to  the  appellant.   Some,
    such as signatures on a witness statement,  criticisms  of  the  arrest
    warrant and the translation of contract  documents,  were  not  matters
    raised by the respondent  either  in  the  refusal  letter  or  by  the
    Presenting Officer at the hearing.  Furthermore, the appellant's  basic
    claim, that he was involved with the music group, had been accepted  by
    a previous Immigration Judge.   The  appellant  was  therefore  not  on
    notice that these were matters which would concern the  judge,  and  he
    was deprived of an opportunity to address his concerns.

12. Second, when considering whether  the  appellant  was  involved  as  he
    claimed with Lion Story the judge wrote:

         "In the background information relating  to  the  group,  there  is
         barely a mention of him."

    As Ms Patel pointed out, in at least one of the  articles  produced  by
    the appellant he is mentioned four times by name and his photograph  is
    reproduced.  To state that there is "barely a mention of him" is not  a
    proper reflection of that evidence.


Notice of Decision

The decision is set aside.  It will be reheard in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
by a judge other than Judge Heynes.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed[pic]                             Date 19 December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
