
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
pa/00813/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 13 April 2016                           |On 31 May 2016                   |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                    K T N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Victor Nwosu (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Ms Ashika Fijiwala (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge S K Kaler, promulgated on 5th October 2015, following  a  hearing
    at Yarl's Wood on 7th September 2015.  In the determination, the  judge
    allowed the appeal of the Appellant on the ground that "there has  been
    an error of law in considering Article  8",  whereupon  the  Respondent
    Secretary  of  State  subsequently  applied  for,  and   was   granted,
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the  matter  comes
    before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female citizen of Zambia who was born  on  26th  May
    1983 and she appealed the decision of the Respondent  dated  30th  July
    2015, on the grounds that the decision to refuse her asylum status  and
    humanitarian leave, on the basis that she was bisexual,  has  HIV,  and
    fears  people  trying  to  claim  the  family  land  in   Zambia,   was
    unsubstantiated.

The Judge's Findings

 3. In her determination, the judge rejected completely the asylum claim on
    the basis that, "the Appellant has never previously claimed  she  is  a
    bisexual, despite having made several applications for leave to  remain
    to the Home Office ..." (paragraph 20).  The judge also held that, "her
    actions show that she is untruthful and prepared to exercise deception"
    (paragraph 20 and paragraph 21).  The judge went  on  to  consider  the
    Appellant's HIV status and made it clear that, "the medical cases  have
    consistently stated that there have to be serious consequences for  the
    returnee before Article 3 would be engaged" (paragraph 24),  which  was
    not the case here.  The arguments in favour of the  Appellant's  asylum
    claim were therefore squarely rejected.

 4. With respect to  Article  8,  however,  the  judge  observed  that  the
    Appellant

         "Has been here since the age of 16 years, save  for  short  periods
         when she has visited Zambia.  I accept that she  has  never  worked
         there.  She has two undergraduate degrees and  is  studying  for  a
         masters degree.  She has been running her own consultancy  business
         here for several years.  She owns property" (see paragraph 30).

 5. The judge went on to say that the Secretary of  State,  notwithstanding
    these features to  the  Appellant's  claim,  had  not  addressed  these
    aspects  of  the  Appellant's  claim  (see  paragraph  32).    In   her
    conclusion, the judge then had regard to the case of Veerabudren [2015]
    EWHC 500, there

         "It was held that it was not enough simply  for  the  Secretary  of
         State to expect an applicant to infer that  a  separate  Article  8
         consideration of exceptional circumstances of  her  case  had  been
         carried out if that  matter  had  not  been  referred  to,  as  the
         applicant could not know what circumstances had  or  had  not  been
         taken into account" (see paragraph 39).

 6. On that basis, the judge held that "the decision is not  in  accordance
    with the law" (see paragraph 40).  The matter was remitted back to  the
    Secretary of State for a consideration of these outstanding issues.

The Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application state that in  terms  of  Dube  [2015]  UKUT
    00090 an oral hearing of that decision would have made  it  appropriate
    for  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  to  consider   the   outstanding
    requirements herself, as opposed to making a finding that the  decision
    was not in accordance with the law.   The  judge  had  effectively  now
    remitted the matter back to the Secretary of State  to  fully  consider
    all the aspects specified in paragraph 117A - B of  the  2002  Act  and
    make a decision.  However, the judge  should  have  exercised  her  own
    discretion and made findings herself on these issues.

 8. On 13th October 2013, permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me on 13th April 2016, Ms Fijiwala, appearing  on
    behalf of  the  Respondent  Secretary  of  State,  made  the  following
    submissions.  First, the issue in this appeal was whether Article 8 had
    been considered in a fulsome manner, including outside the  Immigration
    Rules, but this was a flawed contention because the refusal letter  had
    plainly had regard to all  the  circumstances  when  consideration  was
    given to the "exceptional circumstances" of the case (see paragraphs 64
    and 65).  Second, the case of SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387  makes  it
    clear that there is a "second stage" to be  applied,  and  unless  that
    second stage can be successfully overcome by the Appellant,  an  appeal
    cannot succeed (see paragraph 46).  Third, the Secretary of State has a
    residual discretion under the 1971 Immigration Act and in  SS  (Congo),
    where it was held that, given that the Secretary of  State  has  issued
    instructions to officials regarding  the  approach  to  be  adopted  to
    granting leave outside the Rules,

         "The text  of  the  instructions  makes  it  clear  that  the  term
         'exceptional circumstances' is given a wide meaning in the  context
         of the instructions, covering any case in which on proper  analysis
         under Article 8 at the second stage it would be disproportionate to
         refuse leave" (paragraph 49).

10. The Appellant here could not have succeeded under this wide meaning  of
    "exceptional circumstances".  Fourth, this is why a great many  refusal
    letters are couched in exactly the same terms with no problems  arising
    from such a drafting.

11. Fifth, the judge here observed that,

         "Whilst it is  clear  from  the  refusal  letter  that  exceptional
         circumstances have been considered, I note that there is no mention
         of Section 117(B).  That is relevant as  to  the  question  of  the
         legitimate aim test in proportionality" (paragraph 28).

12. However, the judge erred in this respect because there is no  statutory
    obligation on the Secretary of State to consider Section 117B, and Dube
    [2015] UKUT 00090, only suggests that it would  be  desirable  for  the
    Secretary of State to do so.

13. Sixth, whereas the judge is of the view that, "I have read the decision
    letter carefully and I do not find that all of these considerations are
    addressed by the Respondent.  117B(2)  and  (3)  are  highly  relevant"
    (paragraph 32), the fact is that AM (Malawi) [2015] UKUT 260  makes  it
    clear that, "an Appellant can obtain no  positive  right  to  grant  of
    leave to remain from either Section 117B(2) or (3), whatever the degree
    of his fluency in English or the strength of his  financial  resources.
    Therefore, any failure by the decision maker,  if  it  was  a  failure,
    could not have led to the grant of leave on this basis.  Indeed, Forman
    [2015] UKUT 412 makes it clear that,

         "The public interest inform immigration control is not  diluted  by
         the consideration that a person pursuing a claim  under  Article  8
         ECHR has at no time been a financial burden on the state or is self-
         sufficient  or  is  likely  to   remain   so   indefinitely.    The
         significance of these factors is that where they  are  not  present
         the public interest is fortified".

    Ms Fijiwala asked me to make a finding of an error of law in the  judge
    having allowed the appeal on the basis that it was  not  in  accordance
    with the law, and to proceed to allow  the  appeal  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State.

14. For his part, Mr Nwosu  submitted  that  the  fact  remained  that  the
    Secretary of State's refusal letter was inadequate, and anyone  reading
    that refusal letter could not  know  to  what  extent  the  Appellant's
    private life matters had been taken into account.  First, the Appellant
    did have substantial private life interests, as explained at  paragraph
    30 of the determination, because the judge observes that the  Appellant
    has  been  in  the  UK  since  the  age  of  16  years,  has  completed
    undergraduate degrees and has embarked on  a  masters  degree,  and  is
    running her  own  consultancy  business,  together  with  ownership  of
    property.  These matters were not addressed in the  refusal  letter  at
    all.

15.  Second,  insofar  as  reliance  was   placed   by   the   Respondent's
    representative  today,  upon  a  consideration  of   the   "exceptional
    circumstances" all that is said in the refusal letter  (see  paragraphs
    64 to 65 is that it has been decided that no relevant issues are raised
    in the application with respect to "exceptional  circumstances".   That
    is a conclusion and it is not the giving of reasons for  the  decision.
    The Appellant is  entitled  to  proper  reasons.   This  is  especially
    important given that the judge had held that  the  decision  maker  had
    gone through paragraph 276ADE and concluded that  the  Appellant  could
    not succeed under the Immigration Rules, so that in moving  to  matters
    further afield in the domain of freestanding Article  8  jurisprudence,
    it was necessary to address the  specific  issues  that  the  Appellant
    raised.  This had not been done.

16. Third, the judge states (at paragraph 33) that, "I can  carry  out  the
    assessment myself, but it is necessary for the Secretary of State to do
    so first.  The latest case law indicates that in Appendix FM  cases,  a
    full assessment by the Secretary of State is needed at  least  in  some
    cases" (see  paragraph  33).   This  showed  that  the  judge  was  not
    oblivious to her own discretion in being able to carry out an Article 8
    assessment.  What the judge was saying  was  that  a  primary  decision
    first needs to be made in this respect by the Respondent authority  and
    that this is borne out by the authorities.  Given that the Secretary of
    State had failed to  make  a  rounded  assessment  of  the  Appellant's
    private life rights, it was entirely correct to say that  the  decision
    was not in accordance with the law.  In fact, the refusal  letter  does
    not even refer to the leading case  of  Nagre  [2013]  EWHC  720  which
    demonstrates how the second stage must be approached, and  a  reference
    simply to "exceptional circumstances", did not show that the  Secretary
    of State had been approached.

Error of Law

17. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons  are  follows.   First,  it  is  clear  from  the
    Immigration Act 2014 that Part 5A, carrying the title "Article 8 of the
    ECHR: Public Interest Considerations" contains provisions  in  relation
    to the "Application of this Part" that impose a  duty  in  relation  to
    Article 8 considerations only upon "a court or Tribunal".  There is  no
    statutory obligation upon the Secretary of State in this respect.   All
    that Dube [2015] UKUT 00090 states is that although

         "These provisions are only expressed as being binding on  a  'court
         or Tribunal', it may be that the Secretary of State  will  consider
         it in the interests  of  good  administration  and  consistence  of
         decision making on Article 8 claims at all levels to  have  express
         regard to Sections 117A - 117B considerations herself, but  she  is
         not directly bound to do so".

18. To suggest that a failure of the Secretary of  State  to  have  express
    regard to these matters,  is  to  make  a  decision  that  is  "not  in
    accordance with the law", is  to  impose  a  statutory  duty  upon  the
    Secretary of State through the backdoor.  This  is  unwarranted.   Case
    law cannot impose a duty where the statute itself  emanating  from  the
    will of Parliament does not.

19. Accordingly, notwithstanding the otherwise  sensible  approach  of  the
    judge below, it behoved the Tribunal to carry out the Section 117A -  D
    assessment herself.  This was not done.  If there are indeed issues  in
    relation to the Appellant's private life rights, such as the fact  that
    she has been in the UK since the age of 16, has been  running  her  own
    consultancy, and owns property in this country (see paragraph 30) these
    were matters that the judge should have evaluated  in  the  context  of
    Section 117 and the "public interest" requirement in the maintenance of
    firm and fair immigration control.

Remaking the Decision

20. I remake the decision on the basis of  the  findings  of  the  original
    judge, the evidence before her, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  I am allowing this appeal to the extent  that  it  is  remitted
    back to the First-tier Tribunal Judge, to  be  determined  by  a  judge
    other than Judge S K Kaler for a proper assessment  to  be  carried  in
    respect of Section 117.  All of the findings remain in tact.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is  allowed
to the extent that it is remitted back to a First-tier Tribunal Judge  after
the application of Part 5 of the 2014 Act in relation  to  the  Section  117
consideration.  All previous findings remain intact.

An anonymity Order is made.



Signed                              Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 28th May 2016
