
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/00278/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 19 August 2019                         |On 10 September 2019              |
|Extempore Decision                        |                                  |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                                     MM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Iengar, Counsel instructed by Osprey solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Ukraine who entered the UK unlawfully in
    2007 and remained without leave.

 2. In 2018 the appellant made a human rights and protection claim. He
    claimed that he would be at risk on return to Ukraine because he had
    evaded military service. He also claimed that removing him from the UK
    would breach article 8 ECHR because he is in a relationship akin to
    marriage with an EEA national that he has been living with since 2014.

 3. In a decision promulgated on 27 March 2019, First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Khan dismissed the claim. The judge did not find the appellant
    credible. At paragraph 43 of the decision the judge described the
    evidence of the appellant and his partner as "extremely vague and
    evasive". In respect of the asylum claim, the judge found that the
    appellant "was simply making up his evidence as he went along". With
    regard to the article 8 claim, the judge found at paragraph 48 of the
    decision that there were clear inconsistencies between the evidence of
    the appellant and his partner and concluded that the evidence did not
    establish that the relationship was genuine.

 4. The grounds of appeal make only one argument, which is that the judge
    failed to give clear reasons why no weight was given to the evidence of
    the appellant's partner. Ms Iengar submitted that the judge gave
    inadequate consideration to the evidence supporting that there is a
    genuine relationship between the appellant and his partner, including
    four separate letters in support. She acknowledged that the appeal only
    relates to article 8 and that the judge's decision in relation to the
    protection claim is not being challenged.

 5. As this appeal turns on the evidence of the appellant's partner, it is
    necessary to consider both what she said in her evidence and what was
    not included in her evidence. The evidence of the appellant's partner,
    as set out in her witness statement, is that she is a citizen of Latvia
    who has been in a relationship with the appellant since 2014, that they
    live together and that although they are not married the relationship
    is as if they are husband and wife.  The appellant's partner did not
    give evidence about any children who would be negatively impacted by
    the appellant's removal from the UK, or any obstacles to the
    relationship continuing outside the UK, either in Latvia or Ukraine.

 6. Even if the judge had accepted the evidence of the appellant's partner
    in full, that evidence could not, on any legitimate view, have changed
    the outcome of the appeal. The relationship between the appellant and
    his partner commenced (and developed) when the appellant was in the UK
    unlawfully and therefore at a time when he had no legitimate basis
    either for being in the UK or for believing that he was entitled to
    remain in the UK on a permanent basis. There was no evidence before the
    First-tier Tribunal (from the appellant's partner or anyone else) to
    support a finding that there would be obstacles to the relationship
    continuing outside the UK. Moreover, there was no evidence to indicate
    that any child would be adversely affected by the removal of the
    appellant. Taking these factors together there was simply no basis upon
    which a judge could have allowed the appeal under article 8 on the
    basis of the appellant's relationship with his partner or on the basis
    of the evidence given by his partner.

 7. The error that is said to undermine the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal is that there was inadequate consideration of, or inadequate
    reasons given for rejecting, the evidence of the appellant's partner.
    However, given that this evidence could not, even taken at its highest,
    have affected the outcome of the appeal, I am satisfied the judge gave
    it sufficient consideration.

Decision

The appeal is dismissed and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan        |Dated: 28 August 2019                |




