
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00112/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 November 2019                   |On 4 December 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     S B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Christie
For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born in 2003 and is a male  citizen  of  Albania.  He
    arrived in the United Kingdom in 2018 as an unaccompanied minor.  By  a
    decision dated 20 December 2018, the Secretary  of  State  refused  his
    application for international protection. The  appellant  appealed  the
    First-tier Tribunal which, in a decision promulgated on 17  July  2019,
    dismissed his appeal. The appellant now appeals,  with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant claimed that he was the target in a blood feud  and  also
    that he faced a real risk of degrading treatment at the  hands  of  his
    father. The Secretary of State had accepted that the appellant had been
    beaten by his father when drunk. In my opinion,  the  judge  has  given
    adequate reasons for rejecting the appellant's claim to be the  subject
    to a blood feud. Indeed, the grounds of appeal are silent  as  to  that
    aspect of his claim. Instead,  the  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal focus on the abuse which the appellant  has  suffered  at  the
    hands of his father. In her analysis of that aspect  of  the  claim,  I
    find that the judge has fallen into legal error.

 3. First, the judge's findings as to the appellant's claimed present  fear
    of his father and the treatment which  he  may  have  received  at  his
    father's hands are not clear. As I have noted above, the  Secretary  of
    State has accepted that the appellant had been beaten  by  his  father.
    The decision letter of the Secretary of State [114] states  that  steps
    will not be taken to trace the appellant's family  in  Albania  because
    doing so would be contrary to  the  Secretary  of  State's  duty  under
    section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 because
    the appellant's  father  had  been  'physically  abusive.'  The  judge,
    however, [63] appears to cast doubt upon the appellant's claim that  he
    was scared of his father on account  of  the  treatment  which  he  has
    received from him  in  the  past.  The  judge  doubted  that  only  the
    appellant's mother had paid for his journey made travel arrangements to
    the United Kingdom, the implication in the judge's finding  being  that
    his father had assisted him also. The clear inference from the  judge's
    analysis is that the appellant's claim to have suffered  ill  treatment
    at the hands of his father is not  reliable.  That  would  seem  to  go
    behind the Secretary of State's  acknowledgement  that  the  abuse  had
    taken place.

 4.  Secondly,  the  judge  reaches  no  firm  conclusion  as  regards  the
    appellant's claim that corporal punishment administered by  his  father
    amounted to Article 3 ECHR degrading treatment. The judge discusses the
    cases of DMD v Romania [23022/13] and Bouyid v Belgium [2006]  EHRR  32
    but makes no firm finding in the  present  appeal  that  the  treatment
    which the appellant has received in the past  falls  within  Article  3
    ECHR.  Instead,  the  judge  moves  on  in  her  analysis  to  consider
    sufficiency of protection, a consideration  which  is  also  flawed  by
    legal error. At [73], having discussed the background  material  quoted
    from Horvath [2000] UKHL 37,  the  judge  observes  that  the  Albanian
    authorities 'are taking steps to address' the issue of violence towards
    children; she makes no firm finding as to whether  the  Albanian  state
    would provide the  appellant  with  adequate  or  reasonably  effective
    protection against ill-treatment by his father. Moreover, at [73],  the
    judge  finds  that  the  appellant  would,'  being   older   and   more
    experienced', be aware of the protections that  are  available  in  the
    agencies to whom he could turn. That observation appears to ignore  the
    fact that the appellant is still a minor. Strangely, at [74], the judge
    finds that there is 'no reason  that  he  cannot  re-join  his  family'
    including, presumably, his father. If the judge did not find  that  the
    appellant feared his father or, indeed, that he had not  received  ill-
    treatment of his father's hands in the past, then she should have  made
    firm findings supported by reasons. Her failure to do so  vitiates  her
    analysis. In the circumstances, I set aside the decision.




    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand,  save  for  the  findings  regarding  the
    appellant's claim to be a target in blood feud. The appeal is  returned
    to the First-tier Tribunal for that Tribunal  to  remake  the  decision
    following a hearing.


Signed                              Date 22 November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

