
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00730/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2nd October 2018                           |On 10th October 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 MOHAMED [O]
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms M Butler, Counsel


                    DECISION AND REASONS ON ERROR OF LAW

 1. The appellant in this appeal is the Secretary of State. However, it  is
    more convenient to refer to the parties as they were before  the  First
    Tier Tribunal. From now on, therefore, I shall refer to Mr [O] as  "the
    appellant" and to the Secretary of State as "the respondent".

 2. The appellant arrived in the UK  clandestinely  in  November  2015  and
    claimed asylum. Although his age was initially  contested,  it  is  now
    accepted that he  was  only  15  when  he  arrived  and  submitted  his
    application. The respondent accepted the appellant was an  ethnic  Kurd
    from Iraq. However, the account given by the appellant of fearing  ISIS
    and also fearing the Kurdish  population  in  general  because  of  his
    father's former role with the Ba'ath Party were rejected on credibility
    grounds. The appellant appealed.

 3. The appeal was heard by Judge of the First  Tier  Tribunal  Martins  at
    Hatton Cross on 20 February 2018. In a decision not promulgated until 1
    June 2018, the judge  allowed  the  appeal.  She  found  the  appellant
    credible as to the reasons he had put forward for fearing to return  to
    Iraq. She followed country guidance that the appellant's home area  was
    an area of internal armed conflict and considered whether the appellant
    could relocate safely to another area of the country. She gave  reasons
    why she considered this would be unduly harsh. She allowed  the  appeal
    on asylum grounds.

 4. The respondent sought permission to  appeal  on  short  grounds.  These
    challenge the decision on the basis that the  judge  appeared  to  have
    accepted the credibility of the appellant's account without giving  any
    clear reasons for doing so.

 5. The application was considered by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Parkes.  He  considered  the  decision  lacked  any  analysis  of   the
    appellant's case and  amounted  to  a  "bald,  unreasoned  acceptance".
    However, his order concluded  by  stating  that  the  grounds  did  not
    disclose any arguable error of law and that permission  to  appeal  was
    refused. This was apparently amended under the so-called 'slip rule' to
    show that the judge intended to grant permission, although the  amended
    decision confusingly  continued  to  read  that  the  grounds  did  not
    disclose any arguable error of law.

 6. The appellant submitted a rule 24 response arguing  that  the  decision
    should be upheld. The response  also  pointed  out  that  it  had  been
    decided in Katsonga ("Slip Rule"; FtT's  general  powers)  [2016]  UKUT
    00228 (IAC) that rule 31 of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Procedure  Rules
    cannot be used to reverse the effect of a decision. I raised  with  the
    representatives how to approach the question of  the  Upper  Tribunal's
    jurisdiction in this case. Both parties were keen  to  proceed  on  the
    basis that permission  had  been  granted.  I  am  grateful  for  their
    constructive assistance. In the  event  that  the  purported  grant  of
    permission by the First-tier Tribunal is  invalid,  I  reconvene  as  a
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal in  order  to  grant  permission.  The
    parties consented to waive the requirement for an order to that  effect
    being sent out.

 7. I heard submissions from the representatives on the  issue  of  whether
    the judge's decision contained a material error of law.  I  shall  only
    set these out as is necessary to explain my decision.

 8. Mr Tufan wished to argue matters which  had  not  been  raised  in  the
    grounds seeking permission to appeal, such as whether Kirkuk is still a
    'contested area' and whether the appellant could obtain a CSID,  but  I
    did not permit him to do so. He acknowledged the grounds were brief and
    he simply argued that the judge's decision is not adequately  reasoned.
    Ms Butler argued the decision is adequately reasoned. I agree  with  Ms
    Butler and my reasons are as follows.

 9. In her decision the judge set out in considerable  detail  the  reasons
    given by the respondent for disbelieving the appellant, the points made
    in the grounds of appeal and the oral evidence given at the hearing. At
    paragraph 54 of her decision, she began her findings and conclusions by
    stating that she found the appellant credible. Although  she  does  not
    say so expressly, it is clear that she meant by this that she  accepted
    the entirety of the account put forward. She continued in paragraph  55
    as follows:

         "The respondent accepts the appellant's identity, age,  nationality
         and Kurdish ethnicity. Much of the respondent's  rejection  of  the
         appellant's claim is based on alleged inconsistencies, inaccuracies
         or vagueness in the answers given by him at his  asylum  interview.
         As argued on the appellant's behalf, it is highly relevant  to  any
         assessment of the appellant's asylum interview, that he was a minor
         at the time it took place (as is now  accepted),  but  he  was  not
         treated as such by the respondent. The appellant was not given  any
         of the procedural safeguards he was entitled to, significantly  the
         attendance of a legal representative, and therefore the appellant's
         answers at interview are to be assessed  against  that  background;
         namely that he was a minor who is to be given the  benefit  of  the
         doubt according to the respondent's own policy.  I  find  that  the
         appellant gave satisfactory explanations  for  the  inconsistencies
         and discrepancies noted by the respondent.  It  is  significant  to
         note that  he  was  15  years  old  at  the  time,  that  from  the
         information he had, his father was kidnapped and his departure  was
         organised by his mother and uncle. As he explained in  his  witness
         statement, it was not for him to decide when to leave Iraq."


10. I find in this paragraph there are  two  very  clear  reasons  for  the
    positive credibility finding made  by  the  judge:  firstly,  that  the
    various inconsistencies relied on by the respondent had to be viewed in
    the context that the appellant was only 15 years of age at the time  of
    his interview and he was not accompanied at the  time,  and,  secondly,
    that he had provided adequate explanations in his  subsequent  evidence
    for the apparent discrepancies in his account. In my judgment,  in  the
    circumstances of this case, these reasons are adequate.

11. This is a case in which it is helpful to have regard  to  some  of  the
    general  guidance  provided  by  the  higher  courts.  In  Piglowska  v
    Piglowski [1999] UKHL 27 Lord Hoffman,  allowing  an  appeal  from  the
    Court of Appeal, and restoring the decision of the lower courts  stated
    that,

         "These reasons should be read on the assumption that, unless he has
         demonstrated the contrary, the judge knew how he should perform his
         functions and which matters he should take into account.   This  is
         particularly true when the matters in question  are  so  well-known
         ...  An appellate court should resist the temptation to subvert the
         principle that they should not substitute their own discretion  for
         that of the judge by a narrow textual analysis which  enables  them
         to claim that he misdirected himself."


12. In RH v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 640, in upholding the determination of the
    adjudicator, Buxton LJ said,

         "14. There is, however, a more fundamental reason why the  approach
         of the AIT was mistaken. We were shown very familiar  authority  in
         the shape of Flannery v Halifax [2000] 1 WLR  377,  and  English  v
         Emery Reimbold [2002] 1 WLR 2409, which were  said  to  demonstrate
         that in  addressing  this  question  it  was  not  enough  for  the
         adjudicator to say to believe the mother, he must go on and say why
         he did not accept or did not rely on the answer given by  the  boy.
         Had they both  given  evidence  to  him  there  might  possibly  be
         something in that, but it is not required of a  tribunal  of  fact,
         particularly one that has heard witnesses, to say more than that it
         fully accepts the evidence of the one witness. This court  did  not
         intend, in either Flannery  or  English  v  Emery  Reimbold  to  go
         further  than  that,  and  more  particularly  it  was  careful  to
         emphasise in English v Emery Reimbold that the reasoning  necessary
         to be set out by a tribunal of fact depends very largely  upon  the
         nature of the dispute before it. That is conspicuously the case  in
         Flannery, which was a case about two  competing  expert  witnesses,
         where the parties were entitled to some indication of why  one  has
         been preferred to the other. In this case it  is  absolutely  clear
         why the adjudicator decided the matter that he did. He  decided  it
         simply and crudely because he believed what the  mother  told  him.
         The issue before him was whether she had  sole  responsibility  for
         the child, and his series of reasons for believing  what  she  said
         about that could, in my view, not possibly be offset by one  answer
         given by the applicant, part of which is accepted on all  sides  to
         be mistaken and the other part of which, on the mother's  evidence,
         is plainly wrong.


         15.  I therefore  cannot  accept,  I  fear,  that  the  Asylum  and
         Immigration Tribunal was justified at the first  stage  in  finding
         that Mr Watkins had made an error of law. I would  go  further  and
         say  this,  that  when  appeal  tribunals   are   considering   the
         determination of an adjudicator who has heard witnesses and who has
         seen all the  papers,  they  should  be  extremely  careful  before
         translating what may be their view that they would have  found  the
         facts differently from what the adjudicator found into a conclusion
         that the adjudicator has  erred  in  law  in  what  he  has  found.
         Provided it is clear what the basis of the  conclusion  is  --  and
         here it manifestly is clear -- it  is  not  open  to  an  appellate
         tribunal to go behind the determination of the tribunal of fact.


13. Applying these basic principles, in my view, the  judge  in  this  case
    gave sufficient reasons to explain her decision  that,  notwithstanding
    the numerous challenges made, she accepted that the appellant had given
    a truthful account. In the circumstances, she was entitled to go on  to
    find that there would not  be  a  sufficiency  of  protection  for  the
    appellant in his home area and that he would be unable or he could  not
    reasonably be expected to relocate internally.

14. For these reasons, the decision of Judge Martins allowing the appeal on
    protection grounds shall stand and the respondent's appeal against  her
    decision is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not make a material  error  of  law
and her decision allowing the appeal shall stand.


Signed                                  Date 3 October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Froom
