
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00837/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 19th April 2017                         |On 05th September 2017         |
|                                           |                               |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                             AYAZ MOHAMMAD SYED
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss. W Bremang, instructed by Rayan Adams
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Tobin promulgated on 15th September 2016.  The underlying decision that
    was the subject of the appeal before the  First-tier  Tribunal  ("FtT")
    was the decision of the respondent dated 11th December 2015  to  refuse
    the appellant's protection and human rights claims.


 2. The appellant is a  Pakistani  national.   The  appellant's  claim  for
    international protection is based on  his  fear  that  if  returned  to
    Pakistan, he would be killed by his family because he married an Indian
    woman, against their wishes.  He claims that his  family  had  arranged
    for him to marry his cousin.  He also fears return to Nigeria, where he
    had lived for a number of years prior to his arrival in the UK.


 3. A summary  of  the  appellant's  immigration  history  is  set  out  at
    paragraph [4] of the decision of the FtT.  A summary of the appellant's
    protection claim is set out at paragraph [5] of  the  decision  of  the
    FtT.  The FtT Judge heard evidence  from  the  appellant  and  had  the
    opportunity of observing the appellant's evidence be tested  in  cross-
    examination.  The Judge's findings and conclusions are to be  found  at
    paragraphs [16] to [32] of his decision.  I do not repeat them in  this
    decision, but I have carefully considered  the  findings  made  by  the
    Judge, and his reasons for those findings.  It is  sufficient  to  note
    for the purposes of this decision that the Judge found the  appellant's
    account to lack credibility.   The  Judge  found,  at  [16],  that  the
    appellant's evidence is less than  candid.   The  Judge  concluded,  at
    [17], that he was not convinced  by  the  appellant's  account  of  his
    family's purported hostility to an  Indian  Muslim  woman.   The  Judge
    found, at [18] to [22], that the appellant gave an  unsatisfactory  and
    vague account  of  his  father's  political  activities  and  that  the
    appellant had given an account of his  father  still  being  angry  and
    making a vague and unsubstantiated threat,  as  an  effort  to  bolster
    deficiencies in the appellant's earlier story.  At  paragraph  [23]  of
    his decision, the Judge states;


              "Having   heard   the    appellant's    account    and    his
             explanation  for     the     alleged   inconsistencies     and
             anomalies   in his    asylum    application,  together    with
             my assessment above, I do not believe the appellant's  version
             of events. I do not find the appellant credible."


 4. The Judge concluded, at [26], that the appellant has not discharged the
    burden of proof on him by satisfying the FtT  Judge  that  there  is  a
    reasonable degree of likelihood that should he be returned to Pakistan,
    the appellant would  come  within  the  Geneva  Convention.  The  Judge
    concluded that the appellant's removal to Pakistan would not cause  the
    UK to be in breach of its obligations under the Geneva Convention.


 5. The Judge then turned to the appellant's  claims  under  the  ECHR.  At
    paragraph [30], the Judge  found  that  the  appellant  has  failed  to
    satisfy the Judge that there is a real  risk  that  on  his  return  to
    Pakistan, his life would be threatened and/or he would  be  exposed  to
    torture or to inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. As  to  the
    appellant's Article 8 claim, the Judge states, at [32]:


             "Where a claim is based on Article 8 it should be  considered,
             pursuant to the immigration Rules.  The  appellant  failed  to
             meet the  requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iii)  of  the
             Immigration  Rules  because  he  had  not  lived  in  the   UK
             continuously  for  at  least  20  years.  I  accept  that  the
             appellant's wife may initially have to apply for  a  temporary
             visa for Pakistan - or even a succession  of  temporary  visas
             until her immigration status becomes established in  Pakistan.
             I do not envisage any difficulties for the children  returning
             to their country of nationality. Even taking into account this
             inconvenience, I do not consider that returning the  appellant
             to Pakistan would cause the UK to be in breach  of  Article  8
             ECHR. Therefore, for these reasons, and also for  the  reasons
             set out above, I also dismiss this limb of his appeal.


 6. The appellant contends in the grounds of appeal that there were  points
    which were not considered by the FtT Judge tending to suggest that  the
    appellant has a very strong Article 8 claim, either within  or  outwith
    the Immigration Rules.  The appellant claims that his home country,  if
    any, is Nigeria.  It is said that the appellant  has  visited  Pakistan
    very few times, and he never lived in Pakistan on  a  permanent  basis,
    apart of short family visits. Furthermore, it is, or should  have  been
    obvious,  that  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    appellant's integration to  Pakistan  for  the  purposes  of  paragraph
    276ADE (1)(vi) of the immigration  rules.  The  appellant  claims  that
    another relevant factor is that  if  the  appellant  were  returned  to
    Pakistan, he would not be returned with  his  family.  His  wife  is  a
    citizen of India. The appellant claims that at the very least,  in  the
    short term, there would be extremely significant interruption to family
    life involving very young children.


 7. Permission to appeal was granted by FtT Judge Dineen  on  13th  January
    2017. The matter comes before me to consider whether  the  decision  of
    the FtT involved the making of a material error of law, and if  so,  to
    remake the decision.


 8. Before me, Miss Bremang relied upon the grounds of appeal and submitted
    that the Judge has failed to adequately address or consider whether the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the  immigration  rules  are
    met.  Furthermore, there is  no  consideration  by  the  Judge  of  the
    Article 8 claim outside the rules.  She submits  that  there  are  very
    significant obstacles to the appellant's integration into  Pakistan  if
    he is required to leave the UK.  She submits the appellant himself  has
    only lived in Pakistan for a limited time and he would be returning  to
    Pakistan with a wife that has never lived  in  Pakistan.   She  submits
    that there would also be the cultural implications of an  Indian  woman
    living in Pakistan, but accepted that there is  no  objective  evidence
    that an  Indian  woman,  who  herself  is  a  Muslim,  would  face  any
    hostility. She  also  accepts  that  there  is  no  evidence  that  the
    appellant's wife could not go and live in  Pakistan,  although  she  is
    likely to have to apply for some  form  of  temporary  leave  to  enter
    Pakistan, to begin with.  The only evidence of  the  difficulties  that
    the appellant's wife might face, that she was able to refer  to  is  an
    extract from the Hindustani Times dated 11th  May  2015.   The  article
    refers to the problems that nationals of India and Pakistan could  face
    when travelling between the two countries.  Miss Bremang  submits  that
    the appellant's children who are now 5, 3 and 1, are at nursery.  Given
    their young age, she accepts that they are not in the  formative  years
    of their education.


 9. The respondent has filed a rule 24 response dated  26th  January  2017.
    Before me, Mr Harrison relied upon the Rule 24  response.   He  submits
    that the appellant did not advance an Article 8 case expressly  on  the
    basis that the appellant had spent little of his life in  Pakistan.  He
    submits the appellant's claim that "it should have  been  obvious  this
    was a very significant obstacle" is  misplaced.   Mr  Harrison  submits
    that whilst the FtT  Judge  does  not  make  an  express  reference  to
    276ADE(vi) at paragraph [32]  of  his  decision,  there  is  a  general
    finding by the Judge that removal would not breach Article 8.


Discussion


10. The grant of permission to appeal is limited to the decision of the FtT
    Judge as to the Article 8 claim.   That  has  been  the  focus  of  the
    submissions before me.


11. The Judge refers, at paragraph [32], to the requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iii) of the Immigration Rules.  It  is  uncontroversial  that
    those requirements  cannot  be  met.   There  is  however,  no  express
    reference to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) in the decision of the FtT  Judge.
    It  is  therefore  unclear  whether  the  requirements   of   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules were considered by the Judge and
    to that end, I find there to be an error of law in the decision of  the
    FtT.


12. No further evidence was relied upon by the appellant, and there was  no
    application made pursuant to rule  15(2A)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.   The findings made by the Judge  are  not
    challenged by the appellant, and so I proceed to re-make the decision.


13. Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) requires that an individual  must  be  aged  18
    years or above, have lived continuously in the UK for less than  twenty
    years,  but  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   that
    individual's integration into the country to which he would have to  go
    if required to leave the UK.  Guidance on integration has been given by
    the Court of Appeal in SSHD -v- Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813.  Albeit  in
    the context of a foreign criminal, Sales LJ held, at [14]


             "...The idea of "integration" calls  for  a  broad  evaluative
             judgment to be made as  to  whether  the  individual  will  be
             enough of an insider in terms of understanding how life in the
             society in that other country is carried on and a capacity  to
             participate in it, so as to have a reasonable  opportunity  to
             be accepted there, to be able to operate on a day-to-day basis
             in that society and to build up within  a  reasonable  time  a
             variety of  human  relationships  to  give  substance  to  the
             individual's private or family life."


14. Integration is one limb of the test. The other  is  whether  there  are
    very significant obstacles, and on that issue, guidance  was  given  by
    the Upper Tribunal in Treebhawon [2017] UKUT 00013 (IAC)  at  paragraph
    [37].


            "37. The other limb of the test,  very  significant  obstacles,
            erects a self-evidently  elevated  threshold,  such  that  mere
            hardship, mere difficulty, mere hurdles and  mere  upheaval  or
            inconvenience,  even  where  multiplied,  will   generally   be
            insufficient in this context."


15. It was uncontroversial that the appellant is a Pakistani national.  His
    removal will be to Pakistan and not Nigeria.  I reject the claim in the
    grounds of appeal that  the  appellant's  "home  country,  if  any,  is
    Nigeria.".  The claim is entirely misconceived.   The  appellant  is  a
    Pakistani national.  Pakistan is his country of nationality.


16. The appellant's own evidence  is  that  he  is  married  to  an  Indian
    national, but she is, like the appellant, a Muslim.  The Judge  records
    at paragraph [17] of his decision, the appellant's  evidence  that  his
    children have taken his nationality - Pakistani.  There is  nothing  in
    the evidence or the findings made by the Judge that the  appellant  has
    no understanding of how life in Pakistani society  is  carried  on.   I
    acknowledge that the appellant has spent considerable  periods  of  his
    life in Nigeria, however he is a Pakistani national  and  he  has  also
    spent time in Pakistan.  The  appellant's  own  evidence  is  that  his
    father has a political profile and the appellant will therefore have  a
    good awareness of life in Pakistan and a  capacity  to  participate  in
    Pakistani society, so  as  to  have  a  reasonable  opportunity  to  be
    accepted there, and to be able to operate on a day-to-day basis in that
    society.


17. The "very significant obstacles to  the  appellant's  integration  into
    Pakistan" that are relied upon by the appellant are that the  appellant
    himself has only lived in Pakistan for a limited  time.   He  would  be
    returning to Pakistan with a wife that has  never  lived  in  Pakistan.
    That, in my judgement, does not begin to  amount  to  very  significant
    obstacles to the appellant's integration  into  Pakistan.   It  follows
    that in my judgement, the appellant is unable to meet the  requirements
    of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the immigration rules.


18. The proposed  removal  of  the  appellant  from  the  UK  would  be  an
    interference with the appellant's right to respect for his private  and
    or family life and the removal of the appellant from the United Kingdom
    will inevitably interfere with his private and/or  family  life.    The
    interference  is  in  accordance  with  the  law  and  necessary  in  a
    democratic society.  The crucial question is whether  the  interference
    is proportionate to the legitimate end sought to be achieved.


19. I have had careful regard to the duty under section 55 of the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and note that the  best  interests
    of the appellant's children, must be a primary consideration.   I  have
    also had regard to the matters now set  out  in  section  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.


20.  The  appellant's  children  are,  like  the  appellant,  nationals  of
    Pakistan.  Miss Brenang sensibly accepts  that  they  are  not  in  the
    formative years of their education and there is no evidence that any of
    the children have any particular needs beyond the need  to  be  brought
    upon in a safe environment.  It is of course in their best interests to
    be brought up by their parents.  Like the FtT Judge, I do not  envisage
    any difficulties  for  the  children  returning  to  their  country  of
    nationality.   I find that the appellant, his wife and  their  children
    can be expected to re-establish themselves  in  Pakistan  as  a  family
    unit.


21. The appellant relies upon the  fact  that  he  would  be  returning  to
    Pakistan with a wife that has never lived in  Pakistan.   Miss  Bremang
    conceded, rightly in my judgement, that there is no objective  evidence
    that an  Indian  woman,  who  herself  is  a  Muslim,  would  face  any
    hostility. The FtT Judge found, at [32] that the appellant's  wife  may
    initially have to apply for a temporary visa for Pakistan - or  even  a
    succession of temporary visas  until  her  immigration  status  becomes
    established in  Pakistan.   Miss  Bremang  accepts  that  there  is  no
    evidence that the appellant's wife could not go and live  in  Pakistan,
    although she is likely to have to apply  for  some  form  of  temporary
    leave to enter Pakistan, to begin with.   I  have  carefully  read  the
    extract from the Hindustani Times dated 11th May 2015, upon  which  the
    appellant relies.  The article describes the process for applying for a
    visa and making travel arrangements between Pakistan and India as being
    "like walking into a minefield.".  The article states:


             "..In the case of an Indian visa, the average processing  time
             for an application is 35 days though the process can sometimes
             take longer.  The process on the  Pakistani  side  takes  just
             about as long, unless of course there are folks  in  Islamabad
             who do not want you to visit."


22. The FtT Judge rejected the appellant's  account  of  his  fear  of  his
    family.  I find that there is no reason to believe that the appellant's
    family would stand in the way of any application that  the  appellant's
    wife may make to enter Pakistan.  The FtT Judge accepted, as do I, that
    the appellant's wife may initially have to apply for a  temporary  visa
    for Pakistan - or even a succession of  temporary  visas  -  until  her
    immigration status becomes established in Pakistan.  The  extract  from
    the Hindustan Times that the appellant himself relies upon, states that
    the average processing time for an application is about 35  days.   Any
    interference with  the  appellant's  family  life  with  his  wife  and
    children would be for a short  period  whilst  any  necessary  visa  is
    obtained.


23. I find that the removal of the appellant to Pakistan would  not  amount
    to a disproportionate interference with his right to a  family  and  or
    private life.


  24. For the avoidance of any doubt, the  decision  of  the  FtT  Judge  to
      dismiss the appeal on  asylum  grounds,  and  humanitarian  protection
      grounds stands, for the reasons given in his decision.


  25. I re-make the decision in the Article 8 appeal, and dismiss the appeal
      under the immigration rules and on human rights grounds.


Notice of Decision


26. The decision  of  the  FtT  Judge  to  dismiss  the  appeal  under  the
    immigration rules and on human rights grounds is set aside.


27. I remake the decision, and:


 a. Dismiss the appeal under the immigration rules;


 b. Dismiss the appeal on human rights grounds.

Signed                                  Date          28th July 2017




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia







TO THE RESPONDENT


FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal.  There can be no fee award.


Signed

    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

