
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00400/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 3 May 2017                         |On 10 May 2017                        |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

                                    [N N]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Selwood of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.    The appellant is a  citizen  of  Pakistan,  born  on  [  ]  1965.  She
    appealed against the respondent's decision dated 18 June 2015 to refuse
    to grant her asylum and humanitarian protection in the United  Kingdom.
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  Housego  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  4
    January 2017.

2.    Permission to appeal was  at  first  refused  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Grimmett on 2 February 2017 and  subsequently  allowed  by  Upper
    Tribunal  Judge  Reeds  stating  that  all  grounds  are  arguable,  in
    particular that it was accepted by the parties that the appellant is an
    Ahmadi Muslim in Pakistan. It is arguable that past persecution and the
    failure to consider evidence of witnesses and evidence  concerning  the
    manifestation of the appellant's faith brought her within the  guidance
    given in MN and others (Ahmadi's - country conditions - risk)  Pakistan
    CG [2012] UKUT 00039.

3.    The First-tier Tribunal Judge  in  his  decision  made  the  following
    findings which I  set  out  in  summary.  The  appellant's  immigration
    history is that she applied for a family visit visa  18  November  2014
    which was refused. On 11 December 2014, she  made  another  application
    and was granted a visit visa valid from 18 December  2014  to  18  June
    2015. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 8 January 2015 and on
    4 February 2015 she returned to Pakistan. On 5 May 2015, the  appellant
    returned to the United Kingdom and on 3 June 2015 the appellant claimed
    asylum. On 18 June 2015, her asylum claim was refused and she  appealed
    against that decision. On 17 May 2016, the appeal was unsuccessful as a
    first-tier Tribunal hearing. On 8 August 2016,  the  decision  was  set
    aside and the matter remitted for rehearing at the First-tier Tribunal.

   4. There is no real risk or genuine subjective fear for the appellant  to
      return to Pakistan. In light of the findings of facts there is no risk
      to the appellant on return to  Pakistan,  beyond  that  faced  by  the
      millions of Ahmadi Muslims living in  Pakistan.  The  husband  of  the
      appellant continues to live and work in Pakistan. The appellant is not
      proselytising Ahmadi and there is no reason to think that  she  is  at
      any more risk than is he.


   5. The appellant is no longer capable of such an activity  by  reason  of
      her cognitive decline. The latest medical evidence by Prof  Katona  in
      his dated 24 October 2016 speaks of  the  likelihood  of  dementia  is
      because of substantial worsening of her cognitive disorder  since  his
      previous report. The report states  that  the  appellant  can  discuss
      matters only at a superficial level. It is not possible to contemplate
      her undertaking any significant activity such as that it  might  cause
      her to fall within the MN's guidance for grant of asylum.

   6. Even taken at its highest, the claim of the appellant is to have  been
      the victim of one very unpleasant incident two years  ago  before  she
      left Pakistan. Her account of men gathering  outside  her  house  soon
      after her return to Pakistan, in February  2015  does  not  reach  the
      level required for the grant of asylum or humanitarian protection.


   7. The letters from  the  Ahmadi  Muslim  Association  UK  are  doubtless
      accurate in setting out the appellant's past history, but they are  of
      limited assistance to assess the risk as of today's date. The  letters
      contain much generic information, including confirmation of the nature
      of the head scarf of an Ahmadi lady  which  may  render  her  religion
      identifiable. In terms of MN the appellant falls within 2 (ii) and  6.
      The appellant is said to be of limited capacity,  and  was  unable  to
      give evidence at her appeal hearing.  Her  activities  in  the  United
      Kingdom are relevant to how she might practice her religion on  return
      to Pakistan. Other than attending mosque, her role has been limited to
      carrying leaflets for others to give out, and that  sporadically.  The
      medical evidence that her deterioration is now such that she is unable
      to carry out anything other than private prayer, when reminded of  the
      time to pray.


   8. Accordingly, the appellant cannot be considered to be a refugee and is
      not entitled to humanitarian protection. Her removal would not  breach
      her rights under article 2 or 3 of the European  Convention  on  Human
      Rights nor under Article 33, that non-refoulment will be  breached  by
      her return to Pakistan.


   9. The appellant's husband is in Pakistan and she can return to live with
      him and resume family life. The appellant's  relationship  with  other
      family members are  between  adult  relatives  which  does  not  evoke
      Article 8. There must be something more than  ordinary  familial  love
      between them. It is not  disproportionate  for  the  appellant  to  be
      required to return to Pakistan, particularly when this will result  in
      the restoration of her marital life and family  life  with  her  other
      family members in Pakistan.


  10. The appellant's immigration status in  the  United  Kingdom  has  been
      precarious and section 117A, B and D of  the  Nationality  Immigration
      and Asylum Act 2002 apply. There is no claim that medical condition of
      the appellant would breach her right under Article 3 of  the  European
      Convention on Human Rights.


  11. At the hearing, I heard submissions from both parties  as  to  whether
      there is an error of  law  in  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal.


  12. Mr Selwood on behalf of  the  appellant  relied  on  five  grounds  of
      appeal. In respect of the first ground, he submitted  that  the  judge
      did not take into account material evidence to determine  whether  the
      appellant was persecuted before she came to the  United  Kingdom.  The
      First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to assess and determine the  evidence
      of the appellant's son, daughter and sister and the statement from her
      husband. If the Judge had considered this evidence, he would not  have
      found that  the  incident  where  boiling  water  was  thrown  at  the
      appellant could not have happened or that if it did, it was a  kitchen
      accident. The appellant's witnesses attested to  this  incident  which
      happened in 2012. The  appellant's  daughter  gave  evidence  of  this
      incident and notified her sister in the  United  Kingdom  immediately.
      The appellant's son rushed home after  the  attack  and  arranged  for
      medical treatment to be  given  to  the  appellant,  in  hospital.  At
      paragraph 40 the Judge stated that he does not doubt the sincerity  of
      the witnesses, which are positive findings. This was highly  probative
      evidence and not having taken into account, is material and  that  the
      decision would be different.


  13. The second ground is that the Judge gave a  material  misdirection  in
      law when he found at paragraph 61 and 64 of  the  decision,  that  the
      boiling water incident of 2013 was  low-level  harassment.  The  Judge
      failed to take into account other incidents such  as  threats  to  the
      appellant of disfigurement when she was threatened that next time they
      would throw acid on the appellant and not  boiling  water.  The  Judge
      failed to take into  account  that  the  police  refused  to  lodge  a
      complaint. Although the Judge sets out the Qualification Directive  at
      paragraph 12, all these  incidents  taken  cumulatively  are  acts  of
      persecution and fit the description. The corroborative  evidence  came
      from Prof Katona that the appellant has significant anxiety and PTSD.


  14. The third ground is that the Judge failed to take into account all the
      material facts in the appeal. At paragraph 62 and 66,  the  Judge  did
      not take into account that the appellant has  been  an  active  Ahmadi
      since birth and preached to those  who  came  to  her  house.  It  was
      submitted that there were seven other manifestations of her  religion.
      These are that she preached  at  home  and  this  was  fundamental  to
      manifestation of a religion. She would practice as her  faith  openly,
      she referred to the place of worship as  a  mosque  and  the  call  to
      prayers as Azam and salutations of greeting each  other  were  in  the
      Ahmadi manner. The appellant encouraged her son to preach  and  helped
      her daughter in the United Kingdom to distribute leaflets.  The  Judge
      failed to take into account the letter  from  the  Ahmadi  Association
      which summarises the appellant's Ahmadi activities  and  her  family's
      long history. He relied on the case  of  AB  (Ahmadi  Association  UK:
      letters) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00511 (IAC) where it was held that where
      there is specific information about the appellant's activities in  the
      United Kingdom, the letter is to be given weight.  She has  also  been
      identified as an "Aqusi" which  is  an  honour  given  to  exceptional
      Ahmadis. The psychiatrist report  does  not  say  that  the  appellant
      cannot preach in her mental condition.


  15. The fourth ground of appeal is the Judge's evaluation of  the  country
      guidance case of MN which requires that a number  of  findings  to  be
      made by the Judge. The first enquiry is whether the  appellant  is  in
      Ahmadi. Second whether she will manifest her religion in a public  way
      contrary to the Pakistan penal code. The Judge focused on whether  the
      appellant had preached in the past and would do so in the  future.  MN
      states that preaching is only one factor and that if the appellant has
      to preach her faith privately, the Judge  must  ask  himself  why  she
      would do that. The case of HJ Iran applies that if  a  person  has  to
      preach their faith privately for fear of persecution, that  qualifies.
      It was decided that weight  should  be  given  to  Ahmadi  Association
      letters. The letter was detailed and therefore the Judge's  conclusion
      that it was of limited assistance was flawed. The second letter of the
      Ahmadi Association was highly probative but not  referred  to  by  the
      judge. Weight should be given to  the  second  letter  of  the  Ahmadi
      Association.


  16. Mr Tarlow in his submissions relied on his rule 24 response  and  said
      that the decision is carefully worded and deals in  some  detail  with
      the issue of persecution and there is no material error of law in  the
      decision and that the appeal should be dismissed.

Is there a material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal

  17. I have to consider the First-tier Tribunal's decision,  the  arguments
      of the parties, the skeleton argument and I find that  the  Judge  has
      made no material error of law in the  decision.  The  issue  that  the
      Judge found that he had to  decide  is  whether  the  appellant  could
      return to Pakistan as an Ahmadi Muslim given her  circumstances.  That
      is the issue that  he  concentrated  on  and  made  his  findings.  He
      considered all the evidence in the appeal even though he did  not  set
      out every piece of evidence in his decision. The decision is clear and
      understandable.

  18. The Judge considered the evidence about the appellant's future risk if
      she is returned to Pakistan. The complaint against the Judge  is  that
      that the Judge did not consider the past persecution as an  indication
      of future persecution and relied on the  incident  which  happened  in
      Pakistan where boiling water was thrown at the appellant with  threats
      that it would be acid that will be thrown, the next time. While it  is
      trite law that past persecution must be  considered  when  determining
      future risk, it is not always the case  that  pass  persecution  means
      future persecution. The appellant's circumstances have  changed  since
      she was last in Pakistan.


  19. The Judge considered the changed circumstances of  the  appellant  and
      considered the medical evidence of Prof Katona dated October  2016  to
      which he was entitled to give considerable weight. The  report  speaks
      of the likelihood of dementia because of substantial worsening of  the
      appellant's cognitive disorder since his previous report.  The  report
      states that the appellant can discuss matters only  at  a  superficial
      level.  It  is  not  possible  to  contemplate  her  undertaking   any
      significant activity such as that it might cause her  to  fall  within
      the MN's guidance for grant of  asylum.  The  Judge  stated  that  the
      appellant's cognitive decline was to such an extent that  it  rendered
      her incapable of giving evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal.  The
      Judge considered that the appellant's mental condition  precludes  her
      from living the life that she did in the past. The judge then went  on
      to consider the impact of her  mental  condition  would  have  on  her
      future ability to engage in conduct which might bring her  within  the
      risk category. The Judge was entitled to  find  that  on  the  medical
      evidence that the appellant was not able to  conduct  herself  in  the
      same manner as she did when she was last in Pakistan. The  issue  then
      became whether the appellant can return to  Pakistan  as  an  ordinary
      Ahmadi Muslim who is incapable,  due  to  her  cognitive  decline,  of
      engaging in activities which would bring her within the realm  of  MN,
      where she needs International protection.


20. The Judge might have made an error when he did not set out  and  resolve
   the evidence of the witnesses who stated that boiling water was thrown on
   the appellant in Pakistan and that this was because  she  was  an  Ahmadi
   Muslim who preached  her  religion.  The  Judge  considered  the  country
   guidance case of MN is to decide whether the  appellant  falls  into  the
   category of an Ahmadi who would be persecuted in Pakistan and is entitled
   to international protection. Paragraph 2(i) of MN states  that  the  risk
   faced by Ahmadis is legislation in Pakistan that  restricts  the  way  in
   which they are able openly to practise their faith. The case states  that
   the risk faced by Ahmadis is legislation in Pakistan that  restricts  the
   way  in  which  they  are  able  openly  to  practise  their  faith.  The
   legislation not only prohibits preaching and other forms of proselytising
   but also in  practice  restricts  other  elements  of  manifesting  one's
   religious beliefs, such as holding open discourse about religion with non-
   Ahmadis,  although  not  amounting  to  proselytising.  The  prohibitions
   include openly referring to one's place of worship as  a  mosque  and  to
   one's religious leader as an Imam. There  is  clear  evidence  that  this
   legislation is used by non-state actors to threaten and  harass  Ahmadis.
   This was the evidence that the Judge considered when he referred  to  the
   country guidance case.

21. The Judge accepted that the appellant is an Ahmadi which was  the  first
   question to be decided in the  appeal.  The  next  question  involved  an
   inquiry into the appellant's intentions or wishes as  to  her  faith,  if
   returned to Pakistan.  This is relevant because of the need to  establish
   whether it is of particular importance to the religious identity  of  the
   Ahmadi concerned to engage in paragraph 2(i) behaviour in MN. It was  for
   the appellant demonstrate her intention or wish to practise and  manifest
   aspects of the faith openly and whether she is physically able to  do  so
   even if such intentions are genuinely held and of  particular  importance
   to the appellant to preserve her religious identity.  The Judge  evaluate
   all the evidence and found that the appellant was medically incapable  of
   engaging in behaviour set out in MN and which will breach the penal  code
   of Pakistan. Therefore, it was open to  the  Judge  to  decide  that  the
   appellant due to her medical condition was not able to manifest her faith
   or conduct herself in a manner which will draw adverse attention  to  her
   for violating the penal code of Pakistan. These findings were open to the
   judge to make on the evidence.


  22. At the hearing, there were submissions that the  Judge  did  not  take
      into account the witness's evidence that boiling water was  thrown  on
      the appellant in the past in Pakistan for preaching at home  but  this
      does not mean that it will be thrown at her again in the future.  Even
      if in the past, the appellant preached at  her  home,  the  Judge  was
      entitled to find that the appellant's practical inability to do so  in
      the future due to her cognitive decline. It is not the case that every
      Ahmadi Muslim is at risk on Pakistan but only  those  who  preach  and
      conduct themselves in certain ways. The Judge  referred  to  MN  which
      says that not every Ahmadi Muslim requires protection. A  person  must
      have conducted himself in such a way as to attract the consequences of
      the Pakistan legislation.


  23. Given the appellant's state of mind and her  inability  to  even  give
      evidence before the First-tier Tribunal demonstrates  that  she  would
      not be able to do any of the things  which  would  bring  her  to  the
      attention of the authorities. The Judge's approach to any future  risk
      to the appellant in Pakistan did not depend on his  analysis  of  past
      persecution and the witness statements  which  attested  that  boiling
      water was thrown on the appellant.  Even  if  he  had  considered  the
      witness statements of past persecution, this would not  have  affected
      his  decision  because  the  issue  before  the   Judge   was   future
      persecution.  Similarly,  the  letters  from  the  Ahmadi  Association
      setting out the appellant's past conduct would not assist her  in  any
      analysis of future conduct.


  24. The Judge was also entitled to find that the appellant's husband lives
      in Pakistan and has not come to any harm and the appellant can  return
      to live with him safely, and continue family life  with  him  and  her
      other relatives in Pakistan. The appellant lived  in  Pakistan  for  a
      very long time as an Ahmadi Muslim and came to no harm other  than  in
      2013 when the incident of the boiling water happened. She continued to
      live in the country and came to the United Kingdom on a visitor's visa
      and returned. It was only when she returned to the United Kingdom, she
      claimed asylum based partially on the incident which happened  in  the
      year 2013. It was argued for the appellant that the appellant conducts
      herself in other ways which also identify her as  an  Ahmadi  such  as
      that she wears her headscarf in the Ahmadi Muslim  manner  and  called
      her place of prayer a mosque and other conduct peculiar  to  Ahmadi's.
      The Judge was entitled to find that the appellant  lived  in  Pakistan
      for a very long time conducting herself in this manner and came to  no
      harm, until recently. When she was in the United Kingdom she  returned
      to Pakistan which she would not have done if she felt that she was  in
      danger due to her being an Ahmadi Muslim.


23. There is no material error in the decision in respect  of  the  findings
   made by the Judge on the evidence  before  him.  I  also  find  that  the
   Judge's conclusion that the appellant can be returned to Pakistan  safely
   is without error. There is no material error of  law  and  I  uphold  the
   First-tier  Tribunal's  decision.  I  also  find  that   no   differently
   constituted Tribunal would come to a different conclusion on the evidence
   in this appeal.

Notice of Decision

I therefore uphold the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  and  I
dismiss this appeal.


Signed by,                                   Date 6th day of May 2017


A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Mrs S Chana
