
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00426/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 25 August 2017                     |On 15 September 2017                  |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                                     VA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Semega-Janneh, instructed by Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant
herein is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly
or indirectly identify the appellant or any member of the appellant's
family.  Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt of
court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, born in May 1981.  She  appealed
    to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  ("FtT")  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department ("SSHD") dated  22  December
    2016 refusing her protection and human rights claims. That  appeal  was
    dismissed by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Wedderspoon  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 1 March 2017.

    Setting aside of the FtT's decision

 2. Before the FtT the appellant asserted that her removal would breach the
    Refugee Convention and Articles 2, 3 and 8 of the ECHR (see paragraph 4
    of the FtT's decision).  In paragraphs 7 to 13 of its decision the  FtT
    set out in considerable detail the relevant legal framework in relation
    to all of the abovementioned grounds.

 3. The FtT summarised the appellant's Refugee Convention/protection  claim
    in the following terms:

         "Her claim for asylum is based on her fear of persecution  that  if
         returned with her two daughters to  Nigeria  as  a  woman  who  has
         undergone FGM her daughters would  face  mistreatment,  namely  FGM
         practices.  The appellant's partner GBA and their two daughters ...
         are dependent upon her appeal."

    The decision does not, however, incorporate a summary of  the  relevant
    features of the appellant's Article 8 claim.

 4. Thereafter, the  FtT's  decision  sets  out  relevant  aspects  of  the
    appellant's immigration history, at [16] and the Secretary  of  State's
    decision letter (at [17] to [25]), as well as the events at the hearing
    (at [26] to [43]), including the parties' oral submissions (at  [38]  -
    [43]).

 5. The FtT's findings are contained within paragraphs 44 to 59, the  final
    three paragraphs directing the reader's attention to the fact that  the
    appeal  would  be  dismissed  on   Refugee   Convention,   Humanitarian
    Protection, and Articles 2 and 3 ECHR grounds. Strikingly, there is  no
    mention in  these  concluding  paragraphs,  or  anywhere  else  in  the
    decision, of a decision having been made on the Article 8 ECHR ground.

 6. The grounds of appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  bring  challenge  to  the
    FtT's conclusions on the protection grounds,  but  that  challenge  was
    found to be unarguable in the respective decisions (on the applications
    for permission to appeal) made by First-tier Tribunal Judge Bennett (24
    March 2017) and Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede (5/5/17).  Mr Semega-Janneh
    accepted that the appellant could not now pursue these grounds.

 7. It is worthy of observation at this  stage  that  had  permission  been
    granted in relation to  such  grounds  I  would,  in  any  event,  have
    concluded that they had no merit.  The FtT's decision on the protection
    claim is a model of clarity. The  reasons  given  for  the  conclusions
    reached thereon are clear and  cogent,  and  the  FtT  was  undoubtedly
    entitled to conclude as it did in relation to the protection claim.

 8. Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede did, however, grant permission in  relation
    to the claim pursued on Article 8 grounds, stating as follows:

         "However, on the basis that Article 8 and the best interests of the
         children were matters pursued before the Tribunal  it  is  arguable
         that the judge erred by  failing  to  make  any  findings  in  that
         regard."

 9. Ms Isherwood inevitably accepted that the FtT had failed  to  determine
    the Article 8 ECHR ground, which would, inter alia,  have  incorporated
    an assessment of the best interests  of  the  children.   However,  she
    sought to persuade the Tribunal that such a failure  was  not  material
    because any determination of this ground would ineluctably lead to  one
    outcome, i.e. that the appeal would  be  dismissed.  It  followed,  she
    submitted, that the Upper Tribunal  should  not  set  aside  the  FtT's
    decision.

10. I reject that submission.  In my conclusion, in circumstances  where  a
    Tribunal has not engaged at  all  with  a  ground  put  forward  by  an
    appellant  the  proper  approach  is  to  require  that  ground  to  be
    determined on its merits - whatever they maybe. In any  event,  on  the
    information before me I am not prepared to conclude  that  no  rational
    Tribunal could allow the appeal brought on the Article 8 ground.

11. In my conclusion, the appropriate course is to set aside  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal and direct that the scope of the remaking be
    limited  to  a  consideration  of  the  Article  8  ECHR  ground.   The
    conclusions made in relation to the  Refugee  Convention,  humanitarian
    protection and Article 2 and 3 ECHR grounds are to remain standing.

12. In the instant case, given that no  consideration  has  thus  far  been
    given to the  Article  8  ECHR  ground,  I  conclude  that  it  is  not
    appropriate for the appeal  to  remain  in  the  Upper  Tribunal.   The
    parties also agreed that this was so.  I therefore remit the appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for it  to  determine  the  Article  8  ground.
    Although I make no formal direction to this effect, it also seems to me
    that in the unusual  circumstances  of  this  case  such  consideration
    should be undertaken by the same  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  who  has
    determined the protection element of the appellant's  appeal  i.e.  FtT
    Judge Wedderspoon. Once again, the parties concurred.

Notice of Decision

For the reasons given above the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set
aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to consider the Article  8
ECHR ground.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor

