
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00771/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|                                       |                                    |
|At: Manchester Piccadilly              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|                                       |On: 20th April 2018                 |
|On: 28th March 2018                    |                                    |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     NS
                          (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                 Respondents


For the Appellant:     Ms C. Warren, Counsel instructed by Bankfield Heath
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Iran born  in  1985.  She  appeals  with
    permission[1] against the 29th June 2017  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Malik) to dismiss her protection appeal.


    Anonymity Order


 2. This appeal concerns a claim for international protection.  Having  had
    regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of  2013:  Anonymity  Orders  I
    therefore consider it appropriate to make an  order  in  the  following
    terms:

         "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
         Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her
         family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
         Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
         direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"





    Background and Matters in Issue


 3. The Appellant asserts a well-founded fear of persecution  in  Iran  for
    reasons of her political opinion. The basis of her claim is that she is
    an opponent of the regime and that she is now wanted in connection with
    her political activities. In 2009 she was a  supporter  of  the  'Green
    Movement' and in March 2011 was detained for approximately 20 days. The
    Appellant desisted from taking part in  any  political  activities  for
    about two years after this experience, but in 2013  she  and  a  friend
    started producing and distributing leaflets.  In July  2016  her  house
    was raided by the Etelaat, the event  that  prompted  her  to  go  into
    hiding and then leave Iran and seek international protection. If she is
    returned to Iran she will be arrested, detained and likely subjected to
    torture, inhuman and degrading treatment.


 4. This claim was rejected in its entirety by the  Respondent,  who  in  a
    letter dated  11th  January  2017  refused  to  grant  protection.  The
    Respondent did not think that  the  Appellant  knew  enough  about  the
    opposition in  Iran.    The  Respondent  did  not  understand  how  the
    authorities would have been led to the Appellant's home  in  July  2016
    when by the Appellant's own evidence, she and her friend had  conducted
    their activities in secret and had been careful not to  get  caught  or
    let anyone know. The Appellant had stated that she had been released in
    2011 for lack of evidence, so it cannot have been connected with  that.
    The Appellant had claimed that her husband had been shortly detained in
    that raid, and that he had been told by the security services that they
    were after the Appellant; the Respondent did not consider it  plausible
    that the authorities would act in this way, and by releasing  him  give
    him a chance to warn his wife.


 5. When the matter came before the First-tier Tribunal the only matter  in
    issue was whether the account given by  the  Appellant  was  reasonably
    likely to be true. It was common ground that if it was,  the  Appellant
    was entitled to protection since she would have  established  that  she
    faces a real risk of harm in Iran today[2].  The  Tribunal  heard  live
    evidence from the Appellant and her husband and having  done  so  found
    that she had not discharged the burden of proof. The following  reasons
    are given:

          i) There is a material inconsistency in the Appellant's evidence.
             She had said that she had taken photographs  and  made  videos
             during the Green Movement protests in 2009-2011 and  that  she
             had passed these to foreign media outlets including  the  BBC.
             She was in possession of her camera when she was arrested, and
             yet states that she was released for lack of evidence.  It  is
             incredible that the authorities would have released  her  when
             they were aware that she had taken these images and sent  them
             to media outlets;


         ii) A further inconsistency arose in that when she was interviewed
             the Appellant had made no mention of having suffered any  ill-
             treatment during her detention in 2011. At the hearing she had
             said that she had been left in a closed  room,  sitting  on  a
             chair with her handcuffs behind her back for days on end.  The
             Tribunal rejected this part of the account on the grounds that
             it is incredible that it  was  not  mentioned  at  the  asylum
             interview, nor in any of the statements subsequently  prepared
             with the assistance of the Appellant's legal representatives.


        iii) In the alternative if the Appellant was detained in 2011 it is
             incredible that she would have resumed political  activity  in
             2013 since on her own evidence she was  mentally  affected  by
             the detention.  The Appellant further claims that she had left
             incriminating evidence in the form of photographs  and  videos
             on her laptop: the Tribunal did not find it credible that  she
             would have done this.


         iv) It is incredible that the Appellant and her  friend  were  not
             caught when they were producing and distributing leaflets.


          v) There was a lack of corroborative evidence. The Appellant  had
             not produced any evidence that  the  films  she  took  on  the
             protests had in fact been shown on outlets like Youtube or the
             BBC. If they were so used it would have been  relatively  easy
             for her to find them and produce them in evidence.


         vi) It is, as suggested by the Respondent, not plausible that  the
             Etelaat would have released the Appellant's husband after such
             a short period of questioning.


        vii) The Appellant failed to claim asylum in the first safe country
             she reached after fleeing Iran (Italy) and this detracts  from
             her claim to have a subjective fear.

    And the appeal was thereby dismissed.


 6. The Appellant  now  appeals  the  decision  on  the  grounds  that  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal is flawed  for  the  following
    errors of law: a  failure  to  take  material  evidence  into  account,
    mistake of fact/misunderstanding  of  the  evidence,  failure  to  have
    regard to the country background evidence, and in its speculation about
    how the Iranian security services might behave, making findings without
    evidential foundation contrary to the guidance of the Court  of  Appeal
    in HK v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2006]  EWCA  Civ
    1037.


 7.  The  Respondent  defends  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    submitting that all the findings were open to it on the evidence.




    Discussion and Findings


 8. It is, in assessing  the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    necessary to set the evidence of the Appellant out in greater detail.


 9. Her claim is that alongside millions of other Iranians she took part in
    generally pro-democracy protests in 2009-2011.  These  protests  became
    known as the 'Green Movement' and were associated with support for  the
    reformist candidate  Mousavi,  but  were  not  led  by  any  particular
    political  party  or  faction.  The  Appellant  herself  professes   no
    allegiance to any opposition group, but states that she is  opposed  to
    the repression of democracy in Iran.  During various protests  she  had
    taken video clips which she had passed on to a friend P  who  had  been
    supplying material to foreign media outlets, and she believes, had  put
    some of the clips on Youtube.  The  Appellant  retained  copies  of  at
    least some of this material on her laptop.    When  the  Appellant  was
    arrested, in possession of a camera, on a demonstration in March  2011,
    that camera contained images of the protest.  She was  later  released,
    she was told, because there was no evidence to  bring  any  charges  or
    justify further detention. I interpolate here that the  images  on  the
    camera showed no more than the fact  that  she  had  been  attending  a
    protest: the authorities were plainly already  in  possession  of  that
    information since that is where  she  had  been  arrested.   There  was
    country  background  material  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which
    confirmed that approximately 4,000  protestors  were  arrested  in  the
    first half of 2011, and that by mid  August  3,700  of  them  had  been
    released. This was consistent with the Appellant's claim to  have  been
    protesting, to have been arrested and released without formal charge.


10. The Appellant had said, in her written evidence, that after her release
    she found it difficult to cope. She was traumatised by  her  experience
    and so had taken some time before resuming her political activity.   On
    the date of the Etelaat raid, on the 1st July 2016, the  Appellant  and
    her child had been away attending a family celebration  in  Karaj.  The
    Appellant's husband attested that the authorities  came  to  the  house
    looking for  the  Appellant.  They  seized  some  of  her  possessions,
    including her laptop.  He was pushed and threatened. After they left he
    used his mobile telephone to call his wife and warn  her  not  to  come
    home. The following day at 6am the Etelaat returned and  detained  him.
    They held him for approximately six hours  during  which  time  he  was
    questioned about his wife's activities.  He - quite truthfully - denied
    any knowledge.


11. The first ground of appeal is concerned with the approach taken by  the
    Tribunal to the evidence about the video clips, the camera, and whether
    the authorities would have released the Appellant from detention.  This
    part of the  Tribunal's  reasoning  appears  at  paragraph  31  of  the
    determination:

         "I do not accept, even to the lower standard, that  this  appellant
         was arrested and detained as claimed in 2011, because if as she and
         she (sic - I think this should read "if  as  she  said  she")  took
         clips/photos of the demonstrations (which P sent to media  outlets)
         and this was known to the authorities as they had taken her camera,
         I find it incredible that they would merely have detained  her  for
         20 days; nor is there any reasonable explanation as to why she  has
         been unable to produce such material now as despite saying  it  was
         on her laptop and this was taken when Etelaat raided  her  home  in
         July 2016, had it been sent to the BBC or appeared  on  Youtube  as
         claimed, it would have been obtainable now".

  12. Although the grounds of challenge are couched in terms of perversity,
      I am satisfied that there is a more straightforward criticism of this
      reasoning: the Tribunal misunderstood the case. When the  authorities
      seized the Appellant's camera in 2011 the images it contained  showed
      no more than the fact that  she  had  been  on  protests.   That  the
      Appellant was released after a relatively short period is  consistent
      with the country  background  material  which  shows  that  the  vast
      majority of those arrested on the demonstrations were  quite  quickly
      released without further charge.  Contrary to the  reasoning  of  the
      Tribunal, the authorities were not, and could not,  have  been  aware
      that some of that material or similar had already been passed  to  P,
      who  in  turn  may  have  passed  it  on  to  media   outlets.   This
      misunderstanding was central to the Tribunal's finding as to why  the
      claimed arrest was incredible.


  13. As to whether there had been a reasonable explanation for the lack of
      proof that the material had been used by media outlets or appeared on
      Youtube,  the  Ms  Warren  submits  that  the   Tribunal   has   here
      impermissibly  looked  for  corroboration  contrary  to   established
      principles of evidence in asylum  cases.  Again,  I  think  the  more
      straightforward explanation is that the  Tribunal  misunderstood  the
      case. It was not the Appellant's  case  that  she  had  uploaded  any
      material to Youtube, or that she knew as fact that any of  her  clips
      had been used by, for instance the BBC and therefore had the means to
      access them. All she could say was that she had passed some  material
      to P, who intended to use it for that  purpose.  In  the  absence  of
      contact with P the Appellant is simply not in a  position  to  locate
      that material. Even  if  she  spent,  for  instance,  hours  trawling
      through all the videos on Youtube relating to the Green  Movement  in
      the hope of recognising her own film, she would  have  absolutely  no
      means of proving the film was taken by her and it would be of  little
      probative value.


  14. The second ground concerns the Tribunal's approach to the  allegation
      of ill-treatment. The grounds point out that at the asylum  interview
      the Appellant had said to the officer that she had suffered  mentally
      following the detention, but that no follow  up  questions  had  been
      asked. The evidence  about  being  handcuffed  to  a  chair  had  not
      appeared  in  her  witness  statements  because  they  had  not  been
      concerned with that detention, which at best formed background to the
      current claim.  The grounds submit that in those circumstances "there
      is no basis on which the Judge could conclude that the fact that  the
      Appellant said she was ill-treated after it arose in  questioning  at
      the hearing was capable of undermining the Appellant's account".    I
      am not satisfied that this was a perverse finding, that is to say one
      outwith the range of reasonable responses. It  cannot  be  said  that
      there was "no basis" for the negative finding,  since  the  basis  is
      clear:  the ill-treatment was not previously mentioned [see �32].   I
      appreciate that another Tribunal may have taken a different  view  of
      the omission in the earlier evidence.  It  could  be  said  that  the
      Appellant's description of  her  trauma,  read  with  the  background
      information  about  conditions  in   detention,   might   have   been
      interpreted to reasonably raise an inference that she had  been  ill-
      treated. It is true that the Appellant had not, until she was  cross-
      examined, been directly asked about the conditions she faced.  It  is
      also true to say that the detention was not at the forefront  of  her
      claim and so did not feature in  any  great  detail  in  the  written
      material.   It is not however the case  that  the  adverse  inference
      drawn by Judge Malik was not one rationally open to her.


  15. Ground (iii) tackles  the  question  of  plausibility.  The  Tribunal
      specifically rejects the account given by the Appellant's husband, of
      how events  in  July  2016  unfolded,  on  the  grounds  that  it  is
      implausible that the Iranian security services would  behave  in  the
      way described. Specifically, it is not believed that they would  come
      to the house and confiscate property, only to return the next day  to
      take the husband in for questioning,  and  then  release  him.     Ms
      Warren prays in aid the caution in HK, wherein the  Court  of  Appeal
      endorse the guidance of Professor Hathaway  in  the  Law  of  Refugee
      Status (1991):

         "In assessing the general human rights information, decision-makers
         must constantly be on guard to  avoid  implicitly  recharacterizing
         the  nature  of  the  risk  based  on  their  own  perceptions   of
         reasonability"

      She submits that the Tribunal has failed to explain why  the  actions
      described are inherently implausible;  the  Tribunal  does  not  give
      reasons for its findings,  nor  is  reference  made  to  any  country
      background evidence that might illustrate the point. I would have  to
      agree.   The  chronology  advanced  by  the  witness   was   arguably
      internally  coherent:  they  came,  took  away  the   laptop,   found
      incriminating material, came back to question the husband. As to  why
      they did not detain him for longer, this accords with the Appellant's
      case that it is her, not her husband, who has the record of political
      activism. It further accords with  the  country  background  material
      that people are subjected to short periods of detention.  In light of
      that I must agree that the determination does  not  explain  why  the
      events described are inherently implausible.


  16. Mr Bates asked me to consider the case globally, and that if I  found
      any of the alleged errors to be made out, I nevertheless dismiss  the
      appeal on the grounds of immateriality. I agree with  Mr  Bates  that
      this  is  not  an  appeal  where  the  grounds  address  all  of  the
      difficulties with the Appellant's case: see my paragraph 5  above.  I
      am unable to accept however that this was a case bound to  fail  even
      absent the errors identified.  It follows that the decision  must  be
      set  aside,  because  it  appears  that   the   First-tier   Tribunal
      misunderstood crucial elements of the Appellant's case, and failed to
      give reasons for its findings in respect of others. The parties and I
      agreed that if the grounds were made out, or substantially  so,  this
      is a case that would require remittal for fresh findings of  fact  to
      be made.




      Decisions


  17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of  law  such
      that it must be set aside. The decision will be remade de novo in the
      First-tier Tribunal.


  18. There is an order for anonymity.






                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce

                               19th April 2018
                           -----------------------
[1] Permission was granted on the 15th October 2017 by Deputy Upper
Tribunal Judge Chapman
[2] I note that the 'reasons for refusal' letter accepts that the Refugee
Convention is engaged because the Appellant is a woman and is therefore a
member of a particular social group. This is inexplicable given the facts
and as I understand it the claim before the Tribunal proceeded on the
grounds of political opinion.

