



                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: PA005212016
      AA136872015
                                                                 AA136882015
                                                                 AA136892015
                                                                 AA136902015
                                                                 AA135482015
                                                                 AA136912015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision Promulgated and Sent        |
|On 8 May 2017                         |On 19 May 2017                       |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before
                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA

                                   Between

                                    I E M
                                    N O Y
                                    A I M
                                    H A M
                                   A I A M
                                   Z I A M
                                   L I A M

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the appellant:   Mr Dhanji of Counsel
For the respondent: Ms Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. The appellants are nationals of Palestine, resident in Lebanon born on  3
   April 1971, 22 August 1980, [ ] 2012, [ ] 2001, [ ] 2005, [ ] 2009 and  [
   ] 2010.  There are father, mother and five children. As the appeal of the
   family members of the first appellant rests or falls  with  that  of  the
   main appellant, I shall consider his appeal and  refer  to  him  as  "the
   appellant".

2. The appellant appeals to the  Upper  Tribunal  against  the  decision  of
   First-tier Tribunal Judge Anstis dated  25  November  2016  refusing  the
   appellant's appeal against the decision of the  respondent  refusing  him
   asylum and humanitarian protection in the United Kingdom.

3. Permission to appeal was initially refused by  senior  Judge  Osborne  of
   the First-tier Tribunal and subsequently granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge
   Bruce on 20 February 2017 on the basis that that although  the  case  has
   its weaknesses, it was arguable that the Judge's reasoning  in  paragraph
   111 of the decision in respect of paragraph  276  ADE  (1)  (vi)  of  the
   Immigration Rules as being arguably scant.



4. At the hearing before me,  I  heard  submissions  from  both  parties  in
   respect of whether there was a material error of law  in  the  First-tier
   Tribunal's decision.


5. The first ground of appeal is that the Judge failed  to  give  sufficient
   weight to the conclusions of Dr George in his report that  the  appellant
   would be at risk on return to Lebanon based on the information upon which
   he reached this conclusion. The evidence upon which this  conclusion  was
   based was that the appellant had worked for the Palestinian Fatah in  the
   Ein-al-Hilweh camp and that it was   these activities that brought him to
   the adverse attention of Jund Al Sham the Islamic  jihad  movement  which
   puts him at risk on his return to Lebanon.


6. Therefore, had the appellant only relied on the  general  conditions  for
   Palestinian  refugees  in  Lebanon,  the  case  of    MM,  FH   stateless
   Palestinians - KK, IH, HG CG reaffirmed) Lebanon CG [2008)  UKAIT  00014,
   would have precluded him from protection. In MN, FH the court  considered
   objective evidence concerning the situation for  Palestinians  living  in
   Lebanon and concluded "Having considered these matters as a whole, as  we
   have done in some detail above, we have concluded that to the extent that
   there is a discriminatory denial of third category rights in Lebanon  for
   the Palestinians, this does not amount to persecution under  the  Refugee
   Convention or breach of protected human rights under  Article  3  of  the
   ECHR.


7. The Judge however gave clear and cogent reasons at paragraph  86-105  for
   rejecting the appellant's claim that he worked for Palestinian  Fatah  in
   the Ein-al-Hilweh camp.  The Judge stated at paragraph 90 that  the  only
   evidence of this work is the appellant's own evidence and even Dr  George
   could not confirm this evidence. Dr George in his  expert  report  states
   "none of my informants in Rashidiya camp had heard anything to the effect
   that the appellant had lived in Ain-al-Hilweh camp or worked distributing
   aid to Palestinian refugees from Syria." While a  Judge  is  entitled  to
   rely only on the appellant's evidence to prove his claim, he  must  be  a
   credible witness. The Judge did not find the appellant credible  for  the
   reasons that he gave in his decision and which I outline below.


8. The Judge did not find credible the  appellant's  evidence  that  he  was
   sent to the Ain-al-Hilweh refugee camp with $40.000 to spend on  refugees
   coming from Syria, when money would obviously have been in  short  supply
   for the Fatah. The Judge noted that Dr  George  himself  raised  concerns
   about the credibility of the appellant's claim that he was  sent  with  a
   large amount of money to the refugee camp. The Judge further  noted  that
   the appellant's position was one of  payroll  manager  and  therefore  it
   would hardly be expected that he would be the one to be sent on a special
   humanitarian mission  to  Ein-al-Hilweh  camp  The  Judge  considered  Dr
   George's report which stated that none of his informants had heard of the
   appellant's work. There is no perversity in  not  finding  the  appellant
   credible.


9. The Judge further noted in  his  decision  that  the  appellant  did  not
   address this concern at the hearing about be entrusted  with  $40,000  in
   cash, until he prompted the appellant. The Judge noted that the appellant
   then sought to downplay the amount of money while  also  emphasising  his
   trustworthiness. The Judge was entitled to find that this  evidence  went
   to the appellant's credibility and to the credibility of his  claim  that
   he worked at the refugee camp.


10. The Judge considered the appellant's  evidence  of  his  encounter  with
   Haitham Al Shaabi in the Ein-al-Hilweh camp and found that there  was  no
   evidence other than the appellant's evidence of this encounter,  even  if
   the expert found that such an individual is a  prominent  member  of  the
   Jund al Sham.


11. Furthermore,  the  Judge  found  that  the  appellant's  attributes  his
   difficulties with Haitham Al Shaabi to  a  conversation  the  appellant's
   sister had with Haitham Al Shaabi's sister. The Judge correctly found  it
   to be improbable that the appellant's sister would casually  mention  the
   appellant's work for the PLO/Fatah in the Ein-al-Hilweh camp to the known
   sister of a notorious extremist and leader of an organisation opposed  to
   the PLO. This is a logical conclusion that  the  Judge  came  to  on  the
   evidence.


12. The Judge in his decision makes reference to Dr  Georges  expert  report
   throughout his decision. Therefore, the complaint that the Judge did  not
   take into account the expert report has no basis whatsoever.  The  expert
   found the appellant's account "plausible" but  it  is  the  duty  of  the
   Tribunal to assess the credibility of the  appellant  based  on  all  the
   evidence, which he did in a very reasonable and fair manner.


13. The Judge did not accept the appellant's evidence that he  came  to  the
   adverse attention of the Lebanese army. The appellant's evidence was that
   he was detention for a short while, on his return to Al Rashidiya camp by
   the Lebanese army. The grounds of appeal state that  the  Judge  did  not
   accept Dr Georges conclusion on the basis of the information he  received
   from  his  source  that  the  appellant  was  wanted  by   the   Lebanese
   authorities.


14. The Judge however gave cogent reasons for not accepting  this  evidence.
   The first reason given by the Judge was  that  the  appellant  failed  to
   mention  this  pivotal  evidence  of  his  detention  by   the   Lebanese
   authorities earlier but only mentioned it  for  the  first  time,  during
   cross-examination at the hearing. The Judge was entitled to draw  adverse
   credibility findings against the appellant that this pivotal evidence was
   given only during cross examination and even then, it had to be  elicited
   from him. The Judge stated that given that the core  of  the  appellant's
   claim is that he is at risk from the Lebanese authorities, his failure to
   mention this detention was not credible.


15. The Judge did not accept the explanation  advanced  by  the  appellant's
   counsel for his failure to give this  evidence  earlier  which  was  that
   large pieces of the appellant's account which were not supported by other
   evidence were omitted. The Judge rightly pointed out that this should not
   have prevented the appellant or his wife from mentioning  this  detention
   for the Lebanese army, earlier given that the appellant and his wife  had
   given comprehensive  accounts  in  their  asylum  interview  and  witness
   statements of their claim including details  which  are  not  immediately
   relevant to the claim, such as the time they spent in the UAE. The  Judge
   further stated that there is an incident  described  by  the  appellant's
   wife and her witness statement which is consistent  with  the  period  of
   detention described by the appellant  and  therefore  it  makes  it  even
   stranger that this evidence was not given earlier until the hearing.


16. The Judge was entitled to find that the  appellant's  evidence  that  he
   was detained by the Lebanese  authorities  was  an  afterthought  and  an
   attempt to bolster  his  asylum  claim  which  went  to  the  appellant's
   credibility. The  Judge's  reasoning  in  respect  of  this  evidence  is
   faultless.


17. The Judge then considered the  appellant's  brothers  claimed  detention
   and the  threats  and  demands  to  surrender  himself  to  the  Lebanese
   authorities which and took into account the documents  from  the  Popular
   Committee. The Judge gave weight to Dr George  expert  opinion  in  about
   these documents and said, although authentic they should be treated  with
   caution particularly so given that in this case the appellant  was  known
   to have family members who  worked  for  the  PLO/Fatah.  The  Judge  was
   therefore entitled not rely on them.


18. The Judge took into account the expert's view  that  the  Islamic  jihad
   was a ruthless organisation who would not issue threats needlessly but it
   could be expected that they would carry them  through.  The  Judge  found
   that despite this evidence,  it  was  not  credible  that  the  appellant
   remained safe hiding in the Rasididya camp for  five  months.  The  Judge
   father relied on the inconsistency in the  appellant's  evidence  at  the
   hearing when he was asked about this. The Judge stated that the appellant
   gave the impression that "he had been able to stay safe under armed guard
   by members of his family, but this was the first time that this had  been
   mentioned and found it not credible as it could not  be  reconciled  with
   the evidence in his statement that "only his father-in-law and wife, (who
   by then would have left the country), knew where he was." The  Judge  was
   entitled to find that this, inconsistent evidence went to the appellant's
   credibility and to the credibility of his claim.


19. The Judge found that given the appellant's account of events there  were
   also alternative versions of events put forward by Dr George's  anonymous
   source.  The Judge stated that the  anonymous  source  gave  an  entirely
   different account of matters agreeing only that the appellant is at  risk
   from the Lebanese authorities but for a  totally  different  matter.  The
   Judge stated that the appellant was fully aware of the  contents  of  the
   expert's report before the hearing and had every opportunity  to  give  a
   correct account of events in accordance with what the expert's  anonymous
   source as documented in the expert report. He went on to state that it is
   based on an account that the appellant himself has refused  to  adopt  or
   endorse. These are perfectly viable findings on the evidence.


20. The Judge considered the submission by the appellant's counsel to  be  a
   bold one that even if the Judge does not accept the  appellant's  account
   of events, he ought still to consider risk on return based on the account
   given by the expert's anonymous source. The Judge made it clear that  the
   account given by the anonymous source is not endorsed by the  appellant's
   account. I find there is no perversity in the Judges  reasoning  in  this
   regard.


21. The Judge concluded that his task is not simply to  assess  whether  the
   appellant is telling the truth, but is  overall  to  assess  whether  the
   appellant is at risk on return to Lebanon. The Judge  stated  that  there
   may be cases in which it is proper to find an appellant  at  risk  on  an
   entirely different basis to the one put forward by  that  appellant,  but
   said that this is not such a case. He further emphasised that  he  cannot
   rely on an anonymous source, notwithstanding the expert's assurances that
   it was a  credible  source,  particularly  where  the  appellant  himself
   disagrees with the evidence. This is a reliable finding of the evidence.


22. The Judge did not accept the appellant's evidence that he had worked  at
   the  Ein-al-Hilweh  camp  or  that  he  was  detained  by  the   Lebanese
   authorities or that has come to the adverse attention of anyone  or  that
   he is at risk from anyone.


23. The grounds of appeal state that since the changes  to  the  Immigration
   Rules came into force on 9 July 2012, including  the  incorporation  into
   the rules of paragraph 276 ADE, there is  a  need  for  the  Tribunal  to
   consider the question of whether there were very significant obstacles to
   the integration of the appellants as stateless Palestinians  in  Lebanon,
   and that this question cannot be answered simply with  reference  to  the
   2008  country  guidance  case  of  MM,  FH,  in  view  of  the  test  now
   incorporated by virtue of paragraph  276  ADE  and  the  updated  country
   background evidence of the difficulties stateless  Palestinians  face  in
   Lebanon as detailed in Dr George's report.


24. The Judge stood guided by the case of MN, FH when assessing whether  the
   appellant will face very significant  obstacles  to  his  integration  in
   Lebanon and qualify for leave to remain under paragraph 276 ADE (1) (vi).
   In MN, FH the court found that the situation for Palestinians  living  in
   Lebanon does not amount to persecution under the  Refugee  Convention  or
   breach of protected human rights under Article 3 of the ECHR.


25. The Judge was invited to depart  from  the  country  guidance  case  and
   instead rely on Dr George's expert report. The Judge considered the  case
   of DSG (Afghan sikhs: departure from CG Afghanistan)  [2013]  UKUT  00148
   (IAC) which said that very strong grounds and cogent reasons  are  needed
   to depart from a country  guidance  case.  The  Judge  did  not  find  Dr
   George's report demonstrated  such  very  strong  grounds,  supported  by
   cogent evidence. The Judge was entitled not to depart from  the  findings
   in MM, FH.


26. The Judge was entitled to  find  that  the  appellant  did  not  have  a
   history of past persecution and was  therefore  an  ordinary  Palestinian
   living in the camp in Lebanon amongst lots of others  and  where  he  has
   lived in the past. He took into account that the appellant is an engineer
   who left the camp of his own free will, worked in Dubai for  seven  years
   after which he returned to Lebanon and found that there was no reason for
   why he could not continue  to  do  so  again.  The  Judge  considered  Dr
   George's report, including  evidence  about  the  difficulties  stateless
   Palestinians, would face in Lebanon but he was  entitled  to  follow  the
   country guidance case of MM and FH about the conditions and treatment  in
   the camps, while poor, were  not  sufficient  to  amount  to  significant
   obstacles for the appellant and his family to return.


27. I find the Judge's findings are based on all the evidence in the  appeal
   including the expert report of Dr George and  the  decision  is  careful,
   well-reasoned, adequate and without any material error of law.

28. In R (Iran) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2005]  EWCA
   Civ 982 Brooke LJ commented on that analysis as follows:
       15. It will be noticed that the Master of the Rolls used  the  words
       "vital" and "critical" as synonyms of the word "material"  which  we
       have used above. The  whole  of  his  judgment  warrants  attention,
       because it reveals the anxiety of an appellate court not to overturn
       a judgment at first instance unless it really cannot understand  the
       original Judge's thought processes when he/she was  making  material
       findings.

29. I find that I have no difficulty in understanding the reasoning  in  the
   Judge's decision for why he reached his  conclusions.  I  find  that  the
   Judge's conclusions are free of error; I therefore reject the appellant's
   grounds of appeal in their entirety and dismiss  the  appellant's  appeal
   and it follows  that  the  appeals  of  the  other  appellants  are  also
   dismissed.


DECISION

I dismiss the appeal of all the appellants




     Dated this 15th day of May 2017

Signed by,
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Mrs S Chana






