
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00734/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (by remote      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|means)                               |                                     |
|On 24th March 2021                   |On 06th May 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                     LM
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Lams of Counsel, instructed by TNA Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This has been a remote hearing which has not been objected  to  by  the
    parties.  The form of remote hearing was by video, using Skype.  A face
    to face hearing was not held to take precautions against the spread  of
    Covid-19 and as all issues could be determined by remote means.   There
    were technical difficulties for Ms Isherwood accessing the video  call,
    which were improved significantly by her  camera  being  switched  off,
    such that with the agreement of the parties, the hearing proceeded with
    her joining the video call orally.  The file contained the documents in
    paper format.

 2. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Howard promulgated on 29 May  2020,  in  which  the
    Appellant's appeal against the decision to refuse  his  protection  and
    human rights claim dated 9 January 2020 was dismissed.

 3. The Appellant is a national of Namibia,  born  on  2  April  1980,  who
    claims to have arrived in the United Kingdom on 13 December  2018.   He
    claimed asylum on 5 July 2019 on the basis that he would be at risk  on
    return to Namibia as a gay man.

 4. The Respondent refused the  application  the  basis  that  it  was  not
    accepted that the Appellant  was  gay  because  his  account  was  both
    internally  and  externally  inconsistent;  with  a  lack  of  expected
    introspection and detail.  Further, the Respondent did not  accept  the
    Appellant's claim that his father had tried to force him  to  marry  or
    that he beat him due to inconsistencies in the claim.  The  Appellant's
    credibility was damaged  pursuant  to  section  8  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration (Treatment of Claimants etc) Act 2004 as the Appellant only
    claimed asylum after he was arrested.  In  any  event,  the  Respondent
    considered that even if the Appellant was gay, that would  not  per  se
    lead to any risk on return to Namibia where he had  family  support  to
    live openly and there was a sufficiency of  protection  and  option  of
    internal relocation  available.   For  these  reasons  the  Appellant's
    asylum and humanitarian protection claims were refused  and  there  was
    found to be no breach of Articles 2 and/or 3 of the European Convention
    on Human Rights.  The Appellant had not established family life in  the
    United Kingdom  and  would  not  face  very  significant  obstacles  to
    reintegration on return to Namibia.  Overall, there was no basis for  a
    grant of leave to remain and no exceptional circumstances.

 5. Judge Howard dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on  29  May
    2020 on all grounds.  In summary, the First-tier Tribunal did not  find
    the Appellant's claim to be gay credible and that alone was  sufficient
    for the appeal to be dismissed in  circumstances  where  there  was  no
    freestanding or separate claim to humanitarian protection or  on  human
    rights grounds.

The appeal

 6. The Appellant appeals on three grounds as  follows.   First,  that  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  materially  erred  in  failing  to  consider  the
    Appellant's  credibility  in  the  round,  without  reference  to   the
    principles in Tanveer Ahmed and basing  the  conclusions  on  a  single
    finding of inconsistency which was found  to  have  tainted  all  other
    evidence.  Secondly, that the First-tier Tribunal materially  erred  in
    law in misunderstanding the Appellant's evidence about his first sexual
    experience with a particular partner as opposed  to  his  first  sexual
    experience ever.  Thirdly,  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  materially
    erred in law in ignoring the fact that the Appellant's sister's written
    statement was made to the police, which of itself is  a  cogent  reason
    why she did not implicate her father  within  it.   The  other  written
    statements were also dismissed in a pre-emptory fashion  and  the  fact
    that they were prepared for the purposes of the appeal  does  not  mean
    that no weight should be attached to them.

 7. In further written submissions made on behalf of the Appellant, it  was
    reiterated that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in its assessment  of
    credibility and noted that there were no findings on whether there  was
    a sufficiency of protection or option of internal relocation  available
    to the Appellant.

 8. At the oral hearing, Mr Lams relied on the written grounds  of  appeal.
    In relation to the first  ground,  he  submitted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal formed a  negative  view  of  the  claim  based  on  a  single
    inconsistency without considering all of the evidence in the round  and
    assessing all the  other  evidence  as  having  been  tainted  by  that
    inconsistency; even though some evidence, including the claim that  the
    Appellant's  father  had  attacked  him,  was  accepted.   There   were
    significant parts of the Appellant's claim which were not even referred
    to in the decision, such as  the  claim  that  the  Appellant's  father
    sought to force him to marry his cousin.

 9. The First-tier Tribunal's decision is said to consider the Doctor's and
    the Appellant's sister's evidence as an  afterthought.   The  statement
    from the Appellant's sister refers to the police on  its  face  and  Mr
    Lams accepted that it was not in relation to the investigation  of  the
    claimed assault or any other offence but was made to the  police  as  a
    notarised formal statement which he thought was for the purposes of the
    appeal.  In any event, the Appellant's sexuality and  the  assault  are
    different parts of the claim and the lack of evidence on one part  does
    not undermine the matters that were covered in the statement. The  fact
    that it was made to the police may be a reason why it did  not  include
    any reference to the assault.  However, the fact that  this  and  other
    statements were prepared for the appeal hearing was  not  a  sufficient
    reason for no weight to be attached to them.

10. In relation to the letter from the traditional  authority,  the  First-
    tier Tribunal only considered whether the contents were consistent with
    conservative views in Namibia rather than considering any other factors
    which may bear on the credibility of the document itself.   The  First-
    tier Tribunal's logic that the document is  not  credible  because  the
    author was not hostile to the Appellant was submitted to be problematic
    and whilst it may be part of the consideration, it was insufficient  as
    a sole reason for the weight to be attached to it.

11.  The  second  ground  of  appeal  concerns  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    understanding of  the  Appellant's  evidence  about  his  first  sexual
    experience.  Mr Lams submitted that there was no  inconsistency  as  in
    paragraph 15 of the Appellant's written statement  for  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, the inclusion of  the  word  'when'  clarified  that  he  was
    referring only to his first  sexual  experience  with  this  particular
    person and not his first one ever.   Mr Lams submitted that  the  first
    issue was whether the First-tier Tribunal was  entitled  to  find  that
    there was an inconsistency in the Appellant's evidence as to his  first
    sexual experience and secondly, if so, whether that was  sufficient  to
    undermine and taint the remainder of the evidence.

12. On behalf of the Respondent, Ms Isherwood submitted that there  was  no
    material error of law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision,  even
    though it was not the best example of  an  asylum  decision.   Overall,
    this was a case in which the Appellant had  simply  not  addressed  the
    inconsistencies in his evidence and in which supporting evidence lacked
    key  information,  such  as  the  Appellant's  sister's  statement  not
    including any reference at all to the claimed assault.   The  Appellant
    had simply failed to submit adequate evidence to  establish  his  claim
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

13. The inconsistency in the  Appellant's  claim  about  his  first  sexual
    experience  was  highlighted  initially  in  the   substantive   asylum
    interview,  relied  upon  in  the  decision  letter  and  not  properly
    addressed or explained at any later point.  This was part of  the  core
    of the Appellant's claim and it was open to the First-tier Tribunal  to
    note this and find that the Appellant's evidence was  tainted  by  this
    inconsistency.

14. In relation to the other evidence, Ms Isherwood noted  that  whilst  it
    was accepted that the Appellant was assaulted by his father, it was not
    accepted that this was because he was gay and there was simply  nothing
    in his sister's written statement to support that as it does not  refer
    to the assault at all.  The explanation offered by Mr Lams  as  to  why
    reference to it may have been  missing  from  the  statement  does  not
    assist, the evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal  simply  did  not
    support the core parts of the Appellant's claim.

15. The First-tier Tribunal was entitled to attach  little  weight  to  the
    traditional authority letter in circumstances where it was at odds with
    the background evidence and the Appellant's own claim.

Findings and reasons

 1. I begin with the second  ground  of  appeal  as  that  is  the  logical
    starting point and if the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  finding  an
    inconsistency due to  a  misunderstanding  of  the  evidence  then  the
    remainder of the reasoning is not likely to stand, such that that alone
    would be a material error of law.

 2. It is necessary to consider in more detail  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    findings on the Appellant's credibility, specifically on  the  evidence
    as to his first sexual encounter and the evidence before it upon  which
    those findings were made.  The relevant parts of the decision found  as
    follows:

         "26. The appellant claims to be  gay.   He  claims  that  he  first
         sensed he was gay while a teenager at school  and  that  his  first
         attempt at a gay relationship, while unsuccessful was  while  still
         at school.  His second would be partner was JH.  His case  is  that
         JH was his first sexual partner.

         27.  Initially the appellant stated that his first  sexual  partner
         was a man he met on Twitter using a false name.  He stated that  he
         was thirty-one years old when this finally happened.  He made  this
         assertion in a witness statement  dated  the  9th  September  2019.
         Three months later when being interviewed about his asylum claim he
         stated that his first sexual encounter was while at school with JH.

         28.  The Appellant's sexuality lies at  the  heart  of  his  asylum
         claim.  It is the reason why he says, from a teenager he recognised
         this difference in himself and he then sets out a narrative of  the
         significant events on that journey,  culminating  in  his  father's
         ostracising him and his fleeing Namibia.  Central to this narrative
         is his first sexual act as a gay man.   It  is  the  appellant  who
         introduces it as a fact for  consideration  in  his  first  witness
         statement.  When he makes the alternative assertion in  his  asylum
         interview it is [in] response to an open question about his "crush"
         on JH.  At no time is he being closely questioned about his  sexual
         encounters in a way that might be described as designed to trip him
         up.

         29.  I am asked by the appellant to conclude that the change in the
         identity of his first gay sexual partner from a man he met  through
         Twitter when aged thirty-one, to a youth he had a crush on while at
         school is an explicable confusion on the part of the appellant.

         30.  If the subject  matter  of  the  confusion  was  a  peripheral
         detail, confusion might be a credible  explanation.   This  subject
         matter goes to the very core of his claim.  It is from that  moment
         that,  in  reality,  all  else  flows  as  it  must  be  the  first
         substantial step in his journey to the  confirmation  of  his  true
         sexuality.  That it should  be  the  subject  of  two  such  wildly
         different recollections is simply not credible, even to the  lowest
         standard.

         31.  If the appellant is not credible when recalling his first  gay
         sexual experience then everything else he says in  support  of  his
         claimed sexuality is equally tainted. ..."

 3. I set out the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal on this point  in
    some detail, as the matter goes much deeper than suggested by  Mr  Lams
    in submissions that this was a mis-reading of one  particular  sentence
    in a written statement  from  the  Appellant  which  had  two  possible
    meanings (whether the Appellant was describing his first sexual partner
    or his first sexual experience with a particular partner) and the First-
    tier Tribunal interpreted it in the wrong way.

 4. The Appellant's statement dated 9  September  2019,  submitted  to  the
    Respondent after his initial  asylum  screening  interview  and  likely
    together  with  a  preliminary  information  questionnaire   dated   12
    September 2019; contained the following:

         "9. My first crush was on someone in my year at [...] high school I
         went to.  Is name was [JH].  I first noticed him  in  the  corridor
         between lessons, where  he  was  mucking  about  with  a  group  of
         friends, making them laugh.  I liked him  straight  away.   He  was
         tall, mixed-heritage, athletic, and the class joker.  He was always
         happy to talk to me, but never in a romantic way.  I do  not  think
         he ever knew how I felt about him.  I never told him, of course.  I
         could barely admit it to myself.

         ...

         14. But by the time I turned 31, I could not suppress my  sexuality
         anymore.  I knew pretty much nothing about the  gay  community  and
         was eager to learn.  So, I created a Twitter profile using  a  fake
         name and used it to chat to guys online.

         15. ... I began messaging a man and, before long,  we  were  seeing
         each other.  I had my first sexual experience with him, and I  felt
         so free when we were together. ..."

 5. In his asylum interview on 11 December 2019,  the  following  questions
    were put and answers given:

         "59. Question: Tell me about the crush you had on [JH], how did  it
         make you feel?

         59.  Response:  ...  We  started  something  and   we   started   a
         relationship ...

         60. Question:  In your WS you said that [JH] never knew  about  how
         you felt for him, because you never told him.  Now you  are  saying
         you were in a relationship with him, can you explain that?

         60. Response: He never knew at the start ... Things  came  together
         with time.

         61. Question: How long did your relationship with [JH] last?

         61. Response: ... We split only because of the school but  we  were
         still communicating but we did not really have the chance  to  meet
         again.

         62. Question: What sort of relationship did you have with [JH]?

         62. Response: We had a relationship, we even had intercourse.

         63. Question: How old were you at that time?

         63. Response: Maybe early, 20, 21.  No, if it laten then it is late
         18 to 21.  18 to 21.

         ...

         65. Question: In your WS you said that your first sexual experience
         was with someone you met on Twitter, now you are saying it was with
         [JH], can you explain that to me?

         65. Response: No no no, not someone I met  on  Twitter,  I  do  not
         recall saying that on my statement maybe we can read the  statement
         again.

         66. Question: On your WS it says in paragraph 15, I began messaging
         a man and before long, we were seeing each other, I  had  my  first
         sexual experience with  him  and  I  felt  so  free  when  we  were
         together.  Are you telling me that is not correct?

         66. Response: How did the paragraph start?  [read]   I  think  that
         should be under [JH].  No one from the twitter site I had sex with.
          That was supposed to be under [JH].

         67. Question: Why is [JH's] name not in that paragraph, why does it
         just say you were messaging a man.  If [JH] was your  first  sexual
         experience, why have you not named him as such?

         67. Response: I think I did name it where his name is appearing.

         68. Question: All you said about [JH] was that you never  told  him
         about how you felt, you could barely admit it to  yourself.   I  am
         having trouble understanding why you would say something like that,
         and then tell me today that he was your  first  sexual  experience.
         Can you help me to better understand?

         68. Response: I thought I had mentioned it with [JH] I am not  sure
         why it is not mentioned.  Is it from the questions  or  is  it  the
         statement [it is from the statement] I should,  maybe  I  did  not.
         That is supposed to be clearly with, not anyone  from  Twitter  but
         with [JH].

         69. Question: You said earlier you were aware of  the  contents  of
         your WS, and that it was correct, is that now not the case?

         69. Response: [IO explains] Not really, to say that maybe I did not
         double check everything I wrote earlier.  [This is a very important
         document, it is outlining your reason for claiming asylum, why  did
         you not double check it?]  I suppose, because, I  am  the  one  who
         wrote, I thought I knew it all, I just did  not  know  that  I  had
         documented it mistakenly like that."

 6. In the reasons for refusal letter, the Respondent expressly  relied  on
    the inconsistency and interview record in paragraph 39 as  one  of  the
    reasons why the Appellant's claim was not accepted.

 7. In his written statement to the First-tier Tribunal dated  25  February
    2020, the Appellant replicated paragraph 9  of  his  earlier  statement
    dealing with his first crush on [JH] which included that the  Appellant
    did "not think he ever knew how I felt about him.  I never told him, of
    course.  I could barely admit  it  to  myself.".   There  was  then  an
    additional handwritten sentence which did not  appear  in  the  earlier
    statement which added, "We had sex later, during the school holidays.".
     In the second statement, paragraph 15 was  also  replicated  from  the
    earlier statement (set out above), with the addition of 'when'  in  the
    following sentence, "When I had my first  sexual  experience  with  him
    ...".  There was no explanation in the  written  statement  as  to  the
    earlier discrepancies, nor any reference to the asylum interview.

 8. At the oral hearing, the Appellant stated that further to  paragraph  9
    of his written statement, he did tell JH later how he felt,  and  later
    they had a relationship  which  ended  in  physical  intercourse.   The
    Appellant named the person referred to in paragraphs 14 and 15  of  his
    written statement and stated that he did have  sex  with  him  but  his
    first experience was with JH.  He was not cross-examined on this  point
    and in submissions, Mr  Lams  simply  stated  that  the  Appellant  had
    clarified the point about JH.

 9. The difficulty with the ground of appeal and Mr Lams submissions to  me
    is that it relies on an explanation of the evidence which was not given
    by the Appellant himself when asked about the inconsistency and in fact
    does not address the inconsistencies directly; which  as  can  be  seen
    from the asylum interview  includes  not  only  the  Appellant's  first
    sexual experience but whether he had a sexual relationship at all  with
    JH and/or a man he met through Twitter (having  denied  the  latter  in
    interview but maintained it in statements before and after and in  oral
    evidence).   There  was  within  the  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, significant inconsistencies in the Appellant's claim about  a
    core part of it which remained almost entirely unexplained by the  time
    of the appeal hearing.  The addition of a sentence in one paragraph  of
    his earlier written statement and addition of  the  word  'when'  in  a
    latter point offered no explanation at all as to those  inconsistencies
    and failed to clarify the Appellant's evidence on these issues.  On the
    evidence  that  was  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  there  was  no
    misunderstanding and it was open to the Judge to find as  he  did  that
    there were two different accounts, which  could  not  be  explained  by
    confusion and was simply not credible.

10. The second issue, encompassed within the first  ground  of  appeal  was
    then whether in light of that finding, the First-tier Tribunal erred in
    law in its assessment of the other  evidence  when  concluding  overall
    that the Appellant was not credible and was not gay.  In paragraphs  30
    and 31 of the decision, the First-tier Tribunal stated that  given  the
    subject matter, the Appellant not being able to consistently recall his
    first sexual experience went to the very core of  his  claim  and  that
    tainted everything else he said in support of  his  claimed  sexuality.
    It is notable that this is specifically about the Appellant's evidence,
    by the reference to what 'else he says' and not that the  issue  taints
    all of the evidence, including that from other sources.   In  terms  of
    his own account and evidence, that is not an unreasonable  or  unlawful
    finding.

11. The First-tier Tribunal then goes on  to  consider  the  evidence  from
    other sources, the significant pieces  being  the  Doctor's  affidavit,
    which was considered to be credible but does not address or  offer  any
    evidence as to the motive or reason  for  the  assault.   Further,  the
    Appellant's sister's document is silent on the assault, such that there
    is no supporting evidence from her on this point  either.   The  First-
    tier Tribunal finds therefore that the evidence as to motive or  reason
    for the assault is only that  available  from  the  Appellant  himself.
    There is nothing to suggest  that  the  possible  explanation  for  the
    absence of evidence from the Appellant's  sister  offered  by  Mr  Lams
    before me was before the First-tier Tribunal,  nor  apparent  from  the
    face of the document and in any event, it remains the case  that  there
    simply was no supporting evidence before the First-tier Tribunal beyond
    what was said by the Appellant in relation to the assault.

12. In paragraph 33 of the decision, the First-tier Tribunal states that no
    weight is attached to statements of named associates of  the  Appellant
    because they stand in isolation and were prepared in  contemplation  of
    an asylum claim.  The latter is not a reason to attach no weight at all
    to the documents, as in essence, a significant amount of evidence  will
    always be prepared for the purposes of an appeal, particularly  witness
    evidence.  The letters do however stand somewhat in isolation from  the
    other evidence in that they do not address specific events relied  upon
    by the Appellant and two of them are  not  supported  by  any  identity
    documents  and  contain  no  more  than  vague  character   references.
    Although the reasoning of the First-tier Tribunal on the weight  to  be
    attached to these particular documents is  lacking,  having  considered
    that evidence, it is difficult to see how any significant weight  could
    have been attached to it due to  the  content,  or  more  the  lack  of
    specific content consistent with or supportive of the Appellant's claim
    or events forming part of it.  In particular, it does  not  address  in
    any detail any relationships the Appellant did or did not have; nor  as
    to his relationship with his father or the assault.

13. The final evidence considered in paragraph 34 of the  decision  is  the
    letter from the Ovaherero Traditional Authority which states  that  the
    Appellant reported his father for attempting to force him to  marry  an
    older cousin which he refused because he is gay and expresses  sympathy
    for the problem but could not assist.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  found
    that  the  views  expressed  were  inconsistent  with   the   objective
    background country information of a conservative and generally  hostile
    society towards homosexuality, particularly for a traditional chief.  I
    would add it is also inconsistent with  what  the  Appellant  has  said
    about values of the Ovaherero as well.  For this reason, the letter was
    not  considered  credible.   Whilst   there   may   have   been   other
    considerations as to the credibility of the document, it  was  open  to
    the First-tier Tribunal to find it not credible for  the  reason  given
    and in any event, at best the document relies upon an account given  by
    the Appellant and his own credibility is again relevant to this.

14. Having considered the parts of the evidence  in  turn,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal concluded that for all the reasons given,  the  Appellant  was
    not a credible witness  and  had  not  established  that  he  was  gay.
    Although there is no specific reference to Tanveer Ahmed generally  nor
    any express reference to the evidence being considered  in  the  round;
    there is nothing on the face  of  the  decision  to  suggest  that  the
    Tribunal did anything other than apply these  principles  and  consider
    the totality of the evidence before coming to a final  conclusion.    I
    do not find that the First-tier Tribunal found a  single  inconsistency
    which then tainted all other evidence without it  being  considered  in
    the round.  In this case, it is  more  that  there  was  a  significant
    unexplained discrepancy in the core of the Appellant's  account,  which
    was  sufficient  to  taint  the  Appellant's  own  evidence   and   his
    credibility and little if  any  further  evidence  from  other  sources
    supporting the core elements of the claim.

15. The elements of the third ground of appeal have been covered within the
    assessment of evidence and  credibility  in  the  round  above  in  the
    context of the first ground of appeal.  There is no separate  error  of
    law identified in the third ground for the reasons already given.

16. Overall, the First-tier Tribunal reached conclusions which were open to
    it on the evidence as a whole and without any misunderstanding  of  the
    facts and does not contain any material errors of law to the outcome of
    the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   G Jackson                           Date         27th April 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

