
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00682/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 December 2020                          |On 28 January 2021            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                     A R
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Davison, instructed by Indra Sebastian
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka.  He appealed  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal against the respondent's decision  of  19  November  2018
    refusing to grant his claim for international  protection.   His  claim
    also includes challenge  to  the  decision  refusing  his  claim  under
    Articles 3 and 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

2.   The appellant's claim was that he feared return because  of  renting  a
    room in his parents' house to two Tamil youths in 1995.  He stated that
    the youths were members  of  the  LTTE  and  had  been  involved  in  a
    terrorist attack, or alternatively they were acting as  spies  for  the
    LTTE.  He stated that he was visited at home in 2007 by unknown  people
    seeking his arrest for supporting  the  LTTE  in  1995.   Alternatively
    paramilitaries had attended his address in 1995 with the photographs of
    the  youths  or  the  two  youths  were  brought  to  his  address   by
    paramilitaries and identified him.

3.   The appellant's case was that he went into hiding for  ten  months  and
    left Sri Lanka for the  United  Kingdom  in  2008  as  a  student.   He
    obtained further leave but it appears that he has  been  an  overstayer
    since 14 December 2015.  While he was in detention, on 21 May  2018  he
    made an asylum application following service of notices explaining that
    he would be removed to Sri Lanka.

4.   He claimed that the police had continued to demonstrate an interest  in
    him, either attending his home address about  twice  a  month  or  once
    every two to three months.  He said that his wife had moved address but
    was traced by the authorities.   They  sent  a  note  to  that  address
    summonsing the appellant to a police station on 30 May 2013.

5.   The appellant did not give evidence before  the  First-tier  Judge.   A
    psychiatric report prepared by Dr Robin  Lawrence  in  April  2019  was
    filed on his behalf.  His niece had been expected  to  attend  to  give
    evidence but she sent a letter apologising for her  non-attendance  and
    asked for her witness statement to be considered.

6.   The judge noted the background evidence and also the medical  evidence,
    including the psychiatric report provided by Dr Lawrence.

7.   The judge noted the essential findings of Dr Lawrence,  which  had  led
    him to suggest that the appellant had symptoms of paranoia and possibly
    paranoid schizophrenia, together with symptoms of  depression,  anxiety
    and post-traumatic stress disorder.

8.   The judge observed that although  the  medical  notes  which  had  been
    provided separate from Dr Lawrence's report said that the appellant did
    not report active suicidal thoughts though in his  assessment  with  Dr
    Lawrence he said that he wanted to kill himself all the time.

9.   The judge also identified  what  she  saw  as  a  contradiction  in  Dr
    Lawrence's report in that at the beginning of the report he had written
    that the appellant was fully engaged in the assessment and they  formed
    a good rapport, but at page 43 of the bundle and later in the report he
    wrote that the appellant appeared  willing  to  be  seen  but  was  too
    apathetic to conclude that he  was  fully  engaged  in  the  assessment
    process.

10.  The judge concluded that in light  of  the  appellant's  contradictions
    between the medical notes and the  report  prepared  without  sight  of
    those notes, the inconsistences in the accounts given by the  appellant
    in his assessment and those given to the respondent and the  fact  that
    the veracity of the report was totally dependent upon  the  appellant's
    account of events, she gave little weight to Dr Lawrence's report.

11.  The judge found the appellant  not  to  be  a  credible  witness.   She
    concluded that his account of events in Sri Lanka was undermined by the
    inconsistencies across the interviews conducted by the  respondent  and
    the very limited account given  to  Dr  Lawrence.   She  also  made  an
    adverse finding in accordance with section 8  of  the  Immigration  and
    Asylum (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act, in that  the  appellant  had
    only made a claim for asylum after being told that his claim for  leave
    to remain under  the  family  and  private  life  provisions  had  been
    refused,  in  2016  and  2018.   In  addition  he  had  made   numerous
    applications for leave to remain  since  his  initial  arrival  in  the
    United Kingdom in 2008.  She found it inconceivable that he  would  not
    have been advised to claim asylum prior to May 2018 if he had told  his
    lawyers about his position in Sri Lanka.  She found  that  he  did  not
    tell them because the events had not taken place.

12.  Nor did  she  accept  that  the  document  produced  by  the  appellant
    inviting him to the police station was a genuine  document.   She  said
    that irrespective of any grammatical errors in the translation, none of
    the key information required by the form was present.  The name of  the
    sending or receiving operator was completed; the names  of  the  police
    stations were blank; there was no date of receipt and  no  distribution
    list.  The signatory of the document was not named but referred only to
    as officer in charge.  She commented that she  would  expect  at  least
    some of those details such as the issuing officer's name to be  present
    on the form.

13.  As a consequence she concluded that he had not made out his  claim  for
    international protection on the  basis  that  he  was  not  a  credible
    witness.  Nor did she accept that he was at risk  of  serious  harm  on
    return such as to fall foul of the requirements of the  law  concerning
    humanitarian protection and Article 3.

14.  With regard to the appellant's mental health she was satisfied that  he
    did suffer from a depressive condition,  but  given  the  contradictory
    evidence regarding his suicidal ideation  she  found  that  the  mental
    health condition was not at such a level that returning  to  Sri  Lanka
    would expose him to inhumane treatment or  suffering.   She  considered
    that the medication the appellant required ought  to  be  available  in
    Colombo as would counselling and some talking therapies.  He  would  be
    returning to his wife and two children, his parents still lived in  Sri
    Lanka and he would be able to obtain  the  necessary  medication.   The
    Article 8 claim was not made out.

15.  The appellant sought and was granted permission to  appeal,  ultimately
    by a judge of the Upper Tribunal, on the basis that  the  judge  should
    not have dismissed the psychiatric report to the extent  she  did  when
    assessing the appellant's credibility.  She granted permission  on  all
    grounds.

16.  In his submissions Mr Davison responded  to  the  points  made  in  the
    skeleton argument which had been provided on behalf of the Secretary of
    State.  He noted what was said there about the fact  that  Dr  Lawrence
    had said the medical notes would be extremely useful and this had  been
    particularly noted by the First-tier Tribunal Judge  as  had  been  the
    absence of stated symptoms in the medical notes.  The  point  had  been
    made that Dr Lawrence considered that the appellant's real or  imagined
    profound fear would overwhelm the protective features of his family  in
    Sri Lanka and that he was at present  considered  to  be  incapable  of
    reintegration within Sri Lanka.

17.  Mr Davison argued that the  judge  had  dealt  with  the  reintegration
    point quite briefly at paragraph 58.  Though it was  not  pleaded,  the
    point was made that there had been no  mention  by  the  judge  of  the
    Presidential Guidance on vulnerable witnesses  and  that  was  a  clear
    error of law.  There was no reference to the appellant's vulnerability.
      The  judge  had  not  considered  or  assessed  how  the  appellant's
    vulnerability might affect his evidence  and  she  had  referred  among
    other things to his evidence being "rambling".

18.  It had been accepted in the  respondent's  skeleton,  at  paragraph  4,
    that the witness statements  lodged,  at  least  one  of  which  was  a
    reference, had  not  been  directly  addressed  by  the  judge  in  her
    decision.  It was argued they could be very material if the  judge  had
    factored them into the reliability of the  appellant's  evidence.   The
    witnesses did not have his mental health  problems.   No  findings  had
    been made on this evidence and it could not just be ignored.

19.  With regard to what  was  said  at  paragraph  6  of  the  respondent's
    skeleton with regard to the judge's reasoning in respect of the  report
    of Dr Lawrence and the  medical  notes,  it  was  argued  that  it  was
    dangerous to make adverse credibility findings on a delusional witness.



20.   Paragraph  48  was  the  basis  of  the  judge's  adverse  credibility
    findings.  However it was  the  case  that  he  could  be  inconsistent
    because of his mental health problems.  At paragraph 50 the  judge  had
    said that the police report lacked what she would expect but there  was
    no  reference  to  background  evidence  or  relevant  expertise.    At
    paragraph 56 she had accepted some of the evidence but  then  made  the
    point she had about suicidal ideation.  The expert had  said  that  the
    concerns he had about return worsened his state.  This was likely to be
    so and it could well mean that he had a worse mental state and it would
    be wrong to make an adverse credibility finding  in  respect  of  that.
    Suicidal ideation could come and go.

21.  In his submissions Mr Tufan relied on the skeleton  argument  that  had
    previously been submitted.  As had been accepted  by  Mr  Davison,  the
    point about the Presidential Guidance had not been pleaded  previously,
    but it was clear in any event that the appellant had not given evidence
    so it was questioned how the guidance could  be  applied  to  find  him
    credible.  Mr Davison had said the judge was wrong in  his  application
    of the Tanveer Ahmed guidance to the police document,  but  again  this
    was a new point.  Permission had only been granted in  respect  of  the
    medical report.  The judge had clearly looked at it.   The  conclusions
    were open to  the  judge  and  there  was  nothing  irrational  to  her
    findings.  Weight was a matter for her.

22.  Mr Tufan accepted that it appeared there was an error  with  regard  to
    the witnesses, to whom one was referred but not the other, but  it  was
    unclear what the material  effect  of  the  omission  would  be.   They
    corroborated  the  appellant.   The  judge  had  decided  against   the
    appellant and there was no error  of  any  materiality.   He  had  made
    several applications for leave in the United Kingdom and  there  was  a
    serious section 8 issue and this had been considered by the judge.   If
    he were genuine he would have been advised to claim earlier.  He had  a
    wife and children and family in Sri Lanka who would  help  with  health
    issues.

23.  By way of reply Mr Davison argued that the  guidance  was  relevant  to
    paragraph 15 in that the guidance referred  to  the  need  to  consider
    vulnerability in the context of the evidence  and  how  it  was  to  be
    assessed and the weight to be attached.  The failure to  refer  to  the
    witnesses was relevant.  The Tribunal was referred  to  their  evidence
    and there was a degree of detail there.  There was also an  element  of
    corroboration.  The appeal should be allowed.

24.  I reserved my decision.

25.  It is relevant to note that  no  application  was  made  to  amend  the
    grounds so as to include any reference to the failure on  the  part  of
    the  judge  to  refer  to  the  Presidential  Guidance  on   vulnerable
    witnesses.  I do not think that is a  matter  that  can  be  taken  any
    further today, but clearly it was an error by the  judge  not  to  take
    that guidance into account, bearing in mind that the appellant  clearly
    suffers from mental health problems, to the extent that he did not give
    evidence before the judge.

26.  However I consider that there is sufficient force to  the  points  made
    in the grounds such as to lead to findings of material errors of law in
    the judge's decision.  There is a degree of detail in the  evidence  of
    the witnesses which the judge failed to address at  all,  which  to  an
    extent corroborates the account given by the  appellant,  and  that  is
    clearly material to an assessment of the credibility of  the  claim  in
    this case.

27.  I also agree that the medical notes  provided  only  limited  evidence,
    and far more detail was given to Dr Lawrence than can be found in those
    notes.  Nor do I think the judge was entitled to consider  there  is  a
    contradiction between the medical notes and Dr Lawrence's report.   The
    fact that the notes did not record suicidal  thoughts  as  Dr  Lawrence
    did, is in no sense in my view a material discrepancy given the passage
    of time and the extent to which feelings of suicidal ideation may  come
    and go.  I see less force to the criticism of  paragraph  50,  in  that
    what the judge observed there were matters which she was entitled to be
    concerned about from the face of the document.  The matters absent from
    the form upon which he commented were a matter of common sense.

28.  Bringing  these  matters  together  I  consider  on  balance  that  the
    decision of the judge is materially flawed by the failure  to  consider
    the evidence of the witnesses and the flaws in the reasoning  that  led
    the judge to give little weight to Dr Lawrence's report.  Clearly there
    are matters of concern as regards credibility in this case, such as the
    invitation to  the  police  station  and  the  appellant's  immigration
    history.  But these are matters that need to be considered in the round
    with the evidence as a whole.  As a consequence  I conclude  that  the
    appeal is allowed to  the  extent  that  it  is  remitted  for  a  full
    rehearing in the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton  Cross  before  a  judge
    other than Judge Moffatt.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date 20 January 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
