
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00789/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 March 2018                     |On 28 March 2018                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                     NS
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms V Easty, Counsel, instructed by Brighton Housing
Trust
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Reid (the judge), promulgated on 17 July  2017,  in  which
         she dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  respondent's
         decision dated 17 January 2017 refusing his asylum claim.



Factual Background

      2. The appellant is a national of Afghanistan, with an estimated  date
         of birth of 1 March 1999.  His  mother  is  Tajik  and  his  father
         Pashtu. He entered the UK on 30  June  2016  aged  17  and  claimed
         asylum on 19 July 2016.

      3. The appellant's father, who died before he was born, and a deceased
         older brother were both involved with the Taliban (his father was a
         commander) and were killed by the governor of  Balkh  province,  in
         which they lived, as a result of their involvement. The family then
         moved to Panjshir Province when the appellant was about 1 year  old
         and lived on his maternal uncle's land. The appellant's other older
         brother, WS, left Afghanistan when the appellant was aged  8  or  9
         because of threats made by the Governor of  Panjshir  province  who
         assumed that WS, a young  teenager,  would  be  involved  with  the
         Taliban and because the Governor wanted  to  use  him  against  the
         group. WS came to the UK and was eventually granted asylum after an
         appeal (he was found credible and to have a  well-founded  fear  of
         persecution in Panjshir Province and, although there  was  no  real
         risk that he would be at risk of harm from the Province's  governor
         in Kabul, as he was a minor and with  no  family  support  internal
         relocation to Kabul was  not  reasonable)  and  is  now  a  British
         citizen.

      4. When growing up the appellant would occasionally be  approached  by
         armed men in his village (Mujahedin fighters) who  worked  for  the
         Governor of the Province and would ask about  his  father  and  the
         appellant's future plans. The appellant and  his  mother  moved  to
         Kabul in October 2014 after spending 1� months in Pakistan for WS's
         wedding to LS. LS joined them in Kabul in a property rented by  WS.
         The  appellant,  who  had   very   limited   previous   educational
         experience, had a private tutor in Kabul. WS visited the  appellant
         in Kabul. The appellant left Afghanistan in August 2015 when he was
         16 after arrangements were made by his uncle. His mother eventually
         returned to their home village to live with her  brother  after  LS
         came to the UK.

      5. The respondent accepted that the appellant was from Afghanistan and
         had lived in Kabul prior to coming to the UK. It was also  accepted
         that the appellant's father may have had some  Taliban  involvement
         and that the appellant may have experienced some  problems  due  to
         his ethnicity and his father but not to  the  extent  claimed.  The
         respondent did not accept the appellant's claim that men  from  his
         village were looking for him and found that he could, in any event,
         relocate to Kabul.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      6. The judge had before her a bundle  of  documents  prepared  on  the
         appellant's behalf and containing, inter alia,  witness  statements
         from the appellant and his brother (WS) and sister-in-law  (LS),  a
         psychological report prepared by Ms Richards, and an expert country
         report prepared by Dr Giustozzi. For the reasons  outlined  in  the
         psychological report the appellant did not give oral evidence.  The
         judge heard oral evidence from WS and LS.

      7. In her decision  the  judge  gave  detailed  consideration  to  the
         appellant's account and carefully  cross  referenced  the  evidence
         before her. The judge accepted  that  the  appellant's  father  was
         involved with the Taliban and found it plausible that  he  and  his
         mother would be approached when an older child by the Mujahedin  in
         a manner similar to that described by WS. Although  no  threats  to
         harm or kill the appellant were actually made the judge found  that
         it was not safe for the appellant to return to  his  home  village.
         The judge however considered that the appellant could reasonably be
         expected to relocate to Kabul.

      8. The judge found that the appellant had an identity document of some
         type that enabled him to visit Pakistan in 2011 and 2012 as well as
         2014, even if he did not have a Tazkera. The judge found  that  the
         move to Kabul in 2014 had been twofold, based on concern as to what
         might  happen  to  the  appellant  given  the  questioning  by  the
         Mujahedin, and to enable him to  get  some  formal  education.  The
         appellant and his mother  and  sister-in-law  lived  in  Kabul  for
         around 10 months and he attended school for a short  time  although
         he stopped because he was struggling with classes  and  because  of
         his  learning  difficulties.  There  were  no  problems  from   the
         Mujahedin or anyone else in Kabul and no problems during WS's visit
         there in March 2017 to see his wife and  mother.  The  judge  found
         that although the appellant's uncle had been put under pressure and
         informed the Mujahedin that the appellant was in Kabul  he  himself
         had not been harmed. The judge did not accept that the  appellant's
         mother had any significant  health  problems  and  found  that  her
         depression was unlikely to be affecting her to such an extent  that
         she could not look after herself or help the appellant.

      9.  The  appellant  was  a  young  adult  who   had   'mild   learning
         difficulties' and limited education. The judge considered that  the
         appellant had 'mild learning difficulties' with  reference  to  the
         psychological report prepared  by  Ms  Rogers,  a  HCPC  registered
         psychologist. At [39] the  judge  stated,  with  reference  to  the
         psychologist's findings,

             "I accept  her  opinion  that  the  cognitive  tests  are  not
             entirely a reliable  indicator  (page  A26)  because,  as  she
             notes, the Appellant had had little education (see  also  para
             6.1.26) and the tests are based on a Western population  which
             is educated, the test is not culturally sensitive and was done
             via an interpreter, and the result was not consistent with his
             functional ability which was higher than the test  result.  Ms
             Rogers concludes that  the  Appellant's  assessment  (page  25
             paragraph 3.1, at the lower end of the moderate range)  is  in
             fact lower than his actual ability (paragraph  3.2).  I  find,
             based on her opinion, that the Appellant's abilities  are  not
             solely a result of a lack of education but that  his  problems
             are exacerbated by other factors including lack  of  education
             (paragraph 6.1.27).  I  therefore  find  that  as  his  actual
             functional ability  is  higher  than  the  lower  end  of  the
             moderate range of learning disability  as  identified  in  the
             assessment, that the Appellant's learning disability is within
             the mild range. As such he may be limited to menial  jobs  (Dr
             Giustozzi page A80 paragraph 34)."

     10. Having found that the appellant had a  'mild  learning  disability'
         the judge noted that he was nevertheless able to  travel  alone  to
         see the psychologist in London from Kent and that he was  alone  in
         the UK for 6 weeks when his brother was in India and then Kabul. As
         the appellant was able to follow simple directions,  play  computer
         games, use a mobile phone and had  appropriate  social  skills  the
         judge did not accept that the appellant was functionally unable  to
         cope at all on his own. At [41] the judge  concluded  that,  whilst
         the appellant was more  vulnerable  than  someone  without  a  mild
         learning disability, he  was  "not  highly  or  acutely  vulnerable
         because of it."

     11. At [42] the judge accepted that  the  appellant  had  mild-moderate
         depression and mild-moderate PTSD. The judge did not however accept
         that the appellant was as vulnerable as stated by the  psychologist
         because the judge did not accept the evidence concerning the health
         of the appellant's mother, because he was not wholly uneducated and
         because he would have family support reducing his vulnerability  to
         exploitation.  Although  he  suffered  from  depression  there  was
         nothing to suggest  appropriate  treatment  was  not  available  in
         Kabul. He had some familiarity with the city and would be  able  to
         obtain some practical and emotional support from  LS's  family  who
         lived in the city, from his uncle who had travelled in the past  to
         the city, and from his mother who could return to Kabul. The  judge
         did not find that the appellant would be at risk in Kabul given the
         lack of any adverse attention when he lived there  before  and  the
         absence of any action taken against his uncle and mother  in  their
         home village. In reaching this conclusion the judge referred to  Dr
         Giustozzi's report but maintained that the expert had not  factored
         in the appellant's  residence  in  the  city  for  10  months,  his
         attendance at school and the fact that his uncle had  informed  the
         Mujahedin that he was in  the  city.  Having  found  that  internal
         relocation to Kabul was reasonable, the judge dismissed the appeal.

The grounds of appeal and the error of law hearing

     12. The grounds challenge the judge's approach  to  the  psychologist's
         evidence. At 6.1.28 of her report the psychologist stated,

             "[NS's] scores indicate a very low level of  intelligence,  at
             the lower end of the Moderate learning Disability  range;  his
             general functioning indicates that his  intellectual  capacity
             is not as low as suggested here. With guidance he is  able  to
             find his way around  independently.  He  has  some  functional
             skills  and  can  manage  self-care  with  reminding.   [NS's]
             intelligence is likely to be  in  the  mild-moderate  learning
             disability range, rather than at the low end of  the  moderate
             learning disability indicated by the scores achieved here."

     13. And at 7.6.3 offer report the expert stated,

             "[NS] has extensive learning  difficulties,  probably  in  the
             mild-moderate learning disability  range;  the  assessment  of
             (NS) indicated difficulties across the  skills  assessed  even
             when the cultural insensitivity is taken into account."

     14. The grounds, amplified by Ms Easty  during  her  oral  submissions,
         content that the judge erred in finding that the  appellant  has  a
         "mild learning difficulty" and that she gave  no  reasons  why  she
         disagreed with the expert assessment. The judge, it  is  submitted,
         erred in law by re-assessing the appellant's learning  difficulties
         as 'mild' notwithstanding the expert's  clear  assessment  that  he
         fell within the 'mild-moderate'  range.  The  judge  supplanted  an
         assessed range  given  by  the  expert  with  a  fixed  point,  and
         improperly considered the appellant's vulnerability with  reference
         to this fixed point, materially affecting her  conclusion  that  it
         would not be unduly harsh to return him to  Kabul  and  undermining
         her finding that he would be  able  function  adequately  and  find
         employment. This error was compounded by  the  judge's  failure  to
         consider the appellant's vulnerability holistically with  reference
         to his depression and PTSD. It is submitted that the  judge  failed
         to consider the expert report 'in the round' including the expert's
         finding that the appellant operated functionally at the level of  a
         considerably younger child than his  chronological  age  (paragraph
         3.1 of the expert report), that he has an 'exceptionally low  self-
         esteem (paragraph 3.3), that his low learning  level  rendered  him
         more  vulnerable  to  traumatic  experiences  (supra),   that   the
         appellant was afraid of returning to Afghanistan and that  exposure
         to further  loss  and  trauma  would  be  highly  damaging  to  his
         psychological well-being and mental health (7.5.1).

     15. The grounds additionally contend that the judge failed to  consider
         Dr Giustozzi's report at page 58 where he stated,

             "It would therefore be widely assumed that  (NS)  would  share
             the political leaning of the rest of his family.  Because  the
             family has always been opposed to Shura-i Nezar, aligning with
             its enemies at different stages of the  civil  wars  affecting
             Afghanistan, they would even today be assumed to be hostile to
             Shura-i Nezar and potential danger. Members of  Shura-i  Nezar
             in the security apparatus would in all likelihood  be  hostile
             to (NS)."

     16. It was submitted that the judge failed to consider the experts view
         that Shura-i Nezar might use the government institutions  to  track
         down the appellant and that the  authorities  would  be  unable  to
         provide a sufficiency of protection, and the expert's view that the
         appellant's presence in Afghanistan would not stay secret for  long
         particular since he would have to obtain a job in accommodation and
         because the ongoing war and worsening  insurgency  would  make  the
         punishment of alleged  traitors  such  as  the  appellant's  family
         priority for the authorities.

     17. Mr Bramble accepted that the judge impermissibly  re-corrected  the
         psychologist's assessment of the degree of the appellant's learning
         difficulty, and that this constituted an error of law. He submitted
         however that the error was not material. The  judge  gave  detailed
         and legally adequate reasons for finding that the appellant's level
         of functionality would still enable him to return to Kabul and that
         he would have the support of his family. The judge  had  considered
         the appellant's depression and PTSD at [42]. From [49] onwards  the
         judge identified a number of factors supporting her conclusion that
         the appellant would not  be  at  risk  of  ill-treatment  from  the
         authorities in Kabul, and that the judge had clearly considered  Dr
         Giustozzi's report.

Discussion

     18. The judge accepted that the appellant would be at risk  of  serious
         self-harm if returned to his home area [46].  The  judge  concluded
         however that it would not be unreasonable or unduly harsh to expect
         him to relocate to Kabul. The  principal  issue  before  the  judge
         therefore revolved around the issue of the availability of internal
         relocation.

     19. It was not disputed by Mr Bramble that the judge  fell  into  legal
         error by correcting the psychologist's assessment of the extent  of
         the appellant's  learning  difficulties.  The  expert  had  already
         'factored in' the evidence of the appellant's  functional  ability,
         the  absence  of  any  cultural  sensitivity   in   the   cognitive
         assessment,  that  the  assessment  was   undertaken   through   an
         interpreter  and  the  appellant's  limited  education  (3.1,  3.2,
         6.1.28, 7.6.2, 7.6.3). In concluding that the appellant's  learning
         disability was at the 'mild to  moderate  range',  the  expert  had
         therefore already taken full account of the appellant's  functional
         ability. There was no basis for the  judge  to  then  rely  on  the
         appellant's  actual  functional  ability  to  amend  the   expert's
         findings, as she did at [46]. The judge therefore erred in  law  in
         approaching the issue of  the  appellant's  vulnerability  and  the
         reasonableness of him relocating to Kabul on the basis that he only
         had a mild learning difficulty.

     20. It is not clear from the psychologist's report, or  indeed  any  of
         the documentation before me, whether there is a  marked  difference
         between a person who suffers a learning difficulty in the 'moderate
         to mild'  range,  and  a  person  suffering  only  'mild'  learning
         difficulties. I fully appreciate  the  danger  in  attaching  undue
         weight  to  what  may  ultimately  be  an  insufficiently  material
         difference. I cannot  however  exclude  the  possibility  that  the
         difference may be material  when  considered  and  applied  in  the
         context of internal relocation. This is particularly so given  that
         the appellant also suffers  from  mild-moderate  depression,  mild-
         moderate  PTSD,  clinically  significant  levels  of  anxiety   and
         exceptionally low self-esteem.

     21. Having improperly concluded that the appellant had a mild  learning
         disability, the judge then relied on  this  finding  in  concluding
         that the appellant was not highly or acutely vulnerable as a result
         of it [41]. While the judge was entitled to focus on  the  evidence
         of the appellant's actual functionality in reaching her conclusion,
         this failed to take into  account  the  psychologist's  conclusions
         that his  low  learning  level  rendered  him  more  vulnerable  to
         traumatic experiences and  to  the  development  of  mental  health
         difficulties, and the psychologist's conclusion that the  appellant
         is "an extremely vulnerable  young  person."  Moreover,  the  judge
         relied on her finding that the appellant only  suffered  from  mild
         learning difficulties in determining whether he could  relocate  to
         Kabul [47] and [51].

     22. Nor is it sufficiently clear that the judge determined  the  nature
         and degree of the appellant's vulnerability having holistic  regard
         to his other mental health issues. Although the judge indicated, at
         [42], that she also considered  Ms  Rogers'  findings  relating  to
         depression and PTSD, this appears in a separate  paragraph  to  the
         judge's assessment of the appellant's vulnerability [41].

     23. I accept that at [47] and [48] the judge gave a number of clear and
         cogent reasons why the appellant's  personal  circumstances,  other
         than any risk from the authorities, did not prevent his  relocation
         to Kabul. These included the fact that the appellant  was  a  young
         adult and his functional ability, that the appellant was likely  to
         have the support of his brother in the UK, that his sister-in-law's
         family and maternal uncle may be able to provide some support,  and
         that his mother would be able to move back  to  Kabul  if  he  were
         returned. I have carefully considered whether these factors  render
         the judge's errors immaterial and, albeit with some  hesitation,  I
         have concluded that they do not. Even if the appellant is  able  to
         get support from his family I cannot discount the possibility  that
         a judge, properly applying the psychologist's conclusions,  may  be
         entitled to conclude that the impact on the appellant of relocating
         back to Kabul, given the many factors  feeding  his  vulnerability,
         would be unduly harsh.

     24. Having found that the judge materially erred in her legal  approach
         to the psychologist's evidence, I do not need to  consider  whether
         her she failed to take into  account  elements  of  Dr  Giustozzi's
         report.

     25. As the judge's findings in respect of the appellant's vulnerability
         and his ability to relocate were made on the wrong  factual  basis,
         the matter is remitted back to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de
         novo hearing before a judge other  than  judge  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Reid, all issues open.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal decision is vitiated by material errors of law.  The
case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  (de  novo)  hearing
to be heard by a judge other than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Reid.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]    26 March 2018
Signed   Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
