
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00403/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Leeds Combined Court Centre |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 July 2019                      |On 15 August 2019                    |
|Decision given orally at hearing     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT


                                   Between

                                     as
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Greer, Legal Justice Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of a First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    who, following a hearing in Bradford on 15 February 2019, dismissed the
    appellant's appeal against the decision of the respondent to refuse her
    protection and human rights claims.  The appellant asserted a  fear  of
    family members in Pakistan, if returned there, and also  a  fear  of  a
    person who is not only a family member but also someone who  sought  to
    marry her.  The judge comprehensively disbelieved the appellant on  all
    material matters.

 2. Permission to appeal the judge's decision was based  on  nine  grounds,
    although the judge who granted permission correctly observed that  some
    grounds were stronger than others.  Mr Greer helpfully has concentrated
    before me on those stronger grounds.

 3. The first is that the judge made a mistake of fact and also  misapplied
    section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of  Claimants,  etc)
    Act 2004 in making an adverse credibility finding  in  respect  of  the
    appellant.  In short, the judge  misconstrued  the  chronology  in  the
    case.  The judge appears to have thought that the appellant could  have
    put forward the assertion that she was receiving threats from  Pakistan
    before the judge who had earlier heard and dismissed the appeal she had
    brought against an earlier decision of the respondent.  In  fact,  that
    was incorrect, given the point in time in which  the  appellant  became
    aware of the threats.

 4. The judge also considered that the appellant's credibility was  damaged
    because she had failed to make an asylum claim or a human rights  claim
    before being made aware of an immigration decision concerning her.  The
    judge considered  the  immigration  decision  in  question  to  be  the
    negative judicial decision in her earlier appeal.  But, as is  manifest
    from section 8, the definition  of  an  immigration  decision  for  the
    purposes of that section does not encompass a decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  It is confined to decisions reached by the  respondent.



 5. The next ground relates to a finding that the judge made  in  paragraph
    25 of his decision.  In that paragraph, the judge  was  considering  an
    email which said this:-


         "The email makes no reference to her relationship with [H]  despite
         the hostility it purports to show.  The  email  she  says  was  the
         catalyst for her claim.  It was followed, or so it is claimed, soon
         after, on 9 June 2018, by [R]  attending  with  armed  men  to  the
         appellant's parents' house, that is to say, his  mother's  sister's
         house, and issuing threats.  I consider this to  be  implausible  -
         family disputes may involve heated arguments where the  same  point
         could have been made without the need to attend with armed men.   I
         take judicial notice  that  families  with  traditional  values  in
         Pakistan would not countenance  a  younger  member  of  the  family
         disrespecting his elders particularly in this extreme way."

 6. This finding is very problematic.  Judicial notice  involves  something
    which is obvious to any judge hearing a case in  this  jurisdiction  in
    the United Kingdom.  We cannot take judicial notice of  something  that
    is not obvious in that way.  It is certainly not obvious to me  nor,  I
    suspect, to  a  number  of  other  judges,  albeit  practised  in  this
    jurisdiction, that families with traditional values in  Pakistan  would
    not countenance behaviour of the kind described by the judge.  What the
    judge in this case was in fact doing was to apply some knowledge of his
    own about behaviour in a foreign country.  There is nothing on the face
    of it which is wrong with him so doing.  On the  contrary,  the  higher
    courts have respect for decisions of  specialist  tribunals,  including
    the First-tier Tribunal  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber),  in  part
    because of the knowledge that its  judges  build  up  over  time  about
    conditions and behaviour in foreign countries.  However,  as  Mr  Greer
    rightly submitted, if a judge is to apply his or her knowledge of  such
    a matter, then procedural fairness requires  the  judge  to  make  that
    plain to the parties at the hearing, so that submissions  can  be  made
    upon it.  This does not appear to have happened in  the  present  case,
    and is a further reason why the decision is flawed.

 7. The next ground particularly relied upon  by  Mr  Greer  relates  to  a
    failure on the part of the judge to make any  reference  at  all  to  a
    witness statement  of  the  appellant's  brother,  which  on  its  face
    corroborated her account of difficulties with the family.  As Mr  Greer
    said, the judge would have been at liberty to have ascribed  little  or
    perhaps even no weight to that evidence.  It did, however,  require  to
    be taken into account and require a finding to be made  in  respect  of
    it.

 8. In his submissions on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State,  Mr  Diwnycz
    indicated that he was unable  to  defend  the  judge's  decision.   The
    respondent agreed with the submissions that Mr Greer had made  and  the
    decision of the judge could not stand.

Decision

 9. For the reasons I have  given,  I  find  that  this  decision  contains
    material errors of law.  I therefore set it aside.

10. I heard submissions as to what should happen now. Given the  nature  of
    the errors of law, very regrettably this decision has to be  set  aside
    in its entirety with  no  findings  of  fact  preserved.   In  all  the
    circumstances, therefore, having regard to the nature and extent of the
    judicial fact-finding that would be necessary, the proper course in  my
    view is for this case to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be
    heard afresh on all issues.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed
                          Date:  05/08/19


The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
President of the Upper Tribunal
Immigration and Asylum Chamber

