
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00230/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated:    |
|On 29 July 2019                    |On 21 August 2019                  |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                      H
                            (Anonymity DIRECTED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr J Howard (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:     Mrs R Pettersen (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)




                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal, brought with the
       permission of a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal, from a decision  of
       the First-tier Tribunal (the tribunal) which it made on 8 April  2019
       following a hearing of 15 March 2019 and which it sent to the parties
       on 11 April 2019. The tribunal  decided  to  dismiss  the  claimant's
       appeal against a decision of  the  Secretary  of  State  made  on  10
       November 2018, refusing to grant him international protection.

    2. The claimant was born on 14 April 1993 and is a national of  Iraq  of
       Kurdish ethnicity. He entered the United Kingdom on 14 May  2018  and
       made his claim for international protection very shortly  afterwards.
       The account offered by the claimant and which is said to underpin his
       claim to be entitled to international protection may be summarised as
       follows: He is from Tuz Khurmattu in central Iraq where he lived with
       his family. He had been employed by  a  photocopying  company  for  a
       period of some four years. In 2017, whilst he was  working  for  that
       photocopying company at shop premises, he and his boss were  detained
       by Shia militia  and  held  for  five  days.  They  were  accused  of
       involvement in leafletting. It was aid that the  leaflets  criticised
       the Iraqi government and the Shia militia. The claimant was  released
       on condition that he observe  what  people  were  having  printed  or
       photocopied in the shop and report his observations back to the  Shia
       militia. He says that they would then visit the shop  every  week  to
       monitor that he was doing as promised. In March 2018 his  boss  asked
       him to open the shop out of hours and assist two customers.  However,
       whilst printing some material for them he realised that what  he  was
       printing was again critical of the Shia militia. He refused to assist
       any further but was then threatened at gunpoint. So, under duress  he
       carried on with the printing. Two days later his boss  asked  him  to
       open the shop out of hours, once again, for the same people.  He  did
       so and whilst he was once again printing similar material, armed Shia
       militia burst into the shop. He escaped by using the  back  entrance.
       He then travelled to Kirkuk and stayed there for three  nights  until
       his brother-in-law helped him to depart Iraq with the  assistance  of
       an agent.

3.    The Secretary of State did not believe  the  claimant's  account.  The
tribunal did not do so either. It did, however, accept that he is  from  Tuz
Khurmattu and that that town is located  in  an  area  where  the  level  of
indiscriminate  violence  is  such  as  to  engage  Article   15c   of   the
Qualification Directive (2011/95/EU). So, the  tribunal  accepted  he  could
not safely return there.  However,  it  found  that  he  would  be  able  to
internally relocate either to the Kurdish administered  area  of  Iraq  (the
IKR) or to Baghdad. It also found that he would be able  to  obtain  a  CSID
card which is a crucial identity document in Iraq.  That  was  important  in
the context of internal flight.

4.    The tribunal explained why it disbelieved the claimant's account in  a
lengthy passage which runs from paragraph 20 to paragraph 29 of its  written
reasons. The parties are aware of what the  tribunal  had  to  say  in  that
passage so it is not necessary for me to set it out here  but  it  is  clear
that the tribunal found elements of the account offered by the  claimant  to
be vague and implausible.

5.    The appeal having been dismissed the  claimant  submitted  grounds  of
appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  himself.  Those  grounds  amounted  to  an
assertion that he was at risk in Iraq at the hands of the Shia  militia  and
that the tribunal had been wrong to conclude that he could  go  to  the  IKR
because he would not be permitted to do so without  proof  of  his  identity
which  he  did  not  have.  A  judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  granted
permission to appeal and relevantly said this:

         "The grounds of appeal do not refer  directly  to  the  credibility
         assessment; however, the failure to accept the appellant's  account
         of his detention was  as  a  result  of  the  negative  credibility
         findings. I think it is arguable that  the  credibility  assessment
         was flawed. The judge makes findings in relation to the appellant's
         credibility  largely  on  the  basis  of  speculation  as  to   the
         implausibility of his account  without  identifying  an  evidential
         basis for those findings".

6.    The grant of permission was not stated to be limited. Having  obtained
permission to appeal the claimant obtained legal  representation.  The  case
was listed for a hearing before the Upper Tribunal (before me)  so  that  it
could be decided whether the tribunal had erred in law and if it  had,  what
should flow from that. Representation was as stated above and I am  grateful
to each representative.

7.    Mr Howard relied on the grounds and the grant of permission  but  made
some additional points. He argued that because  the  tribunal  had  said  it
found the claimant's account of his escape from the  armed  militia  in  the
shop "improbable" it was apparent that it was applying  the  wrong  standard
of proof. It was applying a balance of probabilities  standard  rather  than
the  real  risk  standard  which  applied  in  cases   where   international
protection is sought. As to the tribunal's finding that the  claimant  would
be able to obtain a CSID card, its assessment had not "gone far enough".  Mr
Howard also argued that the tribunal had erred  in  relying  too  much  upon
plausibility. Mrs Pettersen, for the Secretary of  State,  argued  that  the
tribunal  had  provided  adequate  reasons  for  its   adverse   credibility
conclusion and that  it  had  applied  the  appropriate  standard  of  proof
throughout. It had been entitled to  conclude,  given  its  general  adverse
credibility findings, that the claimant would  be  able  to  obtain  a  CSID
card.

8.    I have  concluded  that  the  tribunal  did  not  err  in  law.  As  a
consequence, I have decided to dismiss the claimant's appeal  to  the  Upper
Tribunal. What follows is my explanation as to why.

9.    It is right to say that the tribunal found much of what  the  claimant
had to say to be implausible. To pick  out  some  examples,  it  thought  it
implausible  that  the  claimant,  after  his  release  from  detention   in
circumstances where he had been mistreated, would agree to  be  involved  in
the out of hours printing. It found the claimant's account of being able  to
escape the Shia militia by simply using a back exit, to  be  implausible  on
the basis that the militia  would  have  sought  to  make  sure  exits  were
covered. It found it implausible that the  claimant's  boss  would  seek  to
involve the claimant in the printing, after the claimant had been  detained,
on the basis that doing so was taking a risk that the claimant might  inform
the militia of what was going on so as to bring their wrath upon his boss.

10.   It is true that the tribunal's credibility assessment did not rely  on
very much at all in the way of inconsistency but, applying common  sense,  a
tribunal is allowed to take into account the degree to which an  account  is
simply implausible or incredible. The tribunal took a number of such  points
and, in my judgment, all of them were open to it. The cumulative  impact  of
those various points does, in my judgement,  amply  justify  the  tribunal's
adverse credibility conclusion. In short,  it  was  entitled  to  reach  the
conclusion it did as to  credibility,  for  the  reasons  it  gave,  on  the
material before it. So, I have concluded that the tribunal did  not  err  in
law in the way in which it was suggested it might have done when  permission
was granted.

11.   The tribunal had to, and did, consider internal flight as a result  of
its conclusion with respect to the applicability of Article 15(c).  As  part
of that assessment it asked itself whether the claimant  would  be  able  to
obtain a CSID card. That was clearly an appropriate enquiry for it  to  make
bearing in mind what is accepted to be the importance of  such  an  identity
document in Iraq for the purposes  of  obtaining  employment  and  accessing
government services. The tribunal did not accept that the claimant had  lost
touch with his family. It reasoned he  would  be  able  to  obtain  evidence
required to re-document himself with the assistance of family (paragraph  30
of the written reasons). It found, if necessary, that he would  be  able  to
apply for "formal recognition of  his  identity"  via  the  National  Status
Court in Baghdad. Its finding as to that has not been  the  subject  of  any
specific challenge and it is explained in  the  written  reasons  (paragraph
31). The claimant had, in effect, argued that he did not have  a  CSID  card
and would not be able to get one. It is fair to say that the tribunal  could
have explained itself  in  more  detail  had  it  wished.  But  against  the
background of its adverse credibility  finding  its  conclusion  as  to  his
ability to obtain a CSID card was open to it.

12.   As to the appropriate standard of proof, the  tribunal  correctly  set
that out at paragraph 6 of its written reasons. The formulation it used  was
"substantial grounds for believing" but that is the same as saying there  is
a "real risk" of persecution or serious ill-treatment upon  return.  So,  it
correctly directed itself as to the  standard  of  proof  the  claimant  was
required to reach. I am not persuaded that what it said at paragraph  28  of
its written reasons suggests it was, at that point or at any other point  in
its deliberations, applying a higher standard than that. In using  the  term
"improbable" the tribunal was simply, in context, making it  clear  that  it
did not believe, to the standard it was required to apply, that  the  escape
had taken place.

13.   In light of the above I am satisfied that the tribunal did not err  in
law. That does, as indicated, mean that the claimant's appeal to  the  Upper
Tribunal must be dismissed.

14.   The claimant was granted anonymity by the tribunal. Nothing  was  said
about that before me but, in those circumstances, I consider it  appropriate
to maintain the status quo. So, the claimant continues  to  benefit  from  a
grant of anonymity.



Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law. Accordingly, the claimant's appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

The First-tier Tribunal granted the  claimant  anonymity.  I  continue  that
grant pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008. Accordingly,  no  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  identify  the
claimant or any member of his family. This grant applies to all  parties  to
the  proceedings.  Failure  to  comply  might  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.


Signed

                                                               M R Hemingway
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Dated 14 August 2019
