

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
PA/00034/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |      Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 31 August 2017                     |      On 01 September 2017           |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?

                                   Between

                            muhammad abdur rahman
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr A Syed-Ali, of Counsel, instructed by Uzma Law
Ltd.
For the Respondent:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant challenges the determination of  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge  Rahman   dismissing   his   appeal   for   protection.   The
         determination was promulgated  on  24  February  2017  following  a
         hearing at Taylor House on 2 February 2017.


      2. The appellant is a Bangladeshi national born on 17  December  1987.
         He entered the UK as a Tier 4 migrant in January 2010 and  obtained
         an extension until 20 August 2015. On 24 August 2014, however,  his
         leave was curtailed on the grounds that he had  used  deception  to
         obtain leave. His article 8  representations  were  refused  on  13
         February 2015 and a judicial review application made  to  challenge
         the August 2014 decision proved unsuccessful in September 2015.  On
         4 January 2016, the appellant sought asylum; this was refused on 12
         December 2016.



      3. The appellant claims to be an atheist and a blogger  and  maintains
         he would be at risk because of that. The judge did  not  accept  he
         was an atheist and found that he would not be at risk on return  to
         Bangladesh.



      4.  The  appellant  obtained  permission  to  appeal  from  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Ransley on 11 July 2017 on five of the seven  points
         he put forward.



         The Hearing

      5. At the hearing on 31 August 2017,  I  heard  submissions  from  the
         parties. Mr  Syed-Ali  argued  the  judge  had  applied  the  wrong
         standard of proof having stated in his determination  that  he  was
         not "persuaded" by the evidence. This meant  that  he  had  wrongly
         assessed the evidence and the entire determination was  flawed.  He
         submitted that although the judge had found  the  appellant  to  be
         unpersuasive and inconsistent he gave inadequate reasons  for  this
         and failed to identify any inconsistencies. The judge also erred in
         accepting the respondent's allegation of deception  without  having
         seen any evidence to support it. Mr Syed-Ali  submitted  this  gave
         the appearance of bias. He submitted that the judge had  failed  to
         make  findings  on  the  consequence  of   the   appellant   having
         distributed his book among his friends and whether he would have to
         modify his behaviour to avoid persecution. Finally, he erred in his
         assessment of future risk.



      6. Mr Whitwell submitted that the judge had properly directed  himself
         at paragraphs  15,  16,  72,  75  and  84.  The  use  of  the  word
         "persuasive"  was  a  term  of  art  and  did   not   vitiate   the
         determination where he had properly directed himself.  Contrary  to
         what was argued, the judge had given adequate reasons for  doubting
         the appellant's credibility. The appellant claimed to be in  hiding
         and yet was able to continue with his employment, visit his friends
         and leave Dhaka on his own passport. He had also delayed in  making
         his asylum application. All  these  matters  informed  the  judge's
         adverse credibility findings.  There was nothing wrong in the judge
         preferring  the  respondent's  evidence  to  the  appellant's   (at
         paragraph 83). In complaining about the absence of a finding on the
         risk to  the  appellant  for  having  distributed  his  books,  the
         appellant did not engage with the judge's finding that he  was  not
         an atheist but, in any event, the judge addressed the issue of  the
         books at paragraph  80.  On  the  issue  of  risk,  the  judge  had
         considered sufficiency of protection and there was no rebuttal from
         the appellant  against  the  country  material  relied  on  by  the
         respondent. The grounds were essentially a  disagreement  with  the
         outcome of the appeal and the decision should stand.


      7. In response, Mr Syed-Ali submitted that the  judge  went  wrong  in
         paragraph 71, notwithstanding his self-direction at paragraphs  15-
         16.  With  reference  to  the  appellant's  ability  to  work   and
         socialise,  pending  litigation  does  not  halt  life   and   even
         terrorists on wanted lists are able to cross borders. The appellant
         maintained that the authorities would not protect  him.  The  judge
         relied  on  the  respondent's  assertions  of   deception   without
         considering any documentary  evidence.  The  judge's  determination
         undermined the judicial process. A de novo hearing was sought.


      8. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my determination  which
         I now give.



         Findings and Conclusions




      9. Permission was granted on five grounds and I heard  submissions  on
         those. I now deal with each in turn.


     10. The first complaint was that by  using  the  word  "persuasive"  in
         paragraph 71, the judge applied the wrong standard of  proof.  This
         point might have carried force had the  judge  not  properly  self-
         directed himself at paragraphs 15-16, 72,  75  and  84.  Given  the
         single use of persuasive in paragraph 71, I am not  satisfied  that
         this is an indication that the wrong test has been applied.  I also
         note  that  the  judge  was  here  referring  to  the   appellant's
         explanation for why he had not adduced evidence earlier; he was not
         assessing the appellant's claim for protection.



     11. The second complaint is that the  judge  failed  to  make  adequate
         credibility findings and did not state why he found the appellant's
         evidence to be inconsistent (at paragraph 72).   The  finding  that
         the appellant was inconsistent pertained to the explanation he  had
         given as to why he had not provided supporting  evidence  from  the
         owner of a radio programme whom he states knew he was  an  atheist.
         The explanations offered by the appellant are set out in  paragraph
         66 and are self-evidently inconsistent. Whilst I accept  the  judge
         could have made it easier for the reader by referring back to  that
         paragraph when he made his observation  at  paragraph  71,  a  full
         reading of the determination makes it quite clear  how  he  reached
         that conclusion. The criticism of the judge's  adverse  credibility
         findings, presumably on other matters, is also not made out as  the
         judge sets out is reasons at length at paragraphs 75-82.



     12. The third point made is that the judge accepted that the respondent
         had made checks at  Sylhet  Police  Station  with  respect  to  the
         appellant's  FIRs  without  having  seen  a  documentary   evidence
         verification report. This would have had merit had the judge  found
         the documents to be false as the respondent  claimed.  However,  he
         made no such finding.  He  properly  directed  himself  as  to  the
         consideration of the evidence (at paragraph 69). At  paragraph  83,
         he noted the respondent's enquiries but made  no  finding  that  he
         agreed with them or that he relied on them. He took account of  the
         evidence on the ease with which forged documents can  be  obtained.
         He reminded himself of the guidance in Tanveer  Ahmed  and  it  was
         only after consideration of the documents  together  with  all  the
         other evidence that he concluded that little weight could be placed
         on them. Far from showing bias, as Mr Syed-Ali submitted, the judge
         undertook a full assessment of all the evidence and concluded  that
         he could not rely on the FIR documents. Given his other sustainable
         findings, this was a  conclusion  entirely  open  to  him  and  was
         reached using the correct approach towards documentary evidence.


     13. The fourth argument concerned the judge's alleged failure  to  make
         findings on the impact on the appellant of the distribution of  his
         second book. This point is without merit as the  judge  did  indeed
         make findings at  paragraph  80.  It  was  open  to  him  to  find,
         notwithstanding what is  argued,  that  the  appellant  selectively
         distributed copies of his book to those he knew and trusted and  it
         is speculative to argue that these  would  now  openly  be  in  the
         public domain and seen by others who would potentially seek to harm
         the appellant. Moreover, as Mr Whitwell pointed out, this had to be
         read in the context of the finding that the appellant  was  not  an
         atheist.



     14. Finally, it was argued that the judge's finding that  there  was  a
         sufficiency of protection was against "the wealth of  material"  to
         the contrary. This material is not identified in  the  grounds  and
         nor was it referred to in oral  submissions  by  Mr  Syed-Ali.  The
         judge was entitled to rely on the country  material  cited  in  the
         respondent's decision letter  to  reach  his  conclusions  on  this
         matter.


     15. The judge set out compelling reasons for rejecting the  appellant's
         claim. The appellant's ability  to  remain  in  employment  and  to
         socialise with  friends  despite  allegedly  being  wanted  and  in
         hiding, the many highlighted difficulties with the  claim  and  the
         long delay before the appellant  made  his  asylum  claim  and  the
         circumstances in which he made it are all matters which  the  judge
         properly had regard to. His decision is reasoned  and  sustainable.
         It does not contain any errors of law.



    Decision


     16. The First-tier Tribunal made no errors of law and the  decision  to
         dismiss the appellant's appeal stands.



    Anonymity



     17. No anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal. I  was  not
         asked to make one and, in any event, see no reason to do so.

    Signed


       Upper Tribunal Judge                                        Date: 31
August 2017
