
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00101/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester, Piccadilly      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16th November 2018                |On 23rd November 2018                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                                MD JETU MIAH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Not present or represented
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Appellant in relation to a decision of Judge P J Holmes in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal promulgated on 12th July 2018 in which he  dismissed  his
    protection appeal on all grounds.

 2. Permission to appeal having been granted, my task is  first  to  decide
    whether the First-tier Tribunal's Decision  and  Reasons  contained  an
    error of law and if so whether and to  what  extent  the  Decision  and
    Reasons should be set aside.

 3. The Appellant was represented before the  First-tier  Tribunal  by  Taj
    Solicitors.  However they wrote to the Upper Tribunal on 15th  November
    explaining that due to a lack  of  funding  they  would  be  unable  to
    represent the Appellant before me. The  Appellant  did  not  attend  in
    person.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted on only one ground, namely that it was
    arguable that the Judge ought to have adjourned the hearing  to  enable
    the Appellant to adduce medical evidence regarding his mental state.

 5. The Decision and Reasons is silent as to any adjournment request having
    been made to the Judge on the  day.   I  have  checked  the  Record  of
    Proceedings and it is clear that there was no adjournment application.

 6. An application was made in writing by letter dated 30th May.  That  was
    refused on 5th June 2018.  No further application was made either prior
    to or at the hearing.

 7. It is not an error of law for a Judge not to adjourn a case when he has
    not been asked to do so.

Notice of Decision

 8. The First-tier Tribunal having made no error of law in its Decision and
    Reasons, the appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

 9. There having been no application for an  anonymity  direction  and  the
    First-tier Tribunal not having made one, I  see  no  justification  for
    directing anonymity and do not do so.


Signed   [pic]                  Date 16th November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin







