
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00190/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 November 2020                           |On 4 February 2021            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                     M B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:         Mr S Tawiah, Counsel instructed by Barnes
                  Harrild & Dyer
         Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is no longer a protection claim. The live issue in the appeal  concerns
the Appellant's relationship with a young person and  although  the  details
are not  shaming  or  distressing,  I  see  no  reason  why  she  should  be
identified.  I have identified her only by  initials  in  the  Decision  and
Reasons and, pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any
matter likely to lead members of the public to  identify  the  young  person
"A". Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt  of  court.  I  make
this order because I see no legitimate public interest in "A"'s identity.

This is an appeal against a decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing
the appellant's appeal against a decision of the respondent on  23  December
2019 refusing him asylum, humanitarian protection and  leave  to  remain  on
human rights grounds.

Although the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  was  the  subject  of  an
extensive wide-ranging challenge permission was granted on  one  point  only
by Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan who said under the heading "Ground 3":

  "I observe that evidence as to the appellant's relationship with  the  16
  year old daughter of his partner is limited to a brief  reference  in  Ms
  I's letter dated 21 January 2020 and a brief reference at paragraph 15 of
  the  appellant's  witness  statement,  dated  29  January  2020.   It  is
  understood that the daughter was attending school  at  the  date  of  the
  hearing before the Judge.  No evidence was presented  on  behalf  of  the
  daughter, and like her mother she did not attend the  hearing.   However,
  the evidence before the Judge details that the daughter resides with  the
  appellant, is close to him and is a British citizen (though  no  evidence
  of citizenship is identified within  the  appellant's  bundle).   In  the
  circumstances it is arguable that the Judge erred in concluding that  the
  appellant enjoys no  genuine  and/or  subsisting  relationship  with  his
  partner's daughter and that the  claimed  relationship  is  incapable  of
  constituting a family life for the purpose of Article 8.   The  appellant
  will be expected to address the materiality of such purported error".

The appellant has made other applications for leave to remain in the  United
Kingdom.  In a decision promulgated on 23 August  2018  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Blundell (as he then was) dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  a
decision refusing  him  leave  to  remain  on  human  rights  grounds.   The
appellant  was  not  represented  at   the   hearing   and   had   expressed
dissatisfaction at the quality of advice he  had  received  from  solicitors
who had been instructed.  There  was  reference  in  that  evidence  to  the
appellant's relationship with Ms I and  Ms  I's  daughter.   Judge  Blundell
said at paragraph 35 of his decision:

  "Insofar as the appellant relies on a relationship with  Ms  I,  however,
  the burden is  also  on  him  to  demonstrate  that  this  is  a  genuine
  relationship and that Article 8 ECHR is engaged.  On  the  basis  of  the
  evidence before me, I do not accept that  the  appellant  has  discharged
  that burden.  He spoke with some affection about Ms  I  and  her  teenage
  daughter but there is  no  documentary  evidence  before  me  about  that
  relationship.  I have taken the biodata above from the  biodata  page  of
  her passport, a copy of which I was given, but there is no other evidence
  to show that there is a genuine and subsisting relationship which engages
  Article 8 ECHR.   Ms  I  did  not  attend  the  hearing.   There  was  no
  documentary evidence of cohabitation and no documentary evidence  of  the
  relationship that the appellant is said to  enjoy  with  Ms  I's  teenage
  daughter.  I  should  be  clear;  I  do  not  make  a  finding  that  the
  relationship is a false  one  but  simply  that  the  appellant  has  not
  discharged the burden of showing that any such relationship exists".

The application leading to the present appeal began as an asylum  claim.   I
considered the evidence adduced by the appellant in support of  that  claim.
I am concerned presently solely with the appellant's relationship  with  his
partner's  daughter.   I  find  nothing  in  the  screening  interview  that
illuminates  that,  neither  do  I  find  that  surprising.   The  statement
supporting the claim was dated 26  November  2019  and  is  described  as  a
statement in support of an application for  asylum.   At  paragraph  42  the
appellant made reference to his partner Ms  I.   He  said  they  started  to
cohabit in May 2017.  He said:

  "I met A when she was 13 years.  I am her stepfather and role model.   We
  get on very well.  Although it could have been difficult for me  to  come
  into her life at such a formative age, it has worked  very  smoothly.   I
  have a strong family bond.  I help her with her  homework,  take  her  to
  church, etc.".

He was interviewed about the application.  He repeated  his  claim  that  he
had a partner  in  the  United  Kingdom.   He  said  that  the  relationship
developed about two months after they met.  The relationship  had  now  last
for three years and they cohabited.

He talked about his partner's then 16 year old daughter.   He  repeated  his
claim to have met her when she was aged 13 and claimed to take care of  her.
 He helped her  with  her  homework  and  they  watched  television  in  the
evening, spent time  together  shopping,  going  to  parties  and  weddings,
family engagements, on Sundays and sometimes they went to  church  together.


He  was  asked  directly  at  question  21  what  role  he  played  in   his
"stepdaughter's" life.  He said:

  "I help her do  her  homework,  to  do  domestic  I  help  her  with  her
  schoolwork her assignments right now she has  started  studying  for  her
  GCSEs so I help her with English I get her homework  and  assignments  we
  just bought a English practice book for her I helped her  to  go  through
  that her reading and comprehension ability I try to help her develop  it.
  Church we go to church not all the time but sometimes we go together.  We
  always fight about her room so I am a role model to her she is a good kid
  and we get on well I make sure I am aware of her movements at all times I
  KNOW WHERE SHE IS when she goes to school, and when she  comes  back  she
  met me at my home it's part of making sure she does not go astray  and  I
  also attend the school meetings when  they  ask  parents  to  go  to  the
  school, when her mum is not available I go in there".

He said that his daughter attended a particular school which he  named,  and
that he believed her  birthday  was  29  October.   The  passport  has  been
produced since and shows the birthday as 27 October.

He explained that his partner had two children, both daughters.  He  claimed
a "fantastic" relationship with A, referred again to being a role  model  in
the house and helping her groom and helping her in  schoolwork,  counselling
her and encouraging her.  The other daughter was an  adult  aged  about  26.
She lived independently but they talk to each other  although  he  described
her as "a bit difficult".

The reasons for refusal given by the Secretary of  State  are  not  helpful.
At paragraph 66 the respondent said:

  "You further state that  you  have  a  parental  relationship  with  your
  partner's daughters A1 and A.  You claim to have  active  involvement  in
  A's life by assisting with homework and studying  for  her  GCSE's.   You
  attend  school  meetings  when  her  mother  is  unavailable  and  church
  together.  You claim to be aware of her whereabouts  at  all  time  (AIR,
  Q15, 21).  Consideration has been given to  this,  however  as  you  have
  failed to demonstrate that you have sole responsibility for the children,
  it is considered that you fail to meet the requirements of  R-LTRPT  with
  reference to paragraph 6 of the Immigration Rules".

Nothing turns on this but  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  ever
claimed to have a parental relationship with A1.

Paragraph 6 of the rules is the definition section but the word "parent"  is
not defined there. Rather, examples are given of what a parent  can  be.   I
do not understand the reference to  "sole  responsibility".   The  appellant
has to prepare his case in light of the Secretary  of  State's  reasons  for
refusing the application and it is helpful for the appellant  to  understand
what the Secretary of State found unsatisfactory  in  the  application  that
had been made. The use of the phrase "sole responsibility"  suggests  to  me
that the Secretary of State was thinking of a different rule.

In his statement supporting his appeal dated 29 January 2020  the  appellant
dealt with his private and family life in the United Kingdom.   He  referred
to his relationship with his partner, which has been accepted,  and  to  her
having two children, one of them  a  minor  who  he  described  as  "my  own
daughter".  He referred to their "very strong bond".

There was a letter serving as a statement from the  partner.   She  referred
to her daughter as a 16 year old schoolgirl and said:

  "I am her primary carer, supported by my partner". She then  referred  to
  the appellant being a "Pillar of support to me and my  daughter  whom  he
  assists a great deal with her studies as she prepares for her GSCEs  next
  year, as well as mentoring her while I go to work twelve hours, three  or
  sometimes four days a week.  He attends parents' school  meetings  on  by
  behalf".

She went on to explain how they attend church together sometimes and said:

  "a strong  bond  now  exists  between  them  and  I  cannot  imagine  the
  devastation his leaving would have on my daughter and obviously me".

The First-tier Tribunal Judge was clearly  aware  of  that  letter  and  its
potential benefit to the appellant but the partner did not  attend  and  the
Judge was not impressed by that evidence.  There  was  an  explanation  from
the partner for her absence.  She is studying for  a  nursing  qualification
and claimed that she had to attend a course event.  There  was  no  evidence
from the course managers to say that the  partner  had  to  attend  on  that
particular occasion and there had  been  no  application  to  adjourn  to  a
different time.  The  appellant's  partner  had  not  attended  the  hearing
before Judge Blundell.

At paragraph 100 of the Decision and Reasons the judge said:

  "In the absence of any evidence from Ms I's 16 year old daughter,  namely
  [A], I am unable to establish that the appellant  has  a  genuine  and/or
  subsisting relationship with  his  partner's  daughter  from  a  previous
  relationship.  Accordingly, I find his claimed relationship is  incapable
  of constituting a family life within the meaning  of  Article  8(1),  for
  want of evidence".

Elsewhere the judge noted how there had been reference to the "strong  bond"
between the appellant and A but the judge also said "there is  conspicuously
no evidence from A to support this".

Mr Tawiah produced a skeleton argument which I  found  very  helpful.   With
conspicuous  correctness  he  limited  himself  to  the  ground   on   which
permission had been granted.

He described the judge's failure to "recognise the  genuine  and  subsisting
relationship between the appellant and A" as a "perverse finding".

As he rightly pointed out, this  is  a  matter  of  considerable  importance
because if there is genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  a
qualifying child the  public  interest  does  not  require  the  appellant's
removal.  The skeleton argument  reminds  me,  correctly,  that  a  parental
relationship can exist between people who are not biologically  related  and
the circumstances have to be considered on a case by case  basis.   This  is
supported by the decision of the Tribunal in R (on the application of RK)  v
SSHD (s.117B(6); "parental relationship" (IJR) [2016] UKUT 31 although I  do
not regard this as the kind of proposition that really needs authority.   It
is, with respect, clearly right.

I have indicated above that the Secretary of State's refusal letter was  not
particularly helpful in the sense that the reasoning was hard to follow  but
it is abundantly clear that the Secretary of State was  not  satisfied  that
there was a parental relationship or something close to it for the  purposes
of Article 8.  It should have been apparent therefore to the appellant,  who
this  time  seems  entirely  satisfied  with  the  quality  of   the   legal
representation, that if he needed  to  rely  on  that  relationship  it  was
something he was going to have to prove.

Taken in isolation the judge's consideration of the evidence could  lead  to
the suggestion that he required supporting evidence from  the  child.   That
would have been a very dangerous approach.  Children are not  encouraged  to
give evidence in matters of that kind because it can be very  traumatic  for
them to give evidence at all or because they can  be  given  an  unjustified
and overwhelming sense  of  failure  if  the  decision  goes  against  their
declared wishes.  Each case must be decided on its own circumstances.   Some
children would feel  that  they  had  not  been  taken  seriously  if  their
evidence was not allowed.  However, the judge's loose  remark  needs  to  be
seen in context.  The context was that the appellant  knew  that  he  had  a
burden to discharge.  He gave his own evidence which I  consider  below  and
he relied upon supporting evidence from his partner who did not  attend  and
gave a very weak explanation for not attending.  The  judge  could  not  put
much weight on that evidence when determining a  controversial  point.   The
appellant has shown himself to be an unsatisfactory witness in a variety  of
ways which had to be factored in and on its own version the examples of  the
relationship really  do  not  amount  to  parental  relationship  but  to  a
friendly relationship  as  might  be  expected  between  an  adult  and  his
partner's daughter.  On its own terms, the appellant  is  "the  man  in  the
house" and he helps  her  with  her  schoolwork  and  they  do  some  things
together  socially  but  this  is  not  strong  evidence   of   a   parental
relationship rather than simply being friendly and influential which is  not
the same at all.

This is not a straightforward case because the welfare of the  child  is  so
important but having considered everything in context and taken as a  whole,
and notwithstanding Mr Tawiah's measured and helpful submissions, I  am  not
persuaded there is any material error here.  The judge's decision is  wholly
consistent with the weak evidence that was before him. He invited  criticism
by a loose remark which was picked up  when  permission  was  granted.   The
evidence supports the decision  and  I  am  entirely  unpersuaded  that  the
judge's thought processes were irrational or otherwise unlawful.



Notice of Decision

I dismiss the appellant's appeal.



                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 29 January 2021                |

