
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00608/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Skype for Business|Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On Friday 5 March 2021                     |On Friday 26 March 2021         |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-

                                    H J A
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms  M  Niama,  Legal  representative,  Berkshire  Law
Chamber


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was made by the  First-tier  Tribunal.   As  this  appeal
involves a protection claim, I consider it is appropriate to  continue  that
order.  Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
Respondent is granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies, amongst others, to both parties. Failure to  comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND


 1. This is an appeal brought by the Secretary of State.  For ease of
    reference, I refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier
    Tribunal.  The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hembrough promulgated on 22 September 2020 ("the
    Decision"). By the Decision, the Judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal
    on asylum grounds but allowed it on humanitarian protection and Article
    8 grounds.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Iraq.   He arrived in the UK on 11
    February 2002, aged ten years, with his father who claimed asylum with
    the Appellant and his siblings as dependents.  They were recognised as
    refugees and granted indefinite leave to remain. On 7 September 2007,
    the Appellant was sentenced to four years detention in a young
    offenders' institution for possession with intent to supply and supply
    of Class A drugs.  On 28 May 2012, the Respondent notified the
    Appellant of her intention to cease his refugee status.  He was
    thereafter served with notice of his deportation.  His appeal against
    that decision was dismissed in a decision promulgated on 18 March 2013.

 3. In July 2015, the Appellant applied to remain in the UK based on his
    private and family life.  That application was initially granted in
    error, but the grant was withdrawn shortly thereafter.  The application
    was then treated as an application to revoke the deportation order.
    That was refused on 16 December 2015.  It appears that the Respondent
    applied paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules to the decision and
    therefore refused to allow a further appeal.  However, following what
    appears to have been a successful application to judicially review that
    decision, the Respondent reconsidered the decision and refused to
    revoke the deportation order on 8 January 2020.  That is the decision
    under appeal.  The Respondent's decision included a certificate under
    section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the
    Section 72 Certificate").

 4. The Judge did not accept that the Appellant continues to present a
    danger to the community and therefore did not uphold the Section 72
    Certificate.  Following the limited grant of permission to appeal, the
    Respondent no longer challenges that finding.  The Judge rejected the
    Appellant's claim to be at risk in Iraq.  He did not accept that there
    was any specific or generalised risk to him on return.     The
    Appellant does not challenge that conclusion and therefore accepts that
    the appeal was rightly dismissed on asylum grounds.  The Respondent
    does not challenge the allowing of the appeal on Article 8 grounds as
    permission was refused on that ground.  The only ground before me
    following the limited grant of permission therefore relates to the
    allowing of the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds.

 5. Permission to appeal was initially refused by Upper Tribunal Judge
    Martin as a First-tier Tribunal Judge on 6 October 2020 in the
    following terms so far as relevant:

         "... 3.  The grounds reflect displeasure with the result, because
         the appellant faced deportation for a sentence of 4 years in a YOI
         for dealing Class A drugs, rather than identifying an arguable
         error of law.


         4.   The decision is very detailed and carefully reasoned.  The
         Judge's finding on s.72 was entirely reasonable given that the
         offence was committed when the appellant was 15 (he is now 28) and
         he has not offended since his release in 2009.


         5.   The judge gave reasons for finding that the appellant, even
         were he to try, would be unable to obtain a CSID.  While dismissing
         his asylum appeal, the Judge, on that basis found him entitled to
         humanitarian protection.  I can discern no arguable error of law in
         the reasoning.


         6.   Further, given the length of time since his offence the Judge
         was entitled to find the appellant a reformed character and
         integrated in the UK.


         7.   Neither the grounds nor the Decision and Reasons disclose any
         arguable error of law."


 6. The application for permission to appeal was renewed to this Tribunal
    and came before Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan.  The challenge to the
    Section 72 Certificate was rejected by her in the following terms:

         "... 2. It is not arguable that the judge's finding that the
         appellant did not constitute a danger to the community for the
         purpose of section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
         Act 2002 (NIAA 2202) was outside a range of reasonable responses to
         the evidence.  Section 72 is said to reflect the exception to the
         principle of non-refoulement outlined in Article 33(2) of the
         Refugee Convention.  It is not arguable that past offences are
         enough to justify removal if a refugee, as a matter of fact, does
         not present a current danger to the community.  It was open to the
         judge to consider the fact that the appellant was a child when he
         committed the offence, the passage of time since the offence (13
         years) and the fact that he had no further convictions.  In any
         event, the point is immaterial because the judge went on to dismiss
         the appeal in so far as the appellant relied on the Refugee
         Convention."


 7. In relation to Article 8 ECHR, Judge Canavan rejected that ground in
    the following terms:

         "... 3. The ground relating to Article 8 expresses disagreement
         with the judge's evaluation of the evidence but fails to
         particularise any arguable errors of law that would have made any
         material difference to the outcome of the appeal.  The judge
         referred to the correct legal test and considered all relevant
         matters.  I note that had the UK Borders Act 2007 been in force at
         the date of his conviction, even for an offence attracting four
         years detention, the appellant would have come within the exception
         to deportation under section 33(3), which exempts a person from
         deportation if they were a child when convicted.  The statutory
         scheme as it has stood since 01 August 2008 recognises that a
         person should not be deported in such circumstances.  It was open
         to the judge to take into account the fact that the appellant was a
         child on the date of conviction and that he had not committed any
         further offences.  The case law of the European Court has always
         taken into account the issue of whether a person has committed
         further offences and to that extent the decision in RA (s.117C;
         'unduly harsh' ; offence; seriousness) Iraq [2019] UKUT 000123 was
         inconsistent with exhortations from the senior courts to follow
         Strasbourg principles: now see HA (Iraq) v SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ
         1176.  The judge considered the First-tier Tribunal decision from
         2013 [75] but it was open to him to consider how the situation had
         developed in the intervening seven years.  This approach was
         consistent with the Devaseelan principles and his obligation to
         consider the circumstances as they stood at the date of the
         hearing.  It was open to the judge to consider the cumulative
         effect of all the appellant's circumstances when considering
         whether they outweighed the undoubtedly weighty public interest in
         deportation.  It is not arguable that his findings were outside a
         range of reasonable responses."

 8. Judge Canavan accepted however that the humanitarian protection grounds
    were arguable.  She expressed her conclusion in the following way:

         "... 4.  The grounds also express disagreements with the judge's
         findings on the evidence relating to identity documentation.  It
         was open to the judge to conclude that the appellant would not be
         familiar with his registration details given his young age when he
         left Iraq and that it was unlikely that his father or sister would
         be able to assist him given their significant mental health
         problems.  Having heard evidence from the witnesses it was also
         open to the judge to conclude that the appellant has no current
         family connections in Iraq to assist him.  However, it is at least
         arguable that the judge failed to explain why he concluded that the
         appellant's inability to obtain a relevant identity document
         entitled him to humanitarian protection 'as the law presently
         stands' [74] when nothing in SMO (Article 15(c); identity
         documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 00400 appears to suggest that the
         mere fact that a person could not obtain a CSID or INID would found
         a claim for humanitarian protection.  The judge had already
         assessed risk on return and concluded that the general conditions
         would not give rise to an Article 15(c) risk [68].  The judge's
         subsequent findings were made under the heading of 'Feasibility of
         Return' [69-74].  The Upper Tribunal in SMO made clear that an
         international protection claim cannot succeed by reference to any
         alleged risk of harm arising solely on account of feasibility of
         return: see HF (Iraq) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1276.  Although it
         would have been open to the judge to conduct a 'sliding scale'
         assessment of all the circumstances, including the impact of the
         absence of identity documentation, but nothing in his finding at
         [74] suggests that approach.  It is at least arguable that
         insufficient reasons were given to explain the finding that the
         appellant was entitled to humanitarian protection."


 9. Judge Canavan made plain at [5] of her decision that permission was
    granted only on the humanitarian protection ground and refused on the
    Refugee Convention and Article 8 grounds.  Although the notice of the
    decision does not record that this was a limited grant of permission,
    no point was taken by Ms Everett that the Respondent was entitled to
    continue to argue the grounds challenging the conclusion about the
    Section 72 certificate or Article 8 ECHR.  I therefore confine my
    consideration to the humanitarian protection ground.

10. Judge Canavan directed that the error of law issue should be determined
    at a remote hearing absent objection from either party.  No such
    objection was received.  The hearing proceeded without any major
    technical difficulties.  In accordance with the directions given by
    Judge Canavan, both parties have filed written submissions expanding
    upon their cases which were developed in oral submissions.

11. The matter comes before me to determine whether the Decision contains
    an error of law and, if I so conclude, to either re-make the decision
    or remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to do so.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

12. Ms Everett pointed out at the outset that the Court of Appeal has
    remitted the appeal in SMO, KSP & IM (Article 15(c); identity
    documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 00400 (IAC) ("SMO") by consent.
    However, Ms Everett confirmed my understanding that the appeal has been
    remitted on one very narrow point, namely whether the Tribunal was
    entitled to find that an appellant could be expected to recall the
    volume and page reference of his entry in the Family Book in Iraq.
    That is relevant to whether an appellant is able to obtain a
    replacement CSID (see [13] of the guidance in SMO).  The point does not
    arise in this appeal as Judge Hembrough did not accept that the
    Appellant would be able to obtain a CSID ([73] of the Decision).
    Although that finding of fact was challenged in the grounds of appeal,
    it was not the reason why permission was granted (understandably in my
    view since it is merely a disagreement with the finding).  Accordingly,
    the basis of the remittal of SMO has no bearing on this appeal, and I
    did not consider it in the interests of justice to adjourn the hearing.
     Ms Everett did not seek to persuade me otherwise.

13. The Judge's findings, reasoning and conclusion on the humanitarian
    protection issue appear at [69] to [74] of the Decision.  In order to
    place in context the submissions made to me, I include the section of
    the Decision beginning with the Judge's findings and conclusion on the
    Refugee Convention claim:

         "The Asylum Claim


         57.  ...


         ...


         61.  The Appellant is a Shia Muslim from southern Iraq.  He came to
             the UK as a 10 year old child.  The circumstances giving rise
             to the grant of his refugee status namely his father's claimed
             risk of persecution by reason of his support for the Dawa
             party have now ceased to exist.


         62.  It was recognised in SMO that a person who is westernised and
             perceived to be wealthy might be at risk.  At paragraph 309
             the Tribunal had this to say:


                  'Whilst we think it unlikely, on the evidence before us,
                  that a returnee would be perceived as wealthy purely on
                  account of having been in the UK, we do accept that those
                  who are or are perceived to be wealthy are more likely to
                  be at risk of being specifically targeted on that account.
                   Being wealthy or being perceived as such is therefore a
                  relevant characteristic for the purposes of the sliding
                  scale assessment under Article 15(c) QD.'


         63.  At paragraph 134 of his report Dr George comments as follows:-


                  'In my view however the risk of kidnapping that Mr HJA
                  could face in Iraq would not be high.  While kidnapping
                  remains a significant phenomenon it is not as widespread
                  as it was at the height of the sectarian civil war in 2006-
                  8; and, in relation to the population as a whole, the
                  numbers of kidnappings are small.  I would add that while
                  Mr HJA as a returnee from abroad would be perceived to be
                  relatively well off, it is unlikely that he would be
                  mistaken for a person of very substantial wealth.'


         64.  Whilst observing that what the Appellant has to establish is a
             'real risk' and not a 'high risk' that he would be a victim of
             kidnapping having regard to the findings in SMO and the
             evidence before me in the round I have not been satisfied that
             the Appellant as a Shia Muslim would be at risk in Baghdad or
             in his home area of Diwaniya.


         65.  As regards the other risk categories identified in SMO there
             was no evidence that he had ever lived in any of the
             previously contested areas or that he or any member of his
             family had any association with or would be perceived to have
             had such an association.  Nor was there evidence of political
             activity in the UK which may put him at risk on return.


         66.  I take account of the fact that latterly he has been diagnosed
             as suffering from depression but clearly he is able to
             function on a daily basis in the UK and to care for himself,
             his children and his father and sister.  I find that his
             condition is not so severe as to put him at risk of adverse
             attention, nor would it prejudice his integration upon return.
              There was no evidence to the effect that he would be unable
             to access Sertraline in Iraq.  I deal with barriers to
             integration when considering Article 8 below.


         67.  I find nothing in Dr George's report that would undermine the
             core findings in SMO as to risk on return generally and
             Article 15(c).  The Appellant would be returned to Baghdad
             which is largely under Shia 'control' and in that regard I
             note what Dr George says about the prevalence of Shia militias
             operating in the city.


         68.  In sum I have not been satisfied to the requisite standard
             that on return to Baghdad the Appellant would be perceived as
             wealthy purely on account of having been in the UK for a
             protracted period or that he has any other immutable
             characteristics such as are likely to give rise to a real risk
             of persecution so as to engage the 1951 Refugee Convention.
             Nor have I been satisfied that there are substantial grounds
             for believing that on return to Baghdad, and solely on account
             of his presence there, he would face a real risk of being
             subjected to indiscriminate violence amounting to serious harm
             within the scope of Article 15(c) or that any such risk
             extends to his home area.


         Feasibility of Return


         69.  No Iraqi national is returnable to Baghdad without a current
             or expired passport or a laissez passer.  I accept that the
             Appellant has none of these documents.  He came to the UK in
             2002 as a 10 year old child.  I accept his evidence that he
             has never been in possession of Iraqi identity documentation.
             His evidence which I accept was that he had travelled on his
             father's passport.  There was no evidence as to the
             whereabouts of the same which will be long expired.


         70.  Given his age when he left Iraq I accept that the Appellant
             would not have any recall of the volume and page reference of
             the entry in the Family Book in Iraq to which reference is
             made at paragraph 13 of the headnote in SMO, if indeed he even
             knew of its existence.  I accept the evidence that both his
             father and his sister have severe mental health issues and I
             find that these are likely to preclude them from assisting him
             in establishing his antecedents assume that they would be
             minded to do so, which cannot be taken as a given.  I was told
             nothing about his brother but given that all of the family
             members arrived at the same time it is reasonable to assume
             that he would also be unable or even unwilling to provide
             assistance.


         71.  The witnesses from whom I heard all seemed to me to be
             credible people.  All were adamant that the Appellant has no
             family connection in Iraq.  I also note what was said by Mr HM
             about his own parents' attempts to verify his Iraqi
             citizenship in Iraq which had proved fruitless.


         72.  Whilst also noting that the Appellant has not made any
             enquiries of his own with the Iraqi Embassy in the UK, having
             regard to my experience in dealing with Appellants who have, I
             accept that his background is such that it would have been
             something of a 'waste of time'.


         73.  In sum I find that the Appellant has no means of obtaining a
             laissez passer and more importantly a CSID or INID from within
             the UK using Consular facilities.  Even if it was the case
             that he could be returned to Baghdad he would have no means of
             obtaining a CSID or INID there within a reasonable time.  He
             would have to travel to his home area and he could not do this
             without a CSID or INID.  I accept that he has no family in
             Iraq who would be able to assist him in obtaining these
             documents.


         74.  I find that he has no financial resources of his own and there
             was no evidence that anyone in the UK would be willing or able
             to assist him financially on return.  He would be unable to
             work without the CSID or INID.  In such circumstances as the
             law presently stands he is entitled to humanitarian
             protection."

14. Although as I have noted, the Court of Appeal has remitted the appeal
    to the Tribunal in SMO, that is on one narrow issue and does not affect
    the remainder of the guidance.  I set out the parts of that guidance
    which are relevant to the issue I have to consider or to which I was
    taken as follows:

         "A.       INDISCRIMINATE VIOLENCE IN IRAQ: ARTICLE  15(C)  OF  THE
         QUALIFICATION DIRECTIVE


         ...


         6.        The living conditions in Iraq as a whole, including  the
         Formerly Contested Areas, are unlikely to give rise to a breach  of
         Article 3 ECHR or (therefore) to necessitate subsidiary  protection
         under Article 15(b) QD.  Where it is  asserted  that  return  to  a
         particular part of Iraq would give rise to such a breach,  however,
         it is to be recalled that the minimum level of severity required is
         relative, according to the personal circumstances of the individual
         concerned.    Any   such   circumstances   require   individualised
         assessment in  the  context  of  the  conditions  of  the  area  in
         question.


         B.    DOCUMENTATION AND FEASIBILITY OF RETURN (EXCLUDING IKR)


         7.        Return of former residents of the Iraqi  Kurdish  Region
         (IKR) will be to the IKR and all other Iraqis will be  to  Baghdad.
         The Iraqi authorities will allow  an  Iraqi  national  (P)  in  the
         United Kingdom to enter Iraq only  if  P  is  in  possession  of  a
         current or expired Iraqi passport  relating  to  P,  or  a  Laissez
         Passer.


         8.        No Iraqi national will be returnable to Baghdad if not in
         possession of one of these documents.


         9.        In the light of the Court of  Appeal's  judgment  in HF
         (Iraq)  and  Others   v   Secretary   of   State   for   the   Home
         Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1276, an international protection claim
         made by P cannot succeed by reference to any alleged risk  of  harm
         arising from an absence of a current or expired Iraqi passport or a
         Laissez passer, if the  Tribunal  finds  that  P's  return  is  not
         currently feasible on account of a lack of any of those documents.


         10.    Where P is returned to Iraq on a Laissez Passer or  expired
         passport, P will be at no risk of serious  harm  at  the  point  of
         return by reason of not having a current passport.


         ...


         D.   INTERNAL RELOCATION WITHIN GOI-CONTROLLED IRAQ


         17.    Where internal relocation is raised in the Iraqi context, it
         is necessary to consider not only the safety and reasonableness  of
         relocation but also the feasibility of that  course,  in  light  of
         sponsorship and residency  requirements  in  operation  in  various
         parts of the country.  Individuals who seek to relocate within  the
         country may not be admitted to a potential safe haven or may not be
         permitted to remain there.


         18.    Relocation within the Formerly Contested Areas.  With  the
         exception of the small area identified in section  A,  the  general
         conditions within  the Formerly  Contested  Areas do  not  engage
         Article 15 QD(b) or (c) or Article 3  ECHR  and  relocation  within
         the Formerly Contested Areas may obviate a risk which exists in an
         individual's home  area.   Where  relocation  within  the Formerly
         Contested Areas is under contemplation, however,  the  ethnic  and
         political composition of the home area and the place of  relocation
         will be particularly relevant.  In particular,  an  individual  who
         lived in a former ISIL stronghold for  some  time  may  fall  under
         suspicion in a place of relocation.  Tribal and ethnic  differences
         may preclude such relocation, given the  significant  presence  and
         control of largely Shia militia in these areas.  Even where  it  is
         safe for an individual to relocate within  the Formerly  Contested
         Areas, however, it is unlikely to be either feasible or  reasonable
         without a prior connection to, and a support structure within,  the
         area in question.


         19.    Relocation to  Baghdad.   Baghdad  is  generally  safe  for
         ordinary civilians but whether it is safe for a particular returnee
         is a question of fact in the individual case.   There  are  no  on-
         entry  sponsorship  requirements  for   Baghdad   but   there   are
         sponsorship requirements for residency.  A documented individual of
         working age is likely to be able  to  satisfy  those  requirements.
         Relocation to Baghdad is likely to be reasonable for Arab Shia  and
         Sunni single, able-bodied men and married couples  of  working  age
         without  children  and  without  specific  vulnerabilities.   Other
         individuals are likely to require external support,  ie a  support
         network of members of his or her family, extended family or  tribe,
         who are willing and able to provide genuine support.  Whether  such
         a support network is available is to be considered  with  reference
         to the collectivist nature of Iraqi society, as considered  in AAH
         (Iraq).


         ..."


15. The Respondent's case as put to me orally in short summary is that the
    Judge's conclusion at [74] of the Decision is contrary to the clear
    guidance in SMO at [9] of the headnote that a protection claim cannot
    be allowed on the basis of a lack of feasibility of return.  Having
    found there to be no specific or generalised risk on return at [61] to
    [68] of the Decision (which findings are not challenged), the only
    factor which led the Judge to the conclusion on the humanitarian
    protection ground at [74] of the Decision can be the lack of
    documentation meaning that the Appellant cannot feasibly be returned to
    Iraq at the present time.  The Respondent says that this is not
    sufficient reason based on the guidance in SMO.

16. The Appellant's written submissions seek to uphold the Decision.  The
    Appellant points to evidence accepted by the Judge that the Appellant
    is suffering from depression, has no formal qualifications and no
    employment history in either the UK or Iraq and has no family in Iraq.
    The Appellant also points to the uncontested evidence about his
    relationships with his family members and his own children in the UK.
    Those latter relationships are in part the reason why his appeal was
    allowed on Article 8 grounds.  They have no relevance to the
    humanitarian protection ground.

17. The Appellant also points out that lack of identity documentation is
    not relevant specifically to the feasibility of return but to the
    possibility of obtaining employment and services in Iraq.  Without
    employment or financial support from the UK, Ms Niama points out, the
    Appellant would not be able to obtain accommodation or have any means
    of living.  In essence, therefore, the Appellant's case is that what is
    said at [74] in the context of the finding that the Appellant would not
    be able to obtain a CSID within a reasonable time and would not have
    any other available means of support is sufficient reason to allow the
    appeal on humanitarian protection grounds.

18. The Appellant's written submissions and Ms Niama's oral submissions
    also focussed on what is said at [18] and [19] of the headnote in SMO.
    As Ms Everett submitted and I accept, paragraph [18] has no relevance
    to this case.  The Appellant is from Southern Iraq and there is no
    suggestion of relocation within the formerly contested areas.

19. Paragraph [19] of the headnote is of greater relevance since it is
    there said that a "documented individual of working age" would be able
    to satisfy the sponsorship requirements for residency.  It must be
    assumed from this statement that the converse also applies, namely that
    an undocumented individual would not be able to satisfy those
    requirements.  Whilst I accept that, otherwise, the Appellant would
    appear to fall within the category of Shia single, able-bodied men, the
    lack of documentation would, as Ms Niama submits, mean that the
    Appellant would require other financial support in order to survive.

20. Unfortunately, neither representative took me to be the body of the
    decision in SMO.  I have referred myself to what is said by the
    Tribunal in the section dealing with "Article 3 ECHR/ Article 15(b) QD"
    at [316] and following.

21. Of particular relevance to this appeal is what is said at [317] of the
    decision as follows:

         "317.     The starting point for our consideration must be the
         respondent's repetition, at [150] of her closing submissions, of
         her concession in previous cases that 'it remains the position that
         a person returning to Iraq without either family connections able
         to assist him, or the means to obtain a CSID, may be at risk of
         enduring conditions contrary to Article 3 ECHR'.  This section of
         our decision is therefore principally relevant to those who have or
         are able to obtain a CSID (or INID) within a reasonable time or
         have family members from whom they can secure assistance or
         support."


22. The concession there made is not mentioned by the Respondent in her
    grounds for reasons which I will come to but there is no subsequent
    authority so far as I am aware which records that this concession has
    been withdrawn.  It is highly likely (although not noted by Judge
    Hembrough) that the finding at [74] of the Decision that "as the law
    presently stands [the Appellant] is entitled to humanitarian
    protection" had this concession in mind.

23. Even if I am wrong about this, and having regard to the fact that the
    concession records only that a person who does not have a CSID and
    family support "may" be at an Article 3 risk rather than "is at risk",
    I consider that the same conclusion can be reached in any event on the
    facts of this case and having regard to the respective positions of the
    parties.

24. First, the Judge has not allowed the appeal on humanitarian protection
    grounds based on the infeasibility of return.  As [9] of the SMO
    guidance makes clear, the feasibility of return is connected to lack of
    passport or laissez passer.  Second, although the possession of those
    documents has a bearing on the ability to obtain a CSID, the relevance
    of possession of a CSID has far wider implications in terms of ability
    to live day to day in Iraq.  As Ms Niama submitted and I accept, the
    possession of a CSID enables an individual to access services, to
    obtain support or employment and therefore to find accommodation (see
    also [337] of SMO).   Third, if an individual is unable to obtain
    support via the acquisition of a CSID, it follows that other support
    will be necessary to allow the individual to support himself, whether
    that is in his home area or elsewhere in Iraq (see [321] of SMO).
    Fourth, paragraph [19] makes clear that the reasonableness of
    relocation to Baghdad discloses the relevance of the documentation
    factor.  Fifth, finally, therefore, the conclusion of the Judge that
    the inability to obtain a CSID coupled with the lack of family support
    is determinative of this aspect of the appeal is one which was
    undoubtedly open to him.

25. For those reasons, paragraph [74] of the Decision, brief though it is,
    makes the necessary findings in order to reach the conclusion that the
    appeal should be allowed on the humanitarian protection ground, namely
    that the Appellant will not be able to obtain a CSID within a
    reasonable time and has no family members from whom he can otherwise
    secure assistance or support.

26. As I have previously indicated, the way in which this ground was
    pleaded differed substantially from that which was pursued orally, no
    doubt because of the basis on which permission was granted.  Permission
    was not granted to argue the points which are raised in the pleadings.
    However, for completeness and since they are directed to the
    humanitarian protection ground, I deal with them.

27. The pleaded grounds at [4] to [6] merely argue that the Judge was not
    entitled to reach the findings he did about inability to obtain
    documentation and family support.  First, it is said that the Judge was
    not entitled to find that the Appellant could not obtain a CSID because
    he had made no efforts to obtain documents from the Embassy.  That is
    dealt with by the Judge at [72] of the Decision who clearly had that
    factor in mind when reaching his conclusion.

28. In relation to family support, it is said that the Judge was not
    entitled to find that the Appellant had no family members who could
    support him given the findings of the Judge in the 2013 determination
    of the Appellant's appeal (see [2] above).  That finding is said to be
    that the Appellant still had family in Iraq.  Whilst I would accept
    that the Judge does not make reference to the earlier appeal decision
    (which was not part of the Respondent's bundle in any event), the Judge
    had evidence recorded at [29] to [48] of the Decision about the current
    position, not just from the Appellant but also from other family
    members.  The Judge was entitled to reach the conclusion which he did
    at [71] of the Decision based on that evidence that the Appellant does
    not have family members still in Iraq who could assist with the
    obtaining of documentation.   The Judge dealt with the availability of
    support from the UK at [74] of the Decision on the basis that there was
    no evidence that anyone in the UK could financially support the
    Appellant.  The grounds as pleaded are therefore merely disagreement
    with the findings made by the Judge which were open to him on the
    evidence.

29. For the foregoing reasons, I conclude that there is no error of law in
    the Decision and I uphold it.

    DECISION

    The Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hembrough promulgated on 22
    September 2020 does not involve the making of an error on a point of
    law. I therefore uphold the Decision with the consequence that the
    Appellant's appeal remains allowed on humanitarian protection (and
    Article 8) grounds.  The appeal remains dismissed on protection
    (Refugee Convention) grounds.



   Signed: L K Smith

   Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

   Dated: 18 March 2021

