

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00143/2015
                                                               PA/00328/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 5 April 2016                               |On 13 April 2016             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  Mrs A. G.
                                  Mr T. R.
                         (Anonymity Direction made)
                                                                 Respondents
Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr T. Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondents:    Mr J. Knight of Duncan Lewis, Solicitors


                                  DECISION


   1. The Secretary of State has been granted permission to  appeal  against
      the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lloyd  who,  by  a  decision
      promulgated on 13  November  2015,  allowed  the  respondents'  appeal
      against refusal of their asylum and human rights claims.  That  means,
      of course, that it is the Secretary of State  that  is  the  appellant
      before the Upper Tribunal and that the claimants are the  respondents.
      However as I will need to reproduce extracts from the decision of  the
      First-tier Tribunal, it is convenient to refer to the parties as  they
      were before the First-tier Tribunal.


   2.  The immigration history of the appellants and  the  nature  of  their
      protection claim was summarised by the  Judge  as  follows.  Both  are
      citizens of Pakistan. The first  appellant  is  a  Christian  and  the
      second appellant is an Ahmadi Muslim. They married in  Pakistan  on  7
      July 2013, having been in a  relationship  together  for  eight  years
      before that. They kept their marriage  secret  from  their  respective
      families for fear of violent reprisal as they know that  both  parents
      would not accept their interfaith marriage.


   3. The appellants first arrived in the United Kingdom on 12 January 2014.
      The first appellant was admitted as a student and the second appellant
      as her dependant. The judge  recorded  the  evidence  offered  of  the
      circumstances in which the need to make an asylum claim had arisen:


           "...in April 2015 the first appellant returned  to  Pakistan  in
           order to spend Easter with her family. They wanted her to  enter
           into an arranged marriage and she was constrained  to  tell  her
           family that she was already married. That provoked  rage  and  a
           sense of breach of honour for her family. They confined  her  to
           her room, confiscated her passport and phone and  had  subjected
           her to beating.  They had also  e-mailed  the  second  appellant
           demanding that he divorce her. Both appellants  were  threatened
           with their lives. The First appellant had managed to escape with
           the assistance of her mother on 26 April 2015; and had  returned
           to the UK on the same date  when  she  claimed  asylum  and  was
           detained. The sense of revenge and breach of honour is one  that
           was felt by both appellants' families."


   4. The judge recorded the evidence  of  both  appellants  that  they  had
      involved themselves in "activities related to the  Ahmadi  community",
      and that the second appellant had preached the Ahmadi  faith  both  in
      Pakistan and in the United Kingdom and would continue to do so  should
      he return to Pakistan.  The  judge  recognised  that  there  were  two
      aspects of the protection claim being advanced. First, each  appellant
      faced persecutory ill treatment from their own families. That had been
      demonstrated in respect of the first appellant by the reaction of  her
      family during the recent visit. The appellant had produced copies of a
      FIR dated 24 April  2015,  laid  by  the  first  appellant's  brother,
      accusing the second  appellant  of  conspiracy  to  abduct  the  first
      appellant and to enter a "false marriage with her".  The  FIR  alleged
      also that the second appellant  had  been  "unlawfully  preaching  his
      Ahmadi religion. An arrest warrant in the name of the second appellant
      was also put before the judge. Secondly the second appellant said that
      he had received death threats in Pakistan because  of  his  practicing
      and preaching of his religious beliefs and, because of his  commitment
      to continuing to do so should he return to Pakistan, he would  face  a
      real risk of persecution, as would his wife who  would  accompany  him
      wherever he established himself in Pakistan.


   5. In his decision, the judge has set out some  very  clear  findings  of
      fact. Before doing so he made clear  that  he  recognised  that  these
      findings were of critical importance  to  the  determination  of  this
      appeal, as the respondent's case was that the account advanced by  the
      appellants was untrue and that the FIR and arrest warrant  were  false
      documents. The judge observed:


           "Essentially, this is an appeal which rests  upon  the  critical
           issue of credibility of the appellants."


      And then made clear that he accepted the appellants' evidence:


           "The Secretary of State in her letter of  refusal  and  at  this
           appeal...  has  roundly  challenged  the  credibility  of   both
           appellants.  It  was  contended  that  their  accounts  to   the
           interviewing  officers  and  now  to  this  Tribunal  had   been
           fabricated as a means of securing their stay in the UK.


           I do not accept that they are lacking  in  credibility.  I  have
           found both the appellants to be credible in the central core  of
           the evidence they have presented in support of their claims"


      The judge specifically found as a fact that:


           "...  both  appellants  are  at  serious  risk  of  revenge  and
           retribution from their families because of the relationship  and
           marriage they have entered into."


      And:


           "I believe the first appellant's account of the retribution  now
           being exacted by her biological brother on behalf of his  family
           and also, on the part of the second appellant, the risks arising
           not only by virtue of the rift with  his  own  family  but  more
           especially the risks arising not only by virtue of the rift with
           his own family but more especially the risks to him and his wife
           arising from his determination to adhere to his Ahmadi faith.


           In the circumstances of  family  retribution  described  in  the
           evidence, I find that there is little prospect of adequate state
           protection for both appellants if they were to have to be return
           to their home country."


      The Judge then made clear that he recognised that the dynamics of  the
      possibility of internal relocation differed depending upon the  nature
      of the risk to be avoided:


           "Of course, in the context  of  the  family  difficulties,  then
           their internal relocation may be viewed as a prospect for  them.
           But, in reality, I accept the evidence that has  been  presented
           by the first appellant that  the  influence  of  her  family  is
           likely to extend beyond the locality where she has been  brought
           up. Indeed, it seems that the blunt determination of her brother
           to wreak revenge is  something  that  will  extend  beyond  mere
           regional boundaries.


           I do not consider that the respondent has  presented  sufficient
           evidence to persuade this tribunal that  the  First  Information
           Report  and  the  arrest  warrant   are   mere   forgeries   and
           fabrications designed to support the appellants' account."


   6. Finally, the judge made clear that as the appellants were husband  and
      wife these claims were "interlinked":


           "... Whatever decision I make must apply to  both  of  them.  If
           they are removed they must be removed to Pakistan together..."

      On that basis, having accepted the appellants  as  credible  witnesses
      whose evidence  was  accepted,  and  that  it  was  supported  by  the
      documentary evidence of the FIR and arrest warranty, the judge allowed
      both appeals.

   7. The grounds upon which permission to appeal was sought and granted are
      narrowly drawn:


           "It is respectfully submitted that the Judge has failed to  give
           reasons why the First Appellant's family influence is likely  to
           extend beyond the locality where she was brought up."


      There is no challenge to the positive credibility findings made by the
      judge nor to his finding of fact that the FIR and arrest  warrant  are
      genuine documents upon which he could rely as to the  truth  of  their
      contents. It might be noted also that the grounds make no  attempt  to
      challenge the findings in relation to the  risk  faced  on  return  to
      Pakistan by the second appellant  on  account  of  his  commitment  to
      practice and preach his religious beliefs. Therefore, that the  second
      appellant succeeds in his appeal in that  respect  goes  unchallenged.
      Given the fact that the judge accepted that the  appellants  would  be
      confronted  jointly  by  whatever  difficulties  either  one  of  them
      attracted to themselves, the grounds lead nowhere at all and, frankly,
      it is hard to see  that  a  grant  of  permission  to  appeal  can  be
      justified.


   8. Put another way, the finding of fact at paragraph 38 of  the  decision
      to the effect that the evidence of the appellants was accepted,  taken
      together with the finding at paragraph 42 that  the  FITR  and  arrest
      warrants were genuine documents are, taken together, a complete answer
      to the Secretary of `State's challenge to this decision. Plainly,  the
      second appellant would be at risk wherever he sought  to  re-establish
      himself in Pakistan  because  he  would  be  at  risk  of  arrest  and
      prosecution. The arrest warrant is the product of the FIR filed by the
      first appellant's brother and it is in that sense that  the  reach  of
      her family extends beyond the home area where the family is located.


   9. The dispute between the parties  concerning  the  credibility  of  the
      account advanced by the appellants was  a  matter  for  the  judge  to
      resolve and, having heard oral evidence he was best placed to  do  so.
      It is entirely clear from a reading of the decision as a whole why the
      judge reached the conclusions he did. Those conclusions are  supported
      by reasoning that is legally sufficient so that his findings  of  fact
      are simply unassailable.


  10. The second ground for seeking permission to  appeal  comes  into  play
      only if the respondent succeeds in making good her  first  ground.  As
      this she has failed to do there is no need  to  say  anything  further
      concerning the second ground.


   Summary of decision:

  11. First tier Tribunal Judge Lloyd made no error of law material  to  the
      outcome of this appeal.


  12. The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed  so
      that the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lloyd is to stand.




      Signed                 [pic]
                               Date:    7 April 2016

                                Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


