
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/00374/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |  Determination Promulgated       |
|On Monday 17 September 2018             |  On Thursday 01 November 2018    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                                     OOA
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Seelhoff of A Seelhoff Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Although an anonymity direction was not made by the First-tier Tribunal,  as
a protection claim, it is appropriate to make that  direction.   Unless  and
until a tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is  granted
anonymity. No report of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify him or any member of his family. This  direction  applies,  amongst
others, to both parties. Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead
to contempt of court proceedings.


                                  DECISION

BACKGROUND

    1. By a decision promulgated on 2 July 2018, I found an error of law  in
       the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge E M M Smith promulgated  on
       23 February 2018.  I set that aside (whilst preserving  the  findings
       at [16] to [32] and [34] of that decision) and  gave  directions  for
       the re-making of the decision.  My earlier decision is annexed hereto
       for ease of reference.

    2. It was envisaged by my directions that the re-making of the  decision
       would follow country guidance to be issued by this Tribunal following
       a hearing in August 2018. Events have since moved on and the  country
       guidance cases are now listed for  hearing  in  February  2019.   The
       Respondent had indicated in his statement of case  a  willingness  to
       adjourn the hearing until after the  country  guidance  case  but  Mr
       Seelhoff for the Appellant indicated that  the  Appellant  wished  to
       press ahead with the hearing.  I therefore declined  to  adjourn  the
       hearing.

    3. For the purposes of re-making, I received a  skeleton  argument  from
       each party setting out their respective cases.   I  also  received  a
       bundle from the Appellant of 227 pages to which I refer hereafter  as
       [AB/xx].  The Respondent filed three documents as follows:

        1) The Home Office Country Policy  and  Information  Note  ("CPIN")
           entitled "Sudan: Return of unsuccessful asylum seekers" (version
           4.0) dated July 2018;

        2) The  Home  Office  CPIN  entitled  "Sudan:  Non  Arab  Darfuris"
           (version 1.0) dated August 2017;

        3) A document entitled "Joint  Report  of  the  Danish  Immigration
           Service and UK Home Office fact finding  missions  to  Khartoum,
           Kampala and Nairobi: Conducted February-March 2016" dated August
           2016 (hereafter referred to  as  the  "FFM  report").   The  FFM
           report appears also in the Appellant's bundle and  since  it  is
           paginated within that bundle  I  refer  hereafter  to  the  page
           numbers in that bundle when referring to the relevant  parts  of
           the FFM.

    4. I refer hereafter only to that evidence  which  is  relevant  to  the
       issues I have to consider.  I have however read and  taking  into  my
       consideration all the material before me.

  FACTUAL POSITION OF THE APPELLANT

    5. As noted at [1] above, I preserved the factual findings made by  FTTJ
       Smith in the  decision  promulgated  on  23  February  2018.   It  is
       appropriate to set out the relevant parts of those findings  as  well
       as the relevant factual background in order  to  set  the  background
       evidence which I have to consider in context.

    6. I begin with the factual background to the Appellant's case  and  the
       facts of his claim which  appear  at  [6]  to  [8]  of  FTTJ  Smith's
       decision as follows:

           "[6]  The facts of the appellant's account are set out fully  in
           the letter of refusal.  Whilst I do not propose to set it out in
           any detail, in essence the appellant claims that he was born  in
           Melit, Darfur and 4 months after his birth  he  and  his  family
           moved to Khartoum [I pause to note that the Appellant  was  born
           in October 1992].  His father was  a  trader.   The  family  are
           members of the Berti Tribe.  The appellant is  married  and  his
           wife lives in Sudan.

           [7]   The appellant attended Almushriq  University  between  the
           ages  of  19  and  23  in  Bahri  Alinkathe  and  graduated   in
           Telecommunications  and  Engineering.   In   2013   whilst   the
           appellant did not take part in the demonstrations regarding fuel
           poverty he assisted some of those that did  by  providing  water
           and taking one person to hospital.  On the 29th  September  2013
           the appellant states he was arrested whilst walking on a  street
           and then detained for 6 weeks.  In that time  he  was  tortured.
           He  was  accused  of   planning   and   taking   part   in   the
           demonstrations.  He was released on the 15th November  2013  and
           was required to report every week for the following 3 years.  He
           failed to report on one occasion and was arrested  on  the  22nd
           January 2016 and  accused  of  attempting  to  escape.   He  was
           detained for 11 days  and  then  released  when  he  claims  the
           authorities could not find anything on him.

           [8]   The appellant then decided to leave Sudan and  his  father
           arranged and financed an  agent.   The  appellant  travelled  to
           Libya where he remained for two months and left on the 2nd  June
           2016 and travelled to Italy.  In Italy he remained for two weeks
           and in that time was fingerprinted and given documents to  leave
           Italy within 10 days.  The  appellant  travelled  to  Calais  in
           France  where  he  remained  for  14  weeks.   Whilst  there  he
           approached the authorities with a view to  claiming  asylum  and
           was provided with an appointment in a month and a  half's  time.
           He decided he couldn't wait and by lorry came to the UK arriving
           on the 30th September 2016."

    7. The Judge's findings on the Appellant's claim appear at [16] to  [32]
       and [34] of the Judge's decision and read (so  far  as  relevant)  as
       follows:

           "[16] It follows that much turns upon  the  credibility  of  the
           appellant in terms of his account for the reasons why [he  left]
           Sudan.

           [17]  I have considered all the evidence before me including the
           interviews of the appellant, his witness statements and his oral
           evidence.....

           .....

           [19]  Section 8 of the  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
           Claimants etc) Act 2004 requires me  to  take  into  account  as
           adversely affecting the credibility of the  appellant's  account
           any behaviour which I consider was designed or likely to  result
           in  concealment  of  information  or   to   mislead   or   delay
           consideration of a claim....It was possible for  this  appellant
           to have claimed asylum whilst in Italy but he failed  to  do  so
           even  though  he  was  encountered  by   the   authorities   and
           fingerprinted.  When the appellant arrived in France he remained
           for 3 � months and states that he did approach  the  authorities
           with a view to  claiming  asylum.   He  therefore  knew  of  his
           entitlement and took advantage of it.  Having been told that  an
           appointment would be provided 1 � months later he decided not to
           remain in France and entered the  UK  illegally.   However,  the
           appellant was content to endure the conditions in France for 3 �
           months and it therefore makes no sense  that  he  did  not  seek
           asylum when he arrived or wait until he  was  seen.   I  do  not
           accept that this appellant truly sought asylum in France and his
           failure to do so in Italy  supports  my  finding  that  he  only
           intended to travel in the UK.  I am  satisfied  to  that  extent
           section 8 applies to this appellant and I will factor it into my
           consideration of his credibility.

           [20]  The appellant accepts that he has never  been  politically
           active in Sudan or  indeed  in  the  UK.   He  accepted  in  his
           evidence to this court that following his detention in  2013  he
           was released because the authorities as he put "had  nothing  on
           me".  Having been released he was required to report weekly  and
           did so he claims  for  3  years  and  again  in  that  time  the
           authorities had  no  reason  to  further  detain  the  appellant
           because of involvement in politics.  He was detained because  he
           had failed to report on  one  occasion.   Again,  following  his
           detention for 11 days the appellant  was  released  because  the
           authorities could still not find a reason to detain him  further
           or connect him to any political activity.   The  appellant  does
           suggest that following his release he was required  to  continue
           reporting and it was not for a further 2 months that he  decided
           to leave Sudan.

           [21]  Whilst the appellant was detained after the demonstrations
           in 2013  there  is  no  suggestion  that  any  proceedings  were
           instituted against him  for  the  actions  he  took  in  helping
           individuals.

           [22]  In 2016 when he  was  detained  he  alleges  that  he  was
           tortured by the use of hot rods on his arms and back.  There  is
           no suggestion that  in  2013  similar  torture  was  perpetrated
           against him when in fact there appeared to be  evidence  of  his
           assisting those who participated in the  demonstrations  whereas
           in 2016 he had simply failed to  report.   It  seems  incredible
           that the authorities who, over a period of 3 years had found  no
           evidence that the appellant was  politically  motivated,  should
           torture him for a single failure to report having reported for 3
           years without issue.

           [23]  In his  screening  interview  when  asked  why  he  feared
           returning to Sudan  (q4.1)  the  appellant  stated  "I  will  be
           detained  and  tortured.   The   Government.    Because   of   a
           demonstration in 2013.". There is no suggestion that he had been
           tortured  in  2016,  his  only  reference   is   to   the   2013
           demonstration.  By the time the appellant is  again  interviewed
           he now includes in the SEF interview (q113) that he was arrested
           again and then discloses the torture in 2016.  However,  in  the
           months between February when he was released and April when fled
           other than verbal abuse there is no suggestion  the  authorities
           took any  action  against  him.   It  is  incredible  that  this
           appellant who had not  been  politically  active  and  had  been
           released on bail for over 2 months should take it  upon  himself
           then to flee as opposed to fleeing when he had been released  in
           the February if he truly believed to be in fear of his life.

           [24]  During his  evidence  Mr  Madanhi  put  to  the  appellant
           whether it would be possible for him to relocate  in  Sudan  and
           having said he could not he was asked why.  He replied  "Because
           I failed to comply with the condition not to leave Sudan". If in
           fact the  appellant  was  placed  on  that  condition  and  that
           condition alone it is remarkable that  he  should  do  the  very
           thing he had been told not to do.  Had he not done that there is
           no evidence that  his  life  was  in  danger.   It  appears  the
           appellant  has  created  his  own  difficulty.   The   appellant
           confirmed that he is in touch with his family on a regular basis
           and they have not been troubled by the authorities.

           [25]  In his SEF interview the appellant was asked  how  he  was
           treated after he was detained on the first occasion (Q107).   He
           replied "Very bad treatment we were  beaten  and  tortured"  and
           later he explained that when he was arrested on the 2nd occasion
           he was burnt on his back (q121).  The appellant has  produced  a
           report by a Mr R A Smowton of the TCU  Decision  team  (AB  p14)
           which sets out the appellant's claim that on the 2nd occasion he
           was tortured with hot rods on his back and forearm.   In  a  2nd
           report from Campsfield IRC signed by a Ms Rachel Davis,  without
           producing the medical records she refers to,  she  provides  her
           account of what is contained within them.  This court  does  not
           have the advantage of those records or a report from a  suitably
           qualified Doctor.  Instead this  court  is  asked  to  adopt  in
           favour of the appellant the account that Ms Davis  has  recorded
           which states that "specific mention is given to linear scar over
           your lumbar region.  Also an irregular scar over  left  scapula.
           Furthermore circular from contact (sic). That the  linear  scars
           on your forearm from contact with hot rods..On the basis of this
           the medical practitioner has expressed  concerns  that  you  may
           have been tortured". Over and above those two reports  which  Mr
           Madanhi relied upon the appellant has produced  photographs  (AB
           p11-13) of his back.  They are not the clearest  of  photographs
           but appear to show  marks  on  his  upper  left  shoulder  blade
           (scapula).

           [26]  Whilst the photographs could support injury  to  the  left
           shoulder blade there are no photographs of the lumber region  or
           the forearm.  This  court  is  being  asked  to  rely  upon  the
           interpretation by a non-medically qualified person (Ms Davis) of
           part of a Doctors examination.  This court has no idea what  the
           Doctor relied upon  to  come  to  his  conclusions  whether  the
           injuries were consistent; the photographs do not  show  some  of
           the injuries claimed (forearm and  lumber  region)  and  in  the
           absence of the medical notes or medical report this court has no
           idea whether the Doctor added qualification to his findings.   I
           have no idea whether the Doctor  had  appropriate  documentation
           before him or whether he simply took the appellant's version  of
           events down.  I have only been provided with a  partial  opinion
           of the Doctor's opinion by a non-medically qualified person....

           [27]  As an example of  the  difficulties  encountered  if  this
           court is being asked to accept the supposed medical  opinion  in
           note that in the Istanbul Protocol on Medical Reports paragraphs
           186 and 187 of the Istanbul Protocol in  relation  to  the  term
           "consistency" it states....

           [28]  Whilst the evidence I have been presented with establishes
           that some injuries are evident on the appellant's left scapula I
           cannot discern from that evidence whether  they  are  consistent
           with what he claims  to  have  happened  or  whether  there  are
           inconsistencies.  Accordingly, I am satisfied that I  can  place
           little weight on the report from Ms Davis  and  Mr  Smowton.   I
           cannot discount that the injuries shown in the photographs  were
           caused in another way unconnected to the authorities.

           [29]  Significantly during his evidence the appellant  disclosed
           that in Sudan he was expected  to  be  called  up  for  Military
           Service which he did not want to do.  He had left University  in
           2015 and it is then that he  would  have  been  expected  to  be
           called up.  He says he was not.  I am  satisfied  that  in  fact
           taking into account the appellant was of age to  be  conscripted
           into Military Service that his desire not to do so following his
           education is the real reason he left Sudan.

           ...

           [31]  Having been released the 2nd time and despite his claim he
           was tortured the appellant  chose  not  to  leave  Sudan  for  a
           further two months.  In those two months nothing of significance
           occurred other than name calling, yet he took it upon himself to
           do exactly what he claims to have been told not to do two months
           before and leave Sudan.  I do  not  accept  the  appellant  fled
           Sudan because he was in fear.  I am satisfied  that  not  having
           obtained suitable employment despite his  University  Degree  he
           took it upon himself to leave Sudan to improve his prospects and
           to avoid Military Service.

           [32]  I am not satisfied even to the low standard of proof  that
           the appellant has provided a true account of his experiences and
           reasons for claiming asylum that justifies his claim of fear.  I
           have  found  that  the  appellant  has  no  profile   with   the
           authorities.  Having as he claims been detained twice he himself
           accepts that they had nothing on him and indeed the  reason  for
           that is that he has done nothing.  The only reason he claims  to
           have been arrested the 2nd time is because he failed  to  report
           once.  In the three years of reporting  the  authorities  simply
           left him alone except with the  requirement  to  report.   I  am
           satisfied that this appellant left Sudan because having achieved
           a University education and not having found a job he  wanted  to
           avoid Military Service.

           ....

           [34]  ...(i) On the available evidence  Sudanese  draft  evaders
           and draft deserters do not face a real risk of imprisonment as a
           punishment.  Instead they are forced to perform military service
           under close supervision; (ii) In view of the ending  in  January
           2005 of the north-south civil war, there is  no  longer  a  real
           risk of conscripts or draft evaders  or  draft  deserters  being
           required to fight in the south; (iii)  The  recent  conflict  in
           Darfur  (still  ongoing)  has  been  characterised  by   serious
           violations of international humanitarian law amounting to crimes
           under international law. However, on the available  evidence  it
           is not reasonably likely that conscripts  or  draft  evaders  or
           draft deserters are being or  would  be  required  to  fight  in
           Darfur; (iv) Accordingly, Sudanese who face conscription, or who
           are draft evaders and draft deserters do not face a real risk on
           return of persecution or treatment contrary to Article 3."

    8. Based on those findings, the Judge concluded at [35] of his  decision
       that the appellant could return to  his  parents'  home  in  Khartoum
       where he has a wife and family.

   EXISTING COUNTRY GUIDANCE

    9. The Appellant relies on the existing country  guidance  AA  (Non-Arab
       Darfuris - relocation)  Sudan  CG  [2009]  UKAIT  00056  ("AA"),  the
       headnote to which reads as follows:

           "All non-Arab Darfuris are at risk of persecution in Darfur  and
           cannot reasonably be expected to relocate  elsewhere  in  Sudan.
           HGMO (Relocation to Khartoum) Sudan CG [2006] UKAIT 00062 is  no
           longer  to  be  followed,  save  in  respect  of  the   guidance
           summarised at (2) and (6) of the headnote to that case."

   10. As is evident from [4] and [5] of AA, the finding of risk for all non-
       Arab Darfuris was based on the Respondent's own Operational  Guidance
       Note dated 2 November 2009.  That in turn  arose  from  events  which
       took place in 2008 and 2009 as set out at [5]  of  the  decision,  as
       follows:

           "[5]  Paragraphs 3.9.4 to 3.9.7  of  the  OGN  summarise  recent
           evidence on the situation in  Khartoum.   On  10  May  2008  JEM
           launched an assault on Omdurman, Khartoum as  a  consequence  of
           which there were reports of arbitrary arrests  by  the  Sudanese
           authorities,  extrajudicial  executions  and  ill-treatment   of
           detainees following the attack.  The  Foreign  and  Commonwealth
           Office stated that following the fighting large number  of  non-
           Arab Darfuris living in Khartoum were detained.  On 4 March 2009
           the ICC  announced  the  issue  of  an  arrest  warrant  against
           President Bashir for war crimes and crimes against  humanity  in
           Darfur.  This led to the expulsion of a number of  international
           NGOs and the closure of some local human  rights  organisations,
           which severely reduced the ability of  the  local  human  rights
           community to monitor and  report  on  human  rights  violations.
           There was continued  press  censorship  and  intimidation  which
           further increased restrictions on the freedom of expression.   A
           UNHCR report of November 2008 refers to the use by the  National
           Intelligence and Security Services (NISS)  of  arbitrary  arrest
           against political dissidents in Khartoum which can involve  ill-
           treatment, torture and unofficial places of detention, and it is
           said that Darfurians may raise the  suspicion  of  the  security
           forces by the mere fact of travelling from other parts of  Sudan
           to Darfur, by having travelled abroad, or having been in contact
           with individuals and organisations abroad."

   11. Paragraphs [2] and  [6]  of  the  headnote  in  HGMO  (Relocation  to
       Khartoum) Sudan CG  [2006]  UKAIT  00062  ("HGMO")  were  maintained.
       Paragraph [2] has some relevance to the Appellant's case and reads as
       follows:

           "[2]  Neither involuntary returnees nor  failed  asylum  seekers
           nor  persons  of  military  age  (including  draft  evaders  and
           deserters) are as such at real risk on return to Khartoum"

   12. It is worthy of note that, prior to the developments which led to the
       Respondent's OGN and the Tribunal's decision  in  AA,  the  House  of
       Lords upheld the Tribunal's decision in HGMO (thereby overturning the
       Court of Appeal's judgment)  in  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department v AH (Sudan) and others  [2007]  UKHL  49.   The  position
       prior to the developments in 2008 and 2009 was therefore accepted  to
       be that a non-Arab Darfuri would be at risk on return to  Darfur  but
       that, in general, it would not be unduly harsh for him to relocate to
       Khartoum, even  if  the  effect  of  relocation  would  be  that  the
       appellant would be  returning  to  live  in  a  camp  for  internally
       displaced persons (an IDP camp).

   13. The events which gave rise to  the  decision  in  AA  are  the  mass,
       arbitrary  detention  and  ill-treatment  in  detention  of  non-Arab
       Darfuris, apparently on the  basis  of  their  ethnicity  alone,  the
       action taken by the ICC against President Bashir and the expulsion of
       NGOs from Khartoum with associated restrictions  on  press  freedoms,
       thereby limiting the information which could be  obtained  about  the
       plight of non-Arab Darfuris in Khartoum.

   14. It is common ground between the parties  that,  if  AA  continues  to
       apply, then the Appellant is entitled to succeed.   The  Respondent's
       position, however, is that I should not follow AA  because  there  is
       now evidence  which  undermines  that  decision  as  to  the  current
       conditions for a non-Arab Darfuri in Khartoum.  I pause to note  that
       the Respondent does not suggest that the Appellant should  return  to
       Darfur.  It is accepted that there is a continuing risk in that area.
        In any event, in this particular case, the Appellant was  living  in
       Khartoum before he came here and  continues  to  have  family  there,
       including his wife.

   15. It is accepted by the Respondent  that  the  Appellant's  case  falls
       squarely within the issue which the  Tribunal  was  deciding  in  AA,
       namely whether a non-Arab Darfuri is at risk and can be  expected  to
       return to Khartoum.  I  add  in  passing  that  the  Respondent  also
       accepts that the Appellant  remains  a  Darfuri  for  these  purposes
       notwithstanding that he has lived most of his life and all  but  four
       months before leaving Sudan in Khartoum and not Darfur and  continues
       to have family in Khartoum.  Based on what is said in  MM  (Darfuris)
       Sudan CG [2015] UKUT 00010 (IAC), ""Darfuri" is to be  understood  as
       an ethnic term relating to  origins,  not  as  a  geographical  term.
       Accordingly it covers even Darfuris who were not born in Darfur".

   16. The legal position concerning the nature of country guidance cases is
       set out by the Tribunal in EM  and  others  (returnees)  Zimbabwe  CG
       [2011] UKUT 98 (IAC) ("EM") as follows:

           "[70] The relevant Practice Direction is now Practice  Direction
           12 of the Practice Directions (Immigration and  Asylum  Chambers
           of the First-tier Tribunal and the  Upper  Tribunal),  dated  10
           February 2010, the relevant provisions of which read as follows:-



                "12.2  A reported determination of the Tribunal, the AIT  or
                the IAT bearing the letters 'CG'  shall  be  treated  as  an
                authoritative  finding  on  the   country   guidance   issue
                identified in the determination,  based  upon  the  evidence
                before the members of the Tribunal, the AIT or the IAT  that
                determine the appeal.  As  a  result,  unless  it  has  been
                expressly  superseded  or  replaced  by   any   later   'CG'
                determination, or is inconsistent with other authority  that
                is binding on the Tribunal, such a country guidance case  is
                authoritative in any  subsequent  appeal,  so  far  as  that
                appeal:-

                    (a)       relates  to  the  country  guidance  issue  in
                    question; and

                    (b)      depends upon the same or similar evidence.

                ...

                12.4   Because of the principle that like  cases  should  be
                treated in like manner,  any  failure  to  follow  a  clear,
                apparently applicable country guidance case or to  show  why
                it does not apply to the case in question is  likely  to  be
                regarded as grounds for appeal on a point of law."

           [71]  The  proposition  that  a  country  guidance  case  should
           provide the "starting point" for a subsequent case that  relates
           to the country  guidance  issue  is  inherent  in  the  Practice
           Direction (and its AIT  predecessor).   Whether  the  subsequent
           case is being "set down to review existing country guidance"  or
           not, the effect of Practice Direction 12 and section  107(3)  of
           the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 is  to  require
           the existing country guidance case to be authoritative,  to  the
           extent that the requirements in Practice Direction  12.2(a)  and
           (b) are met. This is fully in accord  with  what  the  House  of
           Lords (per Lord Brown) held in R (Hoxha) v Special  Adjudicator
           [2005] UKHL 19. If the existing country guidance is such  as  to
           favour appellants (to a greater or lesser extent),  it  will  in
           practice be for the respondent to  adduce  before  a  subsequent
           Tribunal "sufficient material to satisfy them" that the position
           has changed" (Paragraph 66).

   17. Although Hoxha is a case concerning the cessation clauses  under  the
       Refugee Convention, it is appropriate to set out what is said by Lord
       Brown in that case concerning the burden of proof in such a case:

           "That said, however, it would seem to me appropriate that in the
           initial determination of  an  asylum  claim  under  1A  (2)  the
           decision-maker, in a case where plainly the applicant  fled  his
           home country as a genuine refugee from  Convention  persecution,
           should not too readily reach the view that he could  now  safely
           be returned to it. Not only, as both Lord Slynn and  Lord  Lloyd
           observed in Adan [1999] 1 AC 293, may historic  fear  constitute
           important evidence tending to establish a current fear;  so  too
           it justifies some scepticism on the part of  the  decision-maker
           as to whether in truth  the  change  in  home  circumstances  is
           sufficiently clear and firm as to warrant the refusal of refugee
           status. That essentially is the point I was trying  to  make  in
           the Court of Appeal in Mohammed Arif v Secretary  of  State  for
           the Home Department [1999] Imm  AR  327  where,  at  p  276,  I
           suggested that, depending always on the particular facts of  the
           case, there might well be "an evidential burden on the Secretary
           of State to establish that [the asylum seeker] could  safely  be
           returned home." Although "some reservations as to the utility of
           the language of burden of proof" were  expressed  in  the  later
           Court of Appeal decision in S v Secretary of State for the Home
           Department [2002] INLR 416, 431, I remain unrepentant. It  seems
           to me only right that in a case where the Secretary of State  is
           contending that a country once plainly unsafe  (like,  say,  Sri
           Lanka or Kosovo) has now become safe, he should place before the
           appellate authority sufficient material to satisfy them of  that
           critical fact...."

   18. It is unnecessary for me to  decide  whether  Lord  Brown's  comments
       about the burden of proof apply equally to a non-cessation case since
       both representatives accepted that I should, as is  proposed  in  EM,
       take the case of AA as my starting point and it is only if  I  accept
       the Respondent's position that there is now evidence which shows that
       the Appellant does not face a real risk on  return  to  Khartoum  and
       that it would not be unduly harsh for him  to  return  there  that  I
       should dismiss the appeal.  Even if  there  were  no  burden  on  the
       Respondent, the burden of showing a risk on return for the  Appellant
       is to a low standard.  He need show only that there is a real risk of
       persecution or serious harm on return.

  THE APPELLANT'S CASE

   19. Against the above background, I can now set out  the  parties'  cases
       very shortly.  The Appellant has produced  some  background  material
       which he says shows that the Appellant continues to  be  at  risk  on
       return to Sudan.  The main thrust of his case, however, is  that  the
       FFM on which the Respondent relies  cannot  be  relied  upon  as  the
       conclusions are  not  justified  by  the  source  material,  a  lower
       standard of proof has not been applied  to  that  material  and  that
       "when the evidence is properly analysed it is clear that  a  majority
       of the sources who felt able to comment on the question  of  risk  on
       return to ethnic Darfuris did feel that they were at risk on return".
        In consequence, I am invited to affirm what is said in AA.  I should
       add that it is not the Appellant's case as put forward that it  would
       be unduly harsh for him to relocate to Khartoum (from where  he  left
       in any event).  Given that he  has  family  in  that  city,  that  is
       perhaps understandable.  The issue for me is  whether  the  Appellant
       would be at risk on account of his ethnicity.

  THE RESPONDENT'S CASE

   20. Mr Duffy accepted that, although  the  Respondent  has  produced  two
       CPINs in relation to returns to Sudan (one general and  one  relating
       specifically to Darfuris) reliance is placed in the main on  the  FFM
       (which is also the source of much of what is said in the 2017  CPIN).
       He submitted that the FFM, in particular the extracts relied upon  in
       the 2017 CPIN justify the Respondent's conclusion that  there  is  no
       longer a risk on return to Khartoum for a non-Arab Darfuri.

  THE BACKGROUND EVIDENCE

   21. I can deal very shortly with the material in the  Appellant's  bundle
       at [AB/1-105].  The FCO Travel Advice for Sudan is mainly directed at
       British nationals.   Whilst  it  does  refer  to  risk  of  arbitrary
       detention including for foreign nationals, that statement is followed
       by the advice to take care around areas which may be sensitive to the
       government such as military installations, underlining the risk to be
       to those perceived as opponents of the regime.   It  advises  against
       travel to Darfur but I am not concerned with  that.   There  is  also
       reference to demonstrations occurring at short notice in Khartoum but
       the advice given relates to risks to foreign travellers.   I  do  not
       find this evidence of any relevance to the issue I have to decide.

   22. The material at [AB/6-27] is on-line comment  and  reporting  on  the
       attitude of the Government to Darfuris, ongoing conflict in parts  of
       Darfur and ongoing displacement as a result, random attacks on  those
       seeking to return to Darfur  and  sexual  violence  against  non-Arab
       girls and women, again in Darfur.  The same is true of  the  material
       at [AB/88-105].

   23. The US State  Department  report  at  [AB/28-79]  does  contain  some
       information about incidents in Khartoum (including the 2013  protests
       which I assume are those in which the Appellant was  caught  up:  see
       [AB/30]).   However,  the  more  recent  incidents  reported   either
       occurred  in  the  conflict  zones  in  Darfur  or   involve   groups
       specifically  targeted  by  the  government,  particularly  students,
       journalists and activists. There is mention of the government  taking
       steps to have those Sudanese who oppose  it  outside  Sudan  deported
       back to Sudan ([AB/39]).  However, it is  said  that  the  three  men
       deported (who were associated with  online  news  outlets)  were  all
       released within a few months of return.  In any event, the  Appellant
       does not claim to have been involved in opposition  to  the  Sudanese
       regime whilst in the UK (or indeed whilst in  Sudan).   Although  the
       report points to discrimination  against  Darfuri  students  being  a
       "pervasive problem" ([AB/72]) and discrimination occurring  based  on
       ethnicity ([77]), the report does not point to  a  risk  to  Darfuris
       based on ethnicity alone (as opposed to that ethnicity  coupled  with
       some other  element  which  excites  interest  by  the  authorities).
       Similarly, the article at [AB/80-81] relates to arrests  of  students
       and that at [AB/83-85] to opposition protesters.

  The FFM report

   24. I turn then to the FFM report which, as I have already noted, is  the
       main focus of the Respondent's case and the Appellant's criticism  of
       that case.

   25. The FFM is a joint mission conducted by the UK Home  Office  and  the
       Danish Immigration Service which took place in Uganda,  Khartoum  and
       Kenya in February to March 2016.   The  mission  involved  interviews
       with twenty-nine sources, including various organisations, Embassies,
       Sudanese government officials and individuals.  The  delegation  also
       interviewed a UK based NGO in London.  The  representative  of  Human
       Rights  Watch  was  not  available  to  the  delegation  and  Amnesty
       International declined the invitation to meet ([AB/113]).

   26. The relevant part of  the  "Executive  Summary"  in  the  FFM  report
       ([AB/115]) is as follows:

           "... Persons with a political profile returning to Sudan may  be
           questioned   and/or   arrested   upon   arrival   at    Khartoum
           International Airport (KIA) depending on  the  person's  profile
           seeking asylum abroad would not in  itself  cause  persons  from
           Darfur and the Two Areas  problems  with  the  authorities  upon
           return except returnees from Israel.   Neither  would  returnees
           face severe difficulties with the authorities because of staying
           abroad for a longer period or travelling with emergency  papers.
           A person's ethnicity would not generally affect  the  treatment,
           he or she would receive on arrival at KIA.

           The National Intelligence and Security Service (NISS) acts  with
           impunity.   Persons  from  Darfur  and  the  Two  Areas  with  a
           political profile are at risk of being targeted by the NISS  and
           its  affiliated  militias  in  Khartoum,  particularly   student
           activists and persons with an affiliation to rebel groups.   The
           Darfuri and Two Areas communities in Khartoum are  monitored  by
           the  NISS,  principally  to  identify  those  with  a  political
           profile.  Activists at most risk are likely to be those from the
           Darfuri African tribes of Fur, Masalit and Zaghawa, and  persons
           from the Nuba Mountains.

           Persons from Darfur and the Two Areas have access to  documents,
           housing, education and healthcare  in  Khartoum.   However,  the
           quality of these services is  low  in  the  poor  neighbourhoods
           surrounding Khartoum where a majority  of  these  persons  live.
           The main factor regarding access to housing and services is  the
           person's financial resources.   There  is  in  practice  limited
           humanitarian assistance provided in Khartoum to those  displaced
           by violence elsewhere in Sudan.  Most Darfuris and persons  from
           the Two Areas work in the informal sector  as  their  access  to
           employment in a  number  of  sectors,  particularly  the  public
           sector, is limited due to discrimination as well as the  general
           adverse economic conditions in Sudan.  Those working  illegally,
           for example women selling tea without a licence, are at risk  of
           arrest and prosecution  under  Public  Order  laws  as  well  as
           harassment and extortion by the police.

           Persons from Darfur and the Two Areas, and in  particular  those
           of African descent, may experience  societal  discrimination  in
           Khartoum."

   27. If the Executive Summary stood as the  only  comment  on  the  source
       material, I would have some sympathy with  Mr  Seelhoff's  submission
       that it does not take into  account  some  of  the  views  which  are
       supportive of the Appellant's case.  However, that  has  to  be  read
       with the body of the report which expands on what is  said  and  sets
       out the various opinions given to the interviewers.  The  FFM  report
       also sets out a summary of what was said during the  interviews  and,
       as is said in the introduction to the  report,  the  notes  from  the
       meetings were forwarded  for  approval  and  amendment  so  that  the
       sources  could  amend  or  comment  on  their  statements,  all  were
       approved, save for one where a diplomatic source was  told  that  the
       note would be included in  the  report  unless  he  objected  and  no
       response  was  received.   I  am  unable  to  accept  Mr   Seelhoff's
       submission that the FFM's methodology is flawed.

   28. In any event, the FFM report merely sets out  the  findings  of  fact
       based on interviews with various sources, attributing such weight  to
       the evidence as the FFM sees fit.  I have the benefit not only of the
       FFM's views but also an (approved) summary of the evidence  on  which
       those views are based. I am therefore able  to  consider  the  source
       evidence for myself. I deal with the evidence  by  reference  to  the
       issues dealt with in the FFM report insofar as those are relevant  to
       the Appellant's case.

  Arrival at the airport

   29. In terms of what would happen  on  the  Appellant's  arrival  at  the
       airport, although the FFM notes  the  view  of  one  Western  Embassy
       source  that  the  NISS   security   check   is   conducted   without
       conversation, the two human rights lawyers from Khartoum stated  that
       the purpose of security checks was to gather information about  those
       arriving and that various questions would be asked  about  where  the
       person has been and why  and  why  they  were  travelling  to  Sudan.
       Reference to their testimony  indicates  that  they  also  said  that
       persons coming from Uganda, Kenya, Europe  or  USA  may  attract  the
       attention of the authorities when compared with persons  coming  from
       the Middle East.  The examples they gave of  this,  however,  are  of
       journalists, a  student  coming  from  Uganda  (who  it  appears  was
       suspected of involvement in  a  rebel  group)  and  another  man  who
       arrived at the airport drunk (it appears also coming from Uganda) and
       was questioned about contact with communist groups.  Both the men who
       were detained were released after two days and one day  respectively.
       The lawyers considered it less likely that a person arriving in Sudan
       now would be detained at the airport and more likely that a person of
       interest would be allowed to transit the airport and would be  picked
       up thereafter.

   30. There is reference in the testimony of  the  Darfur  Bar  Association
       ("DBA") source based in Kampala to the risk of detention of  Darfuris
       at the airport on return but that is in the context  of  "activists".
       The same source did note  that  there  is  a  lack  of  human  rights
       monitoring since the expulsion of NGOs in 2009 which made  monitoring
       of the situation for returnees more difficult.

   31.  The  International  Organisation  for  Migration  ("IOM")  which  is
       involved in monitoring voluntary returns said  that  those  returning
       with emergency travel documents would face questioning about how they
       left Sudan, what happened to their passports  etc  which  questioning
       would take 10-15 minutes after which the person was free to leave.

   32. I accept that the views of the human rights lawyers,  based  as  they
       are in Sudan itself and who are directly involved in  monitoring  and
       assisting those who fall victim to human rights violations  are  more
       deserving of weight than the opinion of  a  Western  Embassy  source,
       particularly where, as is pointed out by Mr Seelhoff, there have been
       very few returns to Sudan from Western countries.  I note though that
       the examples given of those detained at the airport is persons coming
       from Uganda who were suspected of involvement with certain groups and
       journalists who  it  is  accepted  by  all  sources  are  of  greater
       interest.

  Risk to Returning Failed Asylum Seekers

   33. I take into account, as is noted in the FFM report, when dealing with
       the  position  of  failed  asylum  seekers,  there  is  a   lack   of
       coordination in the returns operations  from  other  countries  which
       means that there is also limited monitoring of returns at the airport
       by independent groups such as UNHCR although it is noted that IOM  is
       present for voluntary returns.  Although there are  few  examples  of
       voluntary returns to Sudan, the views of IOM are deserving of  weight
       as based on "on the ground" evidence.

   34. That brings me on to the examples of returns of failed asylum seekers
       which are mentioned in the FFM.  The source  from  the  European  and
       African Centre ("EAC") said  that  failed  asylum  seekers  would  be
       questioned about their stay abroad, acquaintances there and why  they
       did not have a passport.  The source  from  the  African  Centre  for
       Peace and Justice Studies ("ACPJS") also said  that  those  returning
       without  travel  documents  or  with  escorts  would  be  subject  to
       questioning.

   35. There have been two instances of mass returns which are  referred  to
       in the FFM  report.   The  first  is  a  large-scale  deportation  of
       Sudanese nationals from Jordan in December 2015.  The exact number is
       not clear.  The other is a deportation from Israel.

   36. There is a difference of opinion about what happened to the deportees
       from Jordan.  The East and Horn  of  Africa  Human  Rights  Defenders
       Project ("EHAHRDP"), the Khartoum based  human  rights  organisation,
       DBA (Khartoum), the London based NGO,  Sudan  Democracy  First  Group
       ("SDFG") and the two human rights lawyers from Khartoum all said that
       some of the deportees were arrested and  detained  on  arrival,  that
       some may have been detained for a prolonged  period  and  ill-treated
       and/or that some were placed  on  reporting  arrangements  or  travel
       restrictions.

   37. The EHAHRDP representatives interviewed are based in Kampala and  are
       therefore outside Sudan itself.  The notes of the meeting record that
       the representatives stated that "many of  those  detained  were  non-
       political"  and  that  the  representatives  "believed"   that   some
       experienced torture but it is also noted that they could not  provide
       any evidence  relating  to  torture  or  mistreatment.  Although  the
       representatives were of the view that all asylum seekers would be  at
       risk on return, they explained that there was a lack of reporting  of
       human rights abuses in Sudan and it is therefore unclear on what this
       view is based.  In  particular,  the  representatives  also  "had  no
       information to demonstrate" that "non-political persons" in  Khartoum
       were at risk of routine arrest.

   38. The comment of the Khartoum based human rights organisation is in the
       context of the release of the deportees  and  the  intention  of  the
       authorities to paint a better picture of itself with the rest of  the
       world.  It also has to be  read  with  the  other  comments  of  that
       organisation that "in itself, applying for asylum would not  cause  a
       low-profiled failed asylum seeker problem on return"  and  that  even
       those with a political  profile  returning  to  Sudan  would  not  be
       arrested to the same extent as before (although such a  person  would
       be interrogated on return and their passport confiscated).

   39. The DBA (Khartoum) appears from the record of interview to  have  the
       most complete picture of the returns from Jordan as  the  DBA  source
       and a colleague were  present  at  the  airport  at  the  time.   The
       evidence is that the returnees were deported on 18 December 2015  and
       transferred to the Sudanese authorities still wearing  the  handcuffs
       that they had on when they arrived.   The  source  provides  evidence
       that the returnees were "frightened", that they were made to sign six
       papers without explanation of what they were and  were  told  not  to
       leave their area of residence without first informing the  police  in
       advance.   Importantly, though, the DBA source  stated  that  of  the
       1,053 persons returned, only three of  the  returnees  were  detained
       (although it is of concern that DBA did not  know  their  whereabouts
       thereafter).

   40. The London based NGO is, as its reference suggests, based in  London.
       Its information is based on "monitors" in Darfur and  Khartoum.   Its
       information is that 400-700 persons were deported forcibly, that they
       had their biometrics recorded on arrival and that whilst some persons
       had been released from detention without  problem,  others  had  not.
       However, it is not clear on  what  this  information  is  based.  The
       numbers of returnees differs from the very precise  number  given  by
       the DBA source and it is not clear how many persons are said to  have
       been detained initially or released subsequently.

   41. The SDFG is based in Uganda and  was  formed  by  a  group  of  civil
       society leaders during the 2010 elections in Sudan.  Its focus is the
       wider political situation in Sudan  but  it  works  via  intermediary
       groups based in Sudan (human rights  organisations  and  grass  roots
       groups) with whom it  has  day  to  day  contact.   Its  evidence  in
       relation to the Jordanian returnees is that there were 800 returnees,
       that they were detained and released after one  day  and  that  their
       documents had been confiscated and their names recorded  on  an  exit
       ban list.  Some of that evidence contradicts the evidence of the  DBA
       source who was present at the time.

   42. According to the two human rights lawyers, the deportees from  Jordan
       who were sent back in  handcuffs  and  escorted,  were  arrested  and
       interrogated on arrival and most were released after one to two  days
       in detention.  Again, that contradicts the DBA source evidence  about
       the level of arrests. The evidence also has to be read in the context
       of the opinion of the same lawyers to which I have  already  referred
       that arrest and detention at the airport of even those  in  whom  the
       authorities have an interest was "less likely to happen now".

   43. Other organisations, specifically, the  IOM,  EAC  and  the  Khartoum
       based journalist (1) said  that  the  returnees  had  been  processed
       smoothly.

   44. The IOM is not involved in forcible returns to Sudan.  It deals  only
       with voluntary  returns.   As  such,  their  information  about  what
       happened to those returning from  Jordan  is  based  on  hearsay,  it
       appears from the Sudanese authorities and can be given  more  limited
       weight as a result.  However, their  more  general  view  that  being
       returned as a failed asylum seeker would not on  that  account  alone
       create a problem does have  to  be  given  some  weight  given  their
       involvement in voluntary returns, albeit of limited numbers.

   45. EAC is based in Khartoum.  It was established in the UK in  2013  and
       registered in Sudan in 2014.  Its aim is to provide advocacy services
       to African migrants wishing to emigrate legally and to support  legal
       migration through effective migration management.   Whilst  that  aim
       might be said to be a reason to give less weight to its views, I note
       that the source providing the information is EAC's director  who  was
       himself a political refugee from Sudan (although  not  necessarily  a
       Darfuri).  He also provides two specific examples of persons who  had
       returned to Sudan, one in  particular  having  no  documentation  and
       apparently having some low-profile political involvement.  He reports
       that the persons concerned were allowed to leave the airport  without
       being  detained  although  the  person  with  no  documentation   was
       questioned because the authorities  had  to  establish  that  he  was
       Sudanese.  The EAC director said that a number of the returnees  from
       Darfur had returned there although he had only visited one  of  their
       number.   He also mentions a return of illegal entrants from  Algeria
       in mid-January 2016 who faced no problems at the airport.

   46. The Khartoum based journalist (1) is from Darfur and lives and  works
       in Khartoum.  He has not worked as a journalist for  five  years  but
       works as an activist.   He did  not  have  any  specific  information
       about how failed asylum seekers from Darfur were treated  on  return,
       but  he  had  heard  from  some  of  the  returnees  that,  following
       procedural checks at the airport, they had been allowed to leave  and
       return to their families.   He  did  though  note  that  attempts  to
       contact returnees to interview them had failed because they could not
       be found.  He had assumed that they had left Sudan again.

   47. The Israeli deportees are in a  different  category.  The  two  human
       rights lawyers based in Khartoum provided evidence of a number of the
       Israeli deportees being subjected  to  detention  and  ill-treatment.
       However, that has to be seen in the context of the  comments  of  the
       two lawyers that treatment on arrival  "depended  on  three  factors:
       political opposition activities, affiliation  with  rebel  groups  or
       residence in Israel". That is consistent with, for example, the views
       of EAC that such persons would be viewed  with  suspicion  that  they
       might be "spies" which may be understandable given what is  described
       by the international consultant  based  in  Khartoum  as  a  "general
       'Arabification'" of Sudan.

  Lack of Exit Visa

   48. Although it was not accepted  that  the  Appellant  did  leave  Sudan
       illegally, I take into account what is said in the FFM  report  about
       whether there is a likely risk arising due to lack of an exit visa in
       a passport.

   49. The evidence from the Western Embassy (C) although based on a limited
       sample, is perhaps the best  (ie  most  detailed)  evidence  of  what
       happens  when  a  person  returns  at  the  airport   in   terms   of
       documentation procedure. That evidence is that  there  is  a  lengthy
       administrative procedure which may involve the payment  of  a  bribe.
       The source describes a procedure involving  three  types  of  checks.
       First, there is an immigration desk which involves a check of  travel
       documents including for exit visas.  Second, the NISS desk,  involves
       a check for a person's name  against  a  computerised  list.   Third,
       there is a check for goods including alcohol.   The  source  did  not
       consider that someone travelling  on  an  emergency  travel  document
       would face problems on that account.

   50. The check for exit visas is contrary to the evidence of the  Khartoum
       based human rights organisation that the authorities would  not  look
       for such a stamp on arrival.  Nor would it be an issue that a  person
       was travelling on emergency papers.

   51. In any event, as was pointed out by the source from  Western  Embassy
       (B), it was not probable that a person would leave  Sudan  or  return
       there without such a stamp.  As the source pointed out, if  a  person
       had bothered to obtain a passport, he would spend the time and  money
       necessary to get an exit stamp.

   52. If a person did not have an exit stamp, as is pointed out by Khartoum
       Journalist (3), the lack of such a  stamp  is  contrary  to  passport
       regulations for which Sudanese law provides a punishment of a fine or
       imprisonment for up to six months.  The  same  source  notes  however
       that for a person with  no  political  profile,  there  would  be  no
       problem  obtaining  an  exit  visa  (which  further  undermines   the
       Appellant's case that he did not have such a visa).   In  any  event,
       there is no evidence about how the law is applied and in the view  of
       the source from EAC, the punishment would be a fine (although I  note
       that is based on assumption rather than direct evidence).

  Risk Based on Ethnicity as a Non-Arab Darfuri

   53. I turn then to the nub of the Appellant's case that he  would  be  at
       risk on return due to his Darfuri ethnicity.

   54. As noted at [3.3] of the FFM report, there  are  four  sources  whose
       opinion was that persons from Darfur could be at risk of treatment by
       NISS or targeted by the authorities  due  to  their  ethnicity  only.
       Those are the London Based NGO, Crisis Group,  Faisal  Elbagir  (JHR)
       and EHAHRDP.

   55. According to the source from the London Based  NGO,  there  were  two
       reasons why a person from  Darfur  could  be  targeted  even  if  not
       politically  active.   The  first  was  that  "ethnicity  was  highly
       politicised" and the second that "the system by  which  the  NISS  in
       Sudan operated was arbitrary".  In relation to the first,  the  point
       made is that Darfuris are viewed  as  potential  enemies  because  of
       their perceived support of  those  groups  opposed  to  the  Sudanese
       government. The second reason is based on the law providing  immunity
       to all security and military personnel.  However, although the source
       refers to evidence being irrelevant in  some  cases  where  civilians
       were prosecuted, the FFM report notes that "the source did  not  have
       any information on specific cases in which non-political persons were
       targeted by the authorities, solely on  account  of  their  place  of
       origin or ethnic or tribal background".  The examples of recent cases
       of persecution listed by the London Based NGO are all ones  involving
       either students (who all interlocutors accept are a group of interest
       to the authorities) or activists or both.

   56. Crisis Group is an NGO with a regional office based in Nairobi.  Some
       of their information comes from  sources  inside  Sudan  via  monthly
       communication but the source admitted that the organisation collected
       information based on speaking with sources outside  the  country  and
       therefore that their observations "were largely limited to  anecdotal
       accounts and secondary sources".

   57. In any event, the evidence provided is that the organisation "has  no
       information on whether a person's ethnic or tribal affiliation  would
       give rise to increased scrutiny when seeking to arrive or  leave  the
       country but considered it likely".  The source went on  to  say  that
       "whilst the whole community of Darfuris...in Khartoum were under  the
       NISS' radar, it was first and foremost politically active persons who
       would be targeted by the authorities.   The  source  added  that  the
       level of risk also depended on the  political  circumstances  at  the
       time".  It was also noted that the organisation had no evidence which
       specifically showed that  there  was  mistreatment  or  human  rights
       violations  against  ordinary  civilians  from  Darfur.   The  source
       considered though that those from the Fur  and  Zaghawa  tribes  were
       likely to be perceived as "rebel sympathisers" because  those  tribes
       were still commonly associated with Darfuri rebel groups.

   58. Faisal Elbagir is a human rights defender and journalist working  for
       the NGO Journalist for Human Rights based in Kenya.  He is in contact
       with other journalists and human rights defenders in Sudan, including
       Khartoum through "informal networks".  He was last in Sudan in  2009.



   59. Mr Elbagir's view is that all persons from Darfur would  be  at  risk
       from the authorities "although he recognised  that  in  practice  the
       authorities lacked  the  resources  and  manpower  to  systematically
       target the huge  number  of  persons  from  Darfur  ...who  lived  in
       Khartoum".  Mr Elbagir acknowledged that there was no official report
       of targeting of an ordinary civilian from Darfur based only on ethnic
       affiliation and he did not himself have details of such persons being
       arrested or mistreated by the Sudanese authorities; he said that such
       cases could be found on social media and accounts from families where
       they were able to speak out.  He said that he was sometimes  able  to
       verify such reports independently but did not give  examples  of  any
       cases which had been verified.

   60. The source from EHAHRDP was of the view that all asylum seekers  from
       Darfur would be at risk  on  return  but  admitted  that  he  had  no
       information to demonstrate that non-political persons were  routinely
       arrested.  He was of the view that all tribes would be  similarly  at
       risk as it was difficult to distinguish between tribes because of the
       complexity of tribal dynamics.

   61. Other organisations considered that being from Darfur might lead to a
       perception of rebel sympathies which would lead to greater monitoring
       of activities.  For example, the source from SDFG expressed the  view
       that "those from non-Arab tribes in Darfur...were perceived opponents
       of the government and could be targeted".  The source did  go  on  to
       say that it was "predominantly politically active  persons  who  were
       targeted" but also said that, following the JEM  attack  in  Omdurman
       (in 2008) "the NISS strategy changed and ordinary citizens were  also
       suspected in Khartoum".  I note that it was in response to the events
       following the 2008 attack which led to  the  Respondent's  concession
       which itself led to the country guidance in AA.

   62. The ACPJS considered that those from Darfur were more  likely  to  be
       suspected of supporting or joining the rebels but went on to say that
       "[t]ribal origin would be less of a factor  for  persons  from  minor
       African tribes, less commonly associated with rebel groups...".

   63. The DBA source based in Uganda provided evidence that  "persons  from
       the Fur, Masalit and Zaghawa tribes were generally suspected of being
       connected to rebel groups and hence, were more likely to be monitored
       and at risk of being targeted by the NISS".  However, the source went
       on to say that "not everyone from these tribes were monitored, and it
       was mainly activists  who  were  under  the  government's  radar  and
       targeted".  He said that "[p]ersons from  other  Darfuri  tribes  ...
       would not generally be perceived as opposed  to  the  regime  and  so
       would be at no greater risk of being monitored."

   64. The source from a civil society NGO considered that there were  "only
       certain persons in the Fur, Zaghawa and Masalit communities whom  the
       authorities monitored and targeted".  The  source  had  himself  been
       targeted.  He is from Darfur and is a Fur tribal leader.  He said  he
       was being monitored due to his opposition to  a  proposed  Government
       referendum.

   65. The view of the two human rights lawyers from Khartoum was that those
       Darfuris  from  the  Zaghawi,  Masalit  or  Fur   tribes   would   be
       interrogated more thoroughly on  arrival  but  that  "deportees  with
       neither political affiliation, nor  connection  to  rebel  groups  or
       residence in Israel... were free to go upon arrival and questioning".



   66. The Khartoum based human rights organisation said  that  "[r]egarding
       profile of persons from Darfur...the NISS generally targeted  persons
       who were politically active" although said that the "NISS  were  more
       suspicious towards those from Darfur...Accordingly,  the  NISS  would
       most probably treat activists from  those  areas  more  harshly  than
       others when they were arrested."

   67. The Khartoum based journalist (1) is himself a Darfuri.   The  source
       said that "tribal and ethnic affiliation did not play  a  significant
       role any more" when looking at monitoring and targeting by NISS.  The
       source also said that "it was the type and level  of  activity  which
       was the crucial factor in this respect. Anyone who was active against
       the government could be targeted and detained  regardless  of  tribal
       and ethnic affiliation."  That view is largely mirrored  by  Khartoum
       based journalist (2), also a Darfuri, although the source  did  opine
       that "the NISS were targeting Darfuris more than other groups".

   68. Similarly, Khartoum Journalist (3) also said that those  from  Darfur
       were not targeted although IDPs from those areas "were more likely to
       be suspected of rebel affiliations and treated more harshly  if  they
       did come to the attention of the NISS".  The source considered that a
       distinction could be  drawn  between  those  Darfuris  who  lived  in
       Khartoum for some time prior to the outbreak of the conflict in  2003
       and who were integrated there and IDPs coming from Darfur thereafter.
        The Appellant of course falls into the former category having  moved
       to Khartoum when he was aged only four months in 1992.

   69. The UN official based in Khartoum  expressed  the  view  that  tribal
       affiliation  was  "a  source  of  suspicion   for   the   authorities
       particularly if a person was of African descent".  The source went on
       to say however that those from the Zaghawa, Masalit  and  Fur  tribes
       were more likely to be suspected of supporting rebel groups and  that
       not everyone from those  groups  would  be  suspected  and  targeted;
       "[t]he NISS only targeted those who were suspected of being  involved
       in specific activities supporting the rebel groups".

   70. The UNHCR source had no information  about  the  possible  impact  of
       tribal and ethnic affiliation but expressed the opinion that "it  was
       difficult in practice to treat persons differently on  the  basis  of
       their tribal affiliation...in  Darfur  alone  there  were  about  400
       different tribal groups, and it was difficult to  say  which  one  of
       these groups would be targeted and which one not...".   According  to
       the  UNHCR  source,  "persons  from   Darfur...did   not   face   any
       difficulties from the authorities when travelling to Khartoum."

   71. The source from Western Embassy (A) was of the opinion that  "[i]f  a
       person from Darfur ...was not involved in any activity they would not
       be at significant risk of being targeted due to his or her tribal and
       ethnic affiliation...the main reason for targeting  someone  was  not
       their tribal and ethnic background,  but  rather  their  activities."
       That view is mirrored by the source from  Western  Embassy  (B)  that
       "persons with no political profile or low-profiled persons would most
       probably not face any difficulties with the authorities upon return".
        The source also said that "it was  primarily  returnees'  activities
       ... which was most important; rather than his or her tribal or ethnic
       background."   The  source  did  accept  as  likely  that  the  whole
       community of Darfuris in Khartoum was monitored by the NISS  and  its
       informants, particularly persons from certain tribes such as the  Fur
       tribe but considered that if a person  was  simply  a  Darfuri  doing
       business in Khartoum with no political profile, the person would  not
       have any problems with the  authorities.   The  source  from  Western
       Embassy (C) considered that  Darfuris  may  face  "some  hustles"  on
       arrival at the airport due to ethnicity but  when  asked  to  clarify
       said only  that  they  would  probably  be  "treated  impolitely  and
       probably asked to pay a bribe".

   72. In the main, the views of those interviewed were that  the  focus  of
       the authorities in relation to Darfuris is on students,  particularly
       those who had participated in demonstrations, human rights and  other
       activists and  Government  opponents  and  journalists,  particularly
       those who reported on human rights issues.

   73. As I have pointed out at [10] above, that Darfuris were  at  risk  on
       return to Khartoum in AA  was  conceded  by  the  Respondent  due  to
       arbitrary arrests of such persons based  on  their  ethnicity  alone.
       Some of the sources cited in the FFM report dealt with the  issue  of
       whether such practice continues.  The two human rights  lawyers  from
       Khartoum said there had not been any incidents on a similar scale  to
       2008 and that, even in 2013 following popular  protests  in  Khartoum
       and elsewhere in Sudan the level of arrests was "less intensive" than
       in 2008.   That is expanded upon by Mr Elbagir of JHR who  says  that
       the level of arrests depended on the security situation  in  Khartoum
       and that at the time of the FFM interview the numbers  detained  were
       definitely lower than the 250 persons detained in 2008.  Although  he
       pointed to similar numbers being detained in 2013, those were he said
       mostly youths and students.  This is of course the demonstrations  in
       which the Appellant was caught up albeit not directly.

   74. The Khartoum based human rights organisation reported that, in  2011,
       there had been some cases of large-scale arrests with no  proof  that
       the individuals were linked with  rebel  groups  but  confirmed  that
       there had not been any large-scale arbitrary arrests since 2011.

   75. The Khartoum based journalist  (1)  said  that  there  had  not  been
       similar incidents since 2008 and that  "[t]oday  people  were  mostly
       individually targeted depending on their activities".   The  Khartoum
       based journalist (2) said that "although many  Darfuri  students  had
       been arrested arbitrarily in recent year, there  had  not  been  mass
       arbitrary arrests of  civilians  in  Khartoum  since  the  attack  on
       Omdurman in 2008".   The  Khartoum  based  journalist  (3)  similarly
       confirmed that there had not been any cases "on that scale".

   76. The source from SDFG "[w]hen asked about prevalence of mass arbitrary
       arrest of people similar to those of  May  2008,  following  the  JEM
       attack on Omdurman, ..explained that the situation was much worse  in
       May 2008.  At that time the authorities stopped  busses,  looking  at
       people's faces and  detaining  people  based  purely  on  their  skin
       colour.  SDFG emphasised that this response from the authorities came
       as a reaction to the particular threat  at  that  time.   The  source
       added that at the present  time  large-scale  arrests  only  occurred
       within the student community, due to their activity."

  Obtaining of a National ID Number

   77. Finally, I come to a discrete point raised  by  Mr  Seelhoff  in  his
       closing submissions concerning the Appellant's access to  a  national
       ID number which is required to access services and  to  obtain  other
       types of documents such as a passport.

   78. The National Human  Rights  Monitors  Organisation  ("NHRMO")  is  an
       organisation based in Uganda.  Its representative was last  in  Sudan
       in 2011 and the organisation  has  no  monitors  inside  Sudan.   The
       evidence of its source was based on anecdotal information from  other
       sources in Khartoum.

   79. The NHRMO source said that the  National  Number  was  introduced  in
       2011.  This is a civil registration system which requires a person to
       complete a detailed questionnaire about background,  religion,  place
       of origin, ethnicity and political  affiliation.   According  to  the
       NHRMO source, there were no "significant logistical difficulties"  to
       obtaining a National Number and  no  discrimination  to  prevent  any
       Sudanese national from obtaining one.  According to the  source,  the
       fact that many Darfuris do not have one is because  some  groups  had
       voiced opposition to it and there was suspicion that the  system  was
       introduced as a way of monitoring.  Although the National Number  was
       required to access public services and to deal  with  civil  matters,
       the source was of the view that it was not needed to rent property or
       access healthcare services.

   80. The Professor in law based in Khartoum was of the view  that  it  was
       difficult for Darfuris to  obtain  the  National  Number  because  of
       difficulties in proving  that  they  ethnically  belonged  to  tribal
       groups which belonged in Sudan.  Particularly for those  coming  from
       the conflict areas (which of course the Appellant is not), there  may
       be problems accessing the documentation needed to obtain  a  National
       Number.

   81. I can deal with this issue quite shortly.  The Appellant  has  family
       living in Khartoum, namely his parents  and  his  wife.   I  have  no
       evidence that the Appellant would not be able to  access  a  National
       Number, if necessary calling upon evidence that those  persons  would
       hold about where and when he was born and that he is indeed Sudanese.
        Further, unlike an IDP, the Appellant would be  returning  from  the
       UK, either with a passport which would show that he is Sudanese or if
       he does not have one or cannot obtain one,  on  an  Emergency  Travel
       Document which would also be sufficient indication that the  Sudanese
       authorities accept that he is from that country.

  DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

   82. As I indicated at the outset, the decision in AA  forms  my  starting
       point.  The finding in that case is that all non-Arab Darfuris are at
       risk on return due to their ethnicity.  However, that  was  based  on
       the Respondent's concession at that time, itself based on  events  in
       2008/9 when the authorities carried out mass,  arbitrary  arrests  of
       non-Arab Darfuris and expulsions of NGOs  which  led  to  a  lack  of
       reporting of human rights abuses.

   83. I have to decide  whether  the  Respondent  has  produced  sufficient
       evidence which shows that the position has changed.  In  reaching  my
       conclusions, I do not intend  to  provide  any  specific  or  general
       guidance relating to the situation of non-Arab Darfuris returning  to
       Khartoum.  That is the purpose of the pending country guidance  case.
       My decision is based on the particular facts of  this  case  and  the
       background evidence before me.

   84. As I have indicated, the focus of the Respondent's case  is  the  FFM
       Report and the focus of the Appellant's case is that, when one  reads
       the material underlying the FFM Report, that report does not  provide
       sufficient evidence that the position has changed.  I have  explained
       at [21] to [23] above, why I do not accept that  the  other  material
       put forward by the Appellant assists me in my  consideration  of  the
       current position for non-Arab Darfuris who claim to be at risk solely
       on account of ethnicity.

   85. Dealing then with the FFM report generally, that relies on the  views
       expressed by a number of interlocutors:  individuals,  organisations,
       diplomatic sources and sources from within the regime.   I  have  not
       referred to the views of those from within the regime in my  analysis
       of the evidence as I accept that this is not a source to which I  can
       give weight.  In relation to the other sources, I have set out in  my
       analysis of the evidence the type and location of the individuals and
       organisations as well as their aims and motivations and the source of
       their information.  I consider I can give  more  weight  to  evidence
       which comes from individuals and organisations  themselves  based  in
       Sudan, particularly Khartoum, or  whose  information  comes  directly
       from  sources  within  the  country  as  opposed  to  the  views   of
       individuals and organisations outside the country  whose  comment  is
       not underpinned by evidence from sources within the country.

   86. Although some of the sources did  refer  to  questioning  of  persons
       arriving at the airport, those sources who said that there was a risk
       of detention at that juncture did so in  the  context  of  activists,
       those suspected of involvement in opposition to the  authorities  and
       journalists, all of whom are accepted by all interlocutors to  be  of
       interest to the authorities rather than in the context of a  non-Arab
       Darfuri with no profile other than his ethnicity.

   87. I recognise that there have been a limited number of returns to Sudan
       from the West and therefore there is  limited  evidence  as  to  what
       happens to Darfuris who return having failed in their asylum claims.

   88. There have been two large-scale return operations  of  Darfuris,  one
       from Israel and one from Jordan.  I have explained at [47] why  I  do
       not consider that the evidence about what happened to those returning
       from Israel to be of relevance to what would  happen  to  a  non-Arab
       Darfuri returning from the UK.

   89. There is conflicting information about the returns from Jordan.   The
       most complete information and that with the weightiest  source  comes
       from DBA (Khartoum) as the source and his colleague were  present  at
       the airport at the time of the returns.  Of  1053  persons  returned,
       only three were  detained  and  although  the  whereabouts  of  those
       persons is apparently unknown, it is likely in view  of  the  limited
       number of detentions, that those persons were  specifically  targeted
       as being of interest to the authorities.

   90. Although I accept that the views of the EAC's director may be clouded
       by the aim of  that  organisation,  he  also  provided  two  specific
       examples of Darfuri failed asylum seekers who  had  returned  without
       incident.

   91. The Appellant says that he left Sudan without an  exit  visa.   Given
       the findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge (whose findings I  have
       preserved) about the Appellant's motivation for leaving Sudan,  I  do
       not accept  that  the  evidence  shows  that  this  would  cause  the
       Appellant problems on return.   As observed by  the  Western  Embassy
       source, it is unlikely that a person would go to the trouble to get a
       passport to leave and not also obtain an  exit  visa.   The  Khartoum
       based human rights organisation  also  said  that  neither  this  nor
       travelling on emergency papers would give rise  to  any  problems  on
       arrival.

   92. When read as a whole, the evidence does not show that  the  Appellant
       would be at real risk of coming to the interest of the authorities on
       arrival at the airport either because he is a failed asylum seeker or
       because he has no exit stamp (if he in fact does not).  I  note  that
       if he no longer has a current passport, it is  likely  in  any  event
       that he would be removed on an emergency travel document.

   93. I now turn to the issue at the heart of the Appellant's case that  he
       would be targeted by the authorities  on  account  of  his  ethnicity
       alone.   I begin by noting that none of those interviewed by the  FFM
       said that the situation remained as it was in 2008.

   94. The organisations who provided the evidence most  supportive  of  the
       Appellant's claim to be at risk on account of his ethnicity are:

        1) A London based NGO whose examples are all ones involving  groups
           of particular  interest  and  who  could  not  provide  specific
           examples  of  non-political  persons  being  targeted   due   to
           ethnicity.


        2) A Kenyan based NGO  whose  representative  admitted  that  their
           information  was  based  on  anecdotal  accounts  and  secondary
           sources and in any event said that targeting by the  authorities
           was based on political activism or suspicion based on particular
           tribal associations (and the Appellant is from the  Berti  tribe
           and not from one of those tribes  of  central  interest  to  the
           authorities).


        3) A Kenyan based journalist whose information comes from "informal
           networks" in Sudan and who has not been to Sudan since 2009.  He
           was unable to provide verified  reports  of  any  persons  being
           targeted on the basis of ethnicity alone.


        4)  EHAHRDP  (based  in  Khartoum)  who  had  no   information   to
           demonstrate that those with no political profile were  routinely
           arrested.


   95. The Appellant is not  an  activist  or  someone  who  has  shown  any
       political opposition to the authorities.  He says that  he  would  be
       targeted because he would be perceived to be an opponent  because  he
       is a non-Arab Darfuri.

   96. Some sources interviewed by the  FFM  did  identify  ethnicity  as  a
       possible cause for interest.  However,  SDFG  accepted  that  it  was
       "predominantly" those with a political profile who would be targeted,
       ACPJS said that tribal origin would be "less of a factor"  for  those
       from tribes not generally associated with rebel groups  (said  to  be
       Fur, Masalit and Zaghawa; the Appellant is  not  from  one  of  those
       groups).  In any event, DBA said that it would  not  be  all  persons
       even from those tribes who would be monitored; the  main  factor  was
       whether an  individual  was  perceived  as  an  opponent.   That  was
       confirmed by the civil society NGO source who is also  a  Fur  tribal
       leader and who was being monitored, according to him, not because  of
       his ethnicity but because of his opposition to a proposed  Government
       referendum.

   97. The views of others do not support the Appellant's case.  Their views
       are that it is political activism which is the factor of interest  to
       the authorities and that, whilst tribal  affiliation  might  lead  to
       some suspicion (particularly for those  from  the  Fur,  Masalit  and
       Zaghawa tribes), that alone  would  not  lead  to  targeting  by  the
       authorities.

   98. UNHCR had no information about tribal and  ethnic  affiliation  as  a
       factor but did not consider that tribal affiliation could be used  to
       differentiate between groups from Darfur.  The UNHCR source said that
       those travelling from Darfur  to  Khartoum  did  not  experience  any
       difficulties.

   99. When the evidence is considered as a whole, it does not  support  the
       Appellant's case that he would be at real risk from  the  authorities
       now based on his ethnicity alone.  The  limited  source  evidence  to
       which I refer at [94] above was unable to provide  specific  examples
       of persons being targeted on  grounds  of  ethnicity  alone  and  the
       examples which were given are of persons who fall into  other  groups
       who all accept are likely to be at risk.

  100. I recognise that the Appellant claims that he was  arrested  in  2013
       for  helping  other  students  who  were   participating   in   other
       demonstrations and that part of his claim  was  accepted  (and  those
       factual  findings  preserved).    However,   he   was   not   himself
       participating in the  demonstrations  and  he  was  released  by  the
       authorities, he says because the authorities "had nothing on  [him]".
       He was not detained again (according to the  factual  findings  which
       are preserved) during his reporting thereafter.   Based  on  his  own
       claim, the Appellant is not someone who would  be  perceived  by  the
       authorities as an activist or opponent.

  101. Mr Seelhoff also raised the issue whether the Appellant could  get  a
       National ID number.  He did so only in his closing submissions.   The
       Appellant has a family in  Sudan  who  could  provide  the  necessary
       information so that he could obtain that document.   He  also  has  a
       family based in Khartoum to who he could return.

  102. For the above reasons, I conclude that the  Respondent  has  provided
       sufficient evidence to show that the Appellant is no longer  at  real
       risk on grounds of his ethnicity as a non-Arab Darfuri on  return  to
       Sudan.  I also conclude that the Appellant has not shown that  he  is
       at real risk on return for any other reason.

DECISION

The Appellant's appeal is dismissed

Signed           [pic] Dated:  23 October 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith



                        ANNEX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/00374/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On Monday 25 June 2018                        |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                     OOA

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Seelhoff of A Seelhoff Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Although an anonymity direction was not made by the First-tier Tribunal,  as
a protection claim, it is appropriate to make that  direction.   Unless  and
until a tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is  granted
anonymity. No report of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify him or any member of his family. This  direction  applies,  amongst
others, to both parties. Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead
to contempt of court proceedings.


                    ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

Background

    1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
       E M  M  Smith  promulgated  on  23  February  2018  ("the  Decision")
       dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the  Respondent's  decision
       dated 1 October 2017 refusing his protection claim.

    2. The Appellant is a national of Sudan.  His protection claim is  based
       on a fear of the Sudanese authorities arising from his  participation
       in demonstrations which he says led to his arrest.  He also claims to
       be at risk on the basis that he did not wish to be  conscripted  into
       military service.  The Appellant is also accepted to  be  a  non-Arab
       Darfuri.  As such, he asserts that he cannot be returned to Khartoum.
         That assertion is consistent with the  conclusion  reached  in  the
       country guidance cases of AA (Non-Arab Darfuris -  relocation)  Sudan
       CG [2009] UKAIT 00056 as maintained by MM (Darfuris) Sudan CG  [2015]
       UKUT 00010 (IAC) ("the Country Guidance Cases").

    3. The Respondent, relying on what is said in  his  Country  Policy  and
       Information Note  entitled  "Country  Policy  and  Information  Note:
       Sudan: Non Arab Darfuris" published in August 2017 ("the CPIN")  says
       that there is evidence post-dating the Country Guidance  Cases  which
       justifies a departure from the conclusions in those cases.

    4. The Judge did not accept that the Appellant is at individualised risk
       on return.  He found the Appellant not credible in that  regard.   He
       also found that the evidence post-dating the Country  Guidance  Cases
       was sufficient to justify a departure from the conclusions  in  those
       cases,  particularly  since  the  Appellant  had  not  produced   any
       background evidence undermining what is said in the CPIN.

    5. The Appellant's grounds are two-fold and focus only  on  that  latter
       finding.   The  Appellant  contends  that  the  Judge's   conclusions
       regarding the Country Guidance Cases and the CPIN are irrational  and
       that the Judge has failed to provide adequate reasons  for  departing
       from the Country Guidance Cases.  It is also argued that the  Judge's
       conclusions  relating  to  sufficiency   of   protection   from   the
       authorities on return are irrational, having regard to the background
       evidence and that, here too, that material is said to  undermine  the
       CPIN.

    6. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Mailer
       on 19 March 2018 in the following terms so far as relevant:

           "... [3]     The  grounds  assert  that  the  Judge  'completely
           disregarded' AA [2009], supra, which  was  confirmed  in  MM  in
           2015.  Nor did the Judge consider IM and AI 2016  that  Khartoum
           remains unsafe for  people  from  the  Darfur  area.   That  was
           'sharpened up' in the 2009 decision in AA, and was  extended  in
           2015 in MM.

           [4]   It is arguable that  the  Judge  has  not  given  adequate
           reasons for not following the country  guidance  cases  referred
           to.

           [5]   All grounds are arguable."

    7. The appeal comes before me to determine whether there is  a  material
       error of law in the Decision and if so either to re-make the decision
       or to remit to the First-tier Tribunal to do so.

  DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

    8. The Judge referred to the Country  Guidance  Cases  at  [33]  of  the
       Decision where he said this:

           "Mr Madanhi argued that  the  authorities  supported  that  this
           appellant should not be returned to Sudan because he is  a  non-
           Arab Darfuris.   The  Country  Guidance  case  of  AA  (Non-Arab
           Darfuris - relocation) Sudan CG [2009] UKAIT 00056 held that all
           non-Arab Darfuris are at  risk  of  persecution  in  Darfur  and
           cannot reasonably be expected to relocate  elsewhere  in  Sudan.
           Ms Akhtar argued that there is now good evidence to depart  from
           AA which was promulgated in 2015.  The evidence now  shows  that
           whilst this appellant  could  not  return  to  Darfur  he  could
           relocate to Khartoum.  Mr  Madanhi  argued  that  AA  should  be
           followed.  This was supported in  MM (Darfuris) Sudan CG  [2015]
           UKUT 00010.  The respondent in the letter of  refusal  sets  out
           (paragraphs 50-62) why AA need not be followed.  Mr Madanhi  had
           no evidence to argue against the latest material  in  regard  to
           Sudan.  He accepted that the appellant had said in evidence that
           his family live peacefully in Sudan where they  have  lived  for
           many years.

    9. The Judge, at [16] to [31] of the  Decision,  gave  reasons  for  the
       conclusion  at  [32]  that  the  Appellant's  claim   of   being   at
       individualised risk was not credible.  The grounds do  not  challenge
       that conclusion or the reasoning which led to it.   Similarly,  there
       is no challenge to the finding at  [34]  of  the  Decision  that  the
       Appellant is not at risk  on  account  of  being  liable  to  perform
       military service.

   10. In relation to the finding of risk  as  a  non-Arab  Darfuri,  as  Mr
       Seelhoff pointed out, the approach of the Judge discloses  an  error.
       It is for the Judge to provide reasons why he is entitled  to  depart
       from extant  country  guidance;  not  for  an  appellant  to  provide
       evidence to rebut the later evidence on which the  Respondent  relies
       as reason to depart.  Here, the Judge has failed to provide  adequate
       reasons.  He relies only on what is said in the Respondent's  refusal
       letter which, as Mr  Seelhoff  pointed  out,  consists  only  of  the
       conclusions of the Respondent on the Appellant's case relying on  the
       CPIN.  The Judge has not carried out any analysis for himself of what
       the CPIN says, either  taken  alone  or  alongside  other  background
       material which he had  before  him  (for  example,  the  letter  from
       "Waging Peace" dated 24 October 2017 which appears at [AB/17-22]).

   11. Mr Kandola very fairly conceded that the Judge has erred  by  failing
       to give adequate reasons for his conclusion on  this  aspect  of  the
       claim.

   12. Based on that concession and my own conclusion about the adequacy  of
       reasons, I accepted at the end of the hearing  that  the  grounds  do
       disclose a material error of law.  I indicated however that  I  would
       not  set  aside  that  part  of  the  Decision   dealing   with   the
       individualised claim of risk on return as there is  no  challenge  to
       the findings there made.  As noted above, those  findings  appear  at
       [16] to [32] and [34] of the Decision.  I preserve the findings there
       made.

   13. There was some discussion relating to re-making of the Decision.   In
       particular, I considered with the parties whether there  was  a  need
       for country guidance on this issue  and  I  indicated  that  I  would
       consider this further.  As it transpires, there is no  necessity  for
       me to do so in this case as there is a pending country guidance  case
       (AAR (Sudanese Non-Arab Darfuris - relocation) Sudan:  PA/08701/2017)
       which it is intended will provide further  guidance  on  this  issue.
       That is presently listed for hearing in August 2018, subject to  case
       management directions taking effect on time.

   14. I have made directions for re-making of the Decision in  this  appeal
       below.  I have not expressly stayed the appeal pending the outcome of
       the further country guidance appeal in  case  that  appeal  does  not
       subsequently proceed.  The timetable given below should however allow
       sufficient time for the hearing in that case to  proceed  and  for  a
       decision to be taken in that regard.  If not, then it is open to  the
       parties to seek an adjournment of any further hearing in this  appeal
       on that basis.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal Decision involves the making of a material error  on
a point of law. I therefore set aside the First-tier  Tribunal  Decision  of
Judge E M M Smith promulgated on 23 February 2018.  I preserve the  findings
made at [16] to [32]  and  [34]  of  the  Decision.  I  make  the  following
directions for the re-making of the decision.

DIRECTIONS

    1. By 10 August 2018, both parties shall  file  with  the  Tribunal  and
       serve on the other party any further evidence on which reliance is to
       be placed at the resumed hearing.

    2. By 24 August 2018, both parties shall  file  with  the  Tribunal  and
       serve on the other party a skeleton argument  referring  to  relevant
       case authorities and the evidence on which reliance is placed.

    3. The resumed hearing will be listed on the first available date  after
       31 August 2018.  Time estimate is half a day.  An interpreter is  not
       required  and   will   not   be   booked   unless   the   Appellant's
       representatives inform the Tribunal at least fourteen days before the
       resumed hearing that the  Appellant  will  be  called  to  give  oral
       evidence.

    4. Liberty to both parties to apply for further directions.

Signed           [pic] Dated:  25 June 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
