
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00765/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reason Promulgated        |
|on 15 April 2021                     |19 May 2021                          |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between
                                     WI
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jorro instructed by Sunrise Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant  appeals  with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Cruthers ('the Judge') promulgated on 28 January  2021
       in which the Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal on protection and
       human rights grounds, relied upon as an exception to  the  order  for
       the appellants deportation from the UK.
    2. There is no challenge to the  Judge's  dismissal  of  the  protection
       appeal for which the Judge  gives  sustainable  reasons.   There  was
       within the  protection  appeal  an  issue  concerning  a  section  72
       certificate in relation to which the Judge found "as not  valid"  the
       respondent's attempts to exclude the appellant  from  refugee  status
       pursuant to section 72 of the 2002 Act.
    3. The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, is subject to an order for  his
       deportation from the United  Kingdom  following  his  conviction  for
       participating in a money laundering operation  which  the  Sentencing
       Judge noted involved �1.7 million. The appellant did not  appeal  his
       conviction or sentence of 4  years  imprisonment.  The  core  of  the
       appellant's case on human rights grounds, relied upon as an exception
       to the order for his deportation, was noted by the Judge  at  [9]  in
       the following terms:

             "9.  For the purposes of article 8 of the European  Convention
                  on Human Rights ("ECHR"), ECHR the appellant relies on his
                  private life built up since he first came  to  the  UK  in
                  September 2001. More significantly, the  appellant  relies
                  on his ongoing family life with NG and their two  children
                  in common - AR and E (dates of birth 1 September 2008  and
                  15 November 2009). The appellant  has  three  children  in
                  total (his evidence on 5 January) - the eldest  child,  M,
                  was born on 10 October 2003 and usually still  lives  with
                  her mother - the appellant's now ex-wife, Ms AA.  Usually,
                  the appellant would spend time with M every second weekend
                  but currently M's mother is in Pakistan and the  appellant
                  is not on good terms with the relative who  M  is  staying
                  with (his evidence on 5 January)."

    4. The Judge, in addition to the documentary evidence, had  the  benefit
       of seeing and hearing oral evidence being given by both the appellant
       and NG before deciding on the weight that could properly be given  to
       the evidence.
    5. The Judge divides the decision into  subheadings  which  include  the
       'Mental health evidence, evidence as to possible impact on the  well-
       being of  the  appellants  or  immediate  family  members  if  he  is
       deported/removed to Pakistan' [102 - 117], 'The best interests of the
       appellant's children' [118 - 120], 'Whether either of the  exceptions
       in section 117 C will be met on the facts of this case' [121 -  126],
       and 'Whether on the facts the appellant met the "over and above test"
       in section 117C(6)' [127 - 131], before drawing together the  threads
       at [132 - 133] in the following terms:

             "132.    I regret concluding that the  appellant's  article  8
                  case cannot succeed - because that implies the breakup  of
                  his close family unit with NG and their two  children  (as
                  well as the removal of M's opportunity to build - face  to
                  face - on her bonds with  the  appellant).  However,  that
                  seems to me to be the only conclusion that I can  properly
                  reach through the application of the  relevant  principles
                  to the evidence in this case. And it has been pointed  out
                  that   deportation   will   frequently   lead   to   harsh
                  consequences - including the breakup of family units (see,
                  for example, Lee [2011] EWCA Civ 348, 29 March 2011)


             Overall conclusion


             133.     As Mr Phillips submitted on 5 January, this is a case
                  where the public interest in  deportation  of  non-British
                  criminal outweighs the best interests of the three British
                  children concerned, and outweighs the  preference  of  the
                  appellant and NG."

    6. The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  which  was  granted  by
       another judge of the First-tier Tribunal on the 24 February 2021  the
       operative part of the grant being in the following terms:

             "2.  The grounds of appeal make a number of points, but it  is
                  unnecessary to go through  them  all  in  detail  as  they
                  amount to the submission that the extant circumstances  in
                  the   evidence   before   the   judge   were   exceptional
                  circumstances that should have succeeded in the appeal.


             3.   The grounds of appeal appear to be  arguable  across  the
                  judge at paragraph 129 has disagreed with  the  submission
                  law  by  Mr  Jorro,  and  in  his  Skeleton  Argument   at
                  paragraphs 26 - 30  that  Paragraph  117C  was  satisfied.
                  Permission to appeal is granted all grounds argued."

    7. In her Rule 24 reply dated  5  March  2021  the  Secretary  of  State
       opposes the appeal on the basis the  findings  made  are  within  the
       range of those reasonably available to the Judge.

The law

    8. Section 117C Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 reads:

           117CArticle 8: additional considerations in cases involving
           foreign criminals


           (1)    The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public
                interest.


           (2)    The more serious the offence committed by a foreign
                criminal, the greater is the public interest in deportation
                of the criminal.


           (3)    In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been
                sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more,
                the public interest requires C's deportation unless
                Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.


           (4)    Exception 1 applies where-


                (a)    C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom
                    for most of C's life,


                (b)    C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                    Kingdom, and


                (c)    there would be very significant obstacles to C's
                    integration into the country to which C is proposed to
                    be deported.


           (5)    Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and subsisting
                relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and
                subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,
                and the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child
                would be unduly harsh.


           (6)    In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced
                to a period of imprisonment of at least four years, the
                public interest requires deportation unless there are very
                compelling circumstances, over and above those described in
                Exceptions 1 and 2.


           (7)    The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be
                taken into account where a court or tribunal is considering
                a decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent
                that the reason for the decision was the offence or offences
                for which the criminal has been convicted.

    9. The Court Appeal in AA (Nigeria) v Secretary of State [2020] EWCA Civ
       1296 [at 9] write:

           "9.    There has  been  a  proliferation  of  case  law  on  the
                application of the "unduly harsh" test in section 117C(5) of
                the 2002 Act, and the "very compelling  circumstances"  test
                in section 117C(6). That is the result of the many different
                factual circumstances in which they  regularly  have  to  be
                applied by first instance  judges  of  the  Immigration  and
                Asylum Chamber. That does not mean, however, that there is a
                need to refer extensively to authority for  the  meaning  or
                application of these two statutory tests. It should  usually
                be  unnecessary  to  refer  to  anything  outside  the  four
                authorities  identified  below,  namely KO   (Nigeria)   v
                Secretary of State for the  Home  Department [2018]  1  WLR
                5273; R (on the application of  Byndloss)  v  Secretary  of
                State  for  the  Home  Department [2017]  1  WLR  2380; NA
                (Pakistan)   v   Secretary   of   State   for    the    Home
                Department [2017] 1WLR 207; HA (Iraq) v Secretary of State
                for the Home Department [2020] EWCA Civ 117. It will usually
                be  unhelpful  to  refer  first  instance  judges  to  other
                examples of their application to  the  particular  facts  of
                other cases and seek to draw factual comparisons by  way  of
                similarities or differences. Decisions  in  this  area  will
                involve an examination of the many circumstances  making  up
                private or family life, which are infinitely  variable,  and
                will require a close  focus  on  the  particular  individual
                private and family lives in question, judged cumulatively on
                their own terms. Nor will it be necessary for first instance
                judges to cite extensively from these or other  authorities,
                provided that they identify that they are seeking  to  apply
                the relevant principles. I would associate myself with  what
                Coulson LJ said at  paragraph  [37]  of UT  (Sri  Lanka)  v
                Secretary of State for the Home Department [2019] EWCA  Civ
                1095, that it is an impediment to the efficient  working  of
                the tribunal system in this area for judges to have numerous
                cases cited to them or to feel the need to set out extensive
                quotation from them,  rather  than  focussing  primarily  on
                their  application  to  the  factual  circumstances  of  the
                particular case before them. Judges who are  experienced  in
                these specialised courts should be assumed by any  appellate
                court or tribunal to be well familiar with  the  principles,
                and to be applying them,  without  the  need  for  extensive
                citation, unless it is clear from what they  say  that  they
                have not done so."


Discussion

   10. The grounds of appeal assert the Judge's conclusions as to the effect
       on the appellant's son of his deportation and  consequent  conclusion
       in relation to the article 8 claim are irrational  in  light  of  the
       medical evidence accepted by the Judge, and/or amount to  a  material
       error of law for failing to take account of  that  accepted  evidence
       when finding against the appellant.
   11. In his oral submissions  Mr  Jorro  referred  to  the  basis  of  the
       appellant's claim being the cumulative impact upon the family arising
       from deportation. It was argued that the 'extra  unduly  harsh'  test
       was satisfied in that as a result of NGs depression she would not  be
       able to look after the children if the appellant were  deported,  and
       that owing to AR's fragile mental health there was  a  real  risk  of
       deterioration such that he may never recover if his father were to be
       deported. It was argued that the combined effect of these factors may
       result in consequential damage to the appellant's daughter  E  making
       the case not only very compelling but also 'extra unduly  harsh'  and
       therefore the appellant's deportation disproportionate.
   12. At [6 -9] of the Grounds of Appeal it is written:

           "6.    However, at determination, paras  117  and  126  the  FTT
                Judge  states  and  concludes  that  the  totality  of   the
                materials/evidence do  not  establish  that  any  degree  of
                anticipated harshness, including specifically for AR,  would
                go "beyond what would necessarily be involved for any  child
                faced with the  deportation  of  a  parent."  (As  per  Lord
                Carnwath JSC in KO (Nigeria) v SSHD [2018]  1  WLR  5273  at
                [23]). Having so concluded, the FTT Judge, inevitably,  went
                on to conclude at paras 127-132 that A could  not  meet  the
                'over and above' or 'extra unduly harsh' test in NIAA  2002,
                s117C(6), and thus that the clear and  obvious  interference
                in A's Article 8 (1) right to respect for  his  family  life
                (FTT determination, para 33) would be proportionate  to  the
                Article 8 (2) public interest in preventing crime  is  based
                on the established fact of A  having  been  sentenced  to  a
                period of four years' imprisonment.


           7.     It is  submitted  that  the  FTT  Judge's  conclusion  is
                irrational in light of the medical evidence accepted by  him
                and/or is in clear error of law for failing to take  account
                of that  accepted  and  material  evidence  when  concluding
                against A's case and/or is in error of law  for  failing  to
                provide adequate reasons for concluding A's case  given  the
                accepted evidence.


           8.     Clearly  it  cannot  be  rationally  concluded  that  the
                deterioration of a 12 year old boy's psychological health is
                necessarily a consequence of the deportation of his  father.
                It  is  obviously  not   the   case   that   every   child's
                psychological health will deteriorate  due  to  his  or  her
                father's deportation (or  for  that  matter,  where  parents
                divorce acrimoniously and the child lives with the mother).


           9.     It is submitted that the FTT Judge  has  failed  to  take
                account, adequately or at all, of the  true  import  of  the
                accepted medical report evidence concerning A's sons  mental
                health and the likely deterioration  of  his  mental  health
                when reaching a highly  material  conclusion  contrary  that
                them leads on to his determinative  conclusion  contrary  to
                A's Article 8 claim and appeal."

   13. It is not disputed that a combination of factors affecting more  than
       one relevant family member can, as a matter  of  principle,  together
       meet the necessary threshold of being 'extra unduly harsh'. The Judge
       does not suggest otherwise. To assess whether this is the case on the
       facts a holistic assessment of the relevant aspects of  the  evidence
       is required which it has not been shown the Judge failed to  do  when
       the decision is read as a whole.
   14. It is clear the Judge  considered  the  evidence  with  the  required
       degree of anxious scrutiny  in  what  is  a  detailed  and  carefully
       considered judgement. The thrust of the submissions made by Mr  Bates
       is that, even if the outcome was not one accepted by the appellant or
       Mr Jorro or that even if other judges may not  have  arrived  at  the
       same conclusion as this judge, this does not mean that  the  decision
       is outside the range of those reasonably available to  the  Judge  on
       the evidence, sufficient to warrant the Upper Tribunal interfering in
       the same.
   15. The Judge accepts that it would not be in the best interests of AR if
       his father is removed to Pakistan and  accepts  the  evidence  of  Dr
       Latif that AR's psychological  health  and  academic  performance  is
       likely to deteriorate if the appellant is removed from the UK [114].
   16. At [116 - 120] the Judge writes:

           "116.  For the avoidance of doubt, I see no  reason  to  quarrel
                with Ms  Meek's  assessment  that  the  deportation  of  the
                appellant  [would]  impact  on  his  children   emotionally,
                physically  (sic)  as  well  as  on  their  development  and
                learning within education (Ms Meek's paragraph 5.5  on  page
                147).  I  accept  that  the  family  as  a  whole  is  under
                significant emotional stress in relation to the prospects of
                the appellant being removed from the UK (paragraph  5.3).  I
                accept that the appellant's deportation is likely to have  a
                serious detrimental information impact on his three children
                (paragraph 5.5). What I do  not  accept,  however,  is  that
                there is any real reason why M could not continue to see her
                two half siblings if the appellant was removed  to  Pakistan
                (cp Ms Meek's paragraphs 5.6 and 5.8).  That is, if  NG  and
                M's mother wished to, as they could make arrangements for  M
                to continue seeing/staying with her two half siblings,  even
                if the appellant was then back in Pakistan.


           117.   I have very carefully considered all the materials before
                me  (including  those  summarised  in  this  section).  But,
                referring to the terminology  used  in  KO  and  others  (at
                paragraph 23), I cannot  see  that  the  totality  of  those
                materials establishes - as regards the three children of the
                appellant -  any  degree  of  anticipated  harshness  "going
                beyond what would necessarily  be  involved  for  any  child
                faced with the deportation of a  parent".   (Similarly,  the
                evidence does not show "undue harshness" in relation  to  NG
                but, realistically, Mr Jorro did not argue that it did).


           The best interests of the appellant's children


           118.   Throughout my assessment of  the  appellant's  article  8
                case, I have borne in mind,  a  strong  public  interest  in
                deportation (see, for example, N  (Kenya)  [2004]  EWCA  Civ
                1094). Although the best interests of the children who  will
                be affected by the putative deportation/removal are also  an
                important factor, it  is  well  established  that  the  best
                interests of children can be overridden in this  context  by
                the public interest in deportation and  immigration  control
                (see, for example, AJ (Zimbabwe)  and  VH  (Vietnam)  [2016]
                EWCA Civ 1012).


           119.   The above said, the evidence as to the important role  of
                the appellant in the lives of  his  three  children  clearly
                points (in my assessment) to it being in the children's best
                interests for the appellant to be allowed to continue living
                in the UK. In the case of  M,  that  conclusion  is  perhaps
                marginal because the appellant's own evidence at the hearing
                was that even when M's mother is in the UK (which she is not
                at the moment), he only sees M every other weekend (when,  I
                think, she spends the weekend based at the  family  home  of
                the appellant and NG in Altrincham). (In his  statement  the
                appellant describes how he and NG have built a  relationship
                with M only since  the  appellant  came  out  of  prison  in
                October 2018).


           120.   In relation to AR and E (in particular), I do accept  (as
                Judge Pickup) that their interests would be best  served  by
                them continuing to live (in the UK) in a  family  unit  with
                the appellant and NG."

   17. The above conclusions are sustainable when assessing  this  important
       aspect of the case, but  the  Judge  was  required  to  do  more  and
       consider whether either of the exceptions in section  117C  could  be
       met on the facts of this case, and whether on the facts the appellant
       could meet the "over and above" test in section 117C(6). Between [121
       - 131] of the decision the Judge sets out  the  core  findings  being
       challenged by the appellant in relation to these issues. I  set  them
       out in full:

           "Would either of the "Exceptions" in section 117C be met on  the
           facts of this case?


           121.   As regards the "Exceptions" set out in  section  117C  of
                the 2002 Act, Mr Jorro  realistically   made  no  suggestion
                that on the evidence in this appeal the appellant might  fit
                into the Exception relating to Private Life ("Exception 1" -
                in section 117 C(4)) or the "partner limb" of the  Exception
                relating to Family Life ("Exception 2" - in  section  117  C
                (5)). Here, therefore, my focus is on the  "child  limb"  of
                the Exception relating to Family Life (in section 117 C (5))
                viz the  test  of  the  appellant  having:  "a  genuine  and
                subsisting parental relationship with  a  qualifying  child,
                and the effect of [his] deportation on the [] child would be
                unduly harsh".


           122.   I accept that  the  appellant  has  strong,  genuine  and
                subsisting parental relationships  with  all  three  of  his
                children (and a similarly strong relationship with NG) - the
                respondent does not argue the contrary.


           123.   The respondent accepts (as  did  Judge  Pickup)  that  it
                would be unduly harsh to expect  the  Appellant's  (British)
                children to relocate to Pakistan. It follows that  here  the
                primary question from me is  whether  or  not  it  would  be
                unduly harsh to expect the appellant's children to remain in
                the UK whilst he is deported/removed  to  Pakistan  (as  per
                paragraph 399(a) of the immigration rules).


           124.   As already noted, in the case of M, the  appellant's  own
                evidence on 5 January, was that even when M's mother  is  in
                the UK (which she is not at the  moment),  he  only  sees  M
                every other weekend. In that light, I do not think that  one
                would begin to conclude that the removal of the appellant to
                Pakistan would be "unduly harsh" for M (as  opposed  to  the
                other two children) - not "unduly harsh" in the sense  given
                to that phrase in the relevant decided cases.


           125.   In relation to housing, NG  told  Mr  Phillips  that  the
                council house in  Altrincham  has  been  gained  through  an
                application by her (not the appellant).  There  is  no  good
                reason to think that the housing situation of NG, AR  and  E
                would change if the appellant is removed to Pakistan.


           126.   Unfortunately, weighing up all the  information,  already
                referred to in this Decision, even as regards AR. and  E,  I
                cannot see that, overall, the evidence  here  establishes  a
                "degree of harshness, going beyond what one  would  normally
                is necessarily involved for any child faced with deportation
                of a parent."  (as per paragraph 23 of KO (Nigeria)).


           On the facts of this case does/would  the  appellant  meets  the
           "over and above test" in section 117 C (6)?


           127.   Section 117 C (6)  reads:  "in  the  case  of  a  foreign
                criminal who has been sentenced to a period of  imprisonment
                of  at  least  four  years,  the  public  interest  requires
                deportation unless there are very compelling  circumstances,
                over and above  those  described  in  Exceptions  1  and  2"
                (underlining added):


           128.   To the extent that they are  still  relevant  (and  still
                applicable as at January 2021), I have counted in favour  of
                the appellant's case,  all  the  "For  factors"  that  Judge
                Pickup  counted  in  the  appellant's  favour  through   his
                paragraph 94. To the extent now  appropriate,  I  have  also
                factored in the  matter  relied  on  for  the  appellant  in
                paragraph 29 of the Grounds of Appeal document.


           129.   But  in  my  assessment  the  totality  of  the  evidence
                referred to in  Mr Jorro's paragraphs  26  to  30  (and  are
                summarised  in  my  paragraphs  above)  does  not  begin  to
                establish the test of "extra unduly harsh" - as Underhill LJ
                colloquially put it in JG. In other words, even if Mr  Jorro
                was correct to argue that this appellant  satisfies  one  of
                the Exceptions in section 117 C, I cannot see that over  and
                above that he has  a  case  which  is/would  be  "especially
                strong" (in the sense referred to  in  paragraph  29  of  NA
                (Pakistan)) - essentially for reasons that  I  have  already
                set out above. That is, weighing  up  all  the  information,
                already referred to in this Decision, I cannot see that  the
                argument begins to satisfy  the  relevant  "over  and  above
                test".


           130.   In other words, it seems to me that the respondent's case
                as to a lack of  "very  compelling  circumstances"  here  is
                valid - as set out in paragraphs 77 to 114 of the RFRL.


           131.   Of course, in this area there are dangers  in  going  too
                far in any comparison of "like cases". Even so,  it  may  be
                worth pointing to some features of JG's case  that  made  it
                very significantly stronger than the case of this appellant:


                  - Not only was JG his son's primary carer but  they  lived
                    under a different roof to the son's mother (albeit  that
                    she lived nearby) (paragraph 18 of JG);


                  -  the  psychological  evidence  in  JG  was  cogent   and
                    established a history of the son, having  threatened  to
                    self-harm and the likelihood of serious  emotional  harm
                    to the son if the appellant was deported (paragraph 20 -
                    cp the evidence in relation to AR summarised above); and


                  - through his paragraph 32 Underhill  LJ  said:  "...  the
                    evidence before the judge in  this  case  was  at  least
                    potentially capable of showing that  there  was  in  the
                    present case a real risk of harm to JG's  mental  health
                    that reached the necessary threshold. It did not rely on
                    the "mere" impact of separation,  but  on  the  specific
                    psychological damage evidenced by the materials... (In a
                    context, it must be recalled, where it appeared that the
                    Respondent was JG's primary carer)... It may be that  if
                    we were making our  own  judgement,  I  might  not  have
                    regarded [the medical evidence  as]  compelling  as  the
                    Judge did. But that is not the role of this Court...".

   18. The Judge makes specific reference to a number of other documents  as
       part of the assessment process which the Judge was  not  required  to
       set out verbatim as they were available to all the  parties.  One  of
       these is a reference  to  an  earlier  decision  by  then  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Pickup promulgated on 8  June  2018,  in  which  Judge
       Pickup was considering an earlier appeal against  the  refusal  of  a
       protection of human rights claim dated 31 October 2017,  also  relied
       upon by the appellant as an exception to  the  Secretary  of  State's
       ability to deport him from the United Kingdom. Judge pickup was  also
       satisfied  that  the  best  interests  of  the  two  British  citizen
       children, assessed in isolation of the immigration history  of  their
       father and the conduct of both  parents  in  entering  into  criminal
       activity, is for them to remain in the UK and have, if possible,  the
       involvement of both parents in their upbringing  as  a  single-family
       unit [82].
   19. Judge Pickup found on the evidence that the appellant cannot meet any
       of the unduly harsh tests under paragraph 399 and found that even  if
       the appellant could meet either of those requirements, he would still
       have to demonstrate very compelling circumstances over and above  the
       already high unduly harsh threshold test as a result of the four-year
       sentence of imprisonment.
   20. When assessing the question of very  compelling  circumstances  Judge
       Pickup wrote:

           "94.   Amongst  all  of  the  evidence  taken  as  a  whole  and
                considered in its entirety before reaching my conclusions, I
                take into  account  the  following  non-exhaustive  list  of
                relevant  factors  and  considerations  in  favour  of   the
                appellant.


                 i) I  take  into  account  everything  is  said  about  the
                    circumstances of the children, their ages,  their  lives
                    and integration in the UK:


                ii) I accept that the appellant has a genuine and subsisting
                    relationship with the children and his partner,  despite
                    his enforced separation by his prison sentence;


               iii) I give full weight to the best interests of the children
                    as a primary consideration;


                iv) I do not underestimate the effect  on  the  children  of
                    being deprived from their parent, including every aspect
                    urged upon me in the documentation, expert evidence  and
                    submissions. It will be  hard  on  the  children  to  be
                    permanently separated from the appellant. However,  that
                    is  the  reality  of  the  effect  of  deportation,   it
                    separates families;


                 v) There are no particular medical issues  in  relation  to
                    any of the children, though I note the emotional  strain
                    on the  appellant's  wife.  I  do  not  undervalue  this
                    effect,  but  she  is  jointly   responsible   for   the
                    situation, she finds herself in. Again,  the  effect  of
                    separation from the appellant is little more than to  be
                    expected from deportation;


                vi) I have noted the probation report assessment, the judges
                    positive comments and character  evidence  submitted  on
                    his behalf and that the appellant  committed  a  one-off
                    offence when his head was turned by the promise of money
                    to be made, and that otherwise he was  hard-working  and
                    largely good character;


               vii) That there is little evidence of large financial gain by
                    the appellant and no proceeds of crime proceedings  have
                    been taken against him. His role was as a collector  not
                    controller. He has not lived any lavish lifestyle;


              viii) It is said that he was  persuaded  to  involve  himself,
                    recruiting his wife, under pressure  from  persons  from
                    abroad;


                ix)  Despite  the  huge  sums  involved,  the  sentence  was
                    relatively lenient;


                 x) He has worked hard before and whilst in prison  and  has
                    been assessed as a low risk of reoffending. He says that
                    he is determined never to offend again,  is  remorseful,
                    and wants to make it up to his children.


                xi) I take into account the efforts  towards  rehabilitation
                    and expression of remorse, notwithstanding the  comments
                    made about the extent of minimising and unwillingness to
                    accept responsibility.


               xii) Following case authority of Daso [2015] EWCA Civ 596 and
                    Velasquez  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  845,  I  note  the  public
                    interest is wider than the mere protection of the public
                    from harm from future offending, and includes weight  to
                    be given to the  public  revulsion  at  the  appellant's
                    conduct and the need to deter others. The lack of  other
                    offending any adherence to the law is no more than to be
                    expected and cannot be said to reduce public interest in
                    deportation."

   21. The relevant aspects of the original grounds of appeal considered  by
       Judge Cruthers are set out at [32 (a) - (f)] which are pleaded in the
       following terms:

           "32.   The Appellant must demonstrate  factors  in  his  favour,
                which  surpass  the  public  interest  that   requires   his
                deportation. The factors in favour of the Appellant  are  as
                follows:


                 a. the risk of reoffending is of at the lowest level  given
                    the  one-off  serious   conviction   received   by   the
                    Appellant. The probation report, and subsequent  letters
                    of support, or confirm the Appellant's remorse  for  his
                    actions and his decision to take responsibility for  his
                    offending. By focusing upon his family  to  repair  that
                    which he broke. The Appellant feels that he let down his
                    children by getting involved  in  criminal  privity  and
                    recognises just  as  much  and  now  dedicates  all  his
                    efforts towards being a good father who  can  guide  his
                    children in what is right and wrong. He has been  honest
                    with them in terms of where he went wrong and  therefore
                    shows that he has taken utmost  responsibility  for  his
                    wrongdoing;


                 b. the appellant is socially and culturally  integrated  in
                    the UK, the exception being the most recent  conviction.
                    Previous convictions were minor and not  to  the  extent
                    that  would  suggest  any  real   pattern   of   serious
                    offending. He has strong family connections in  the  UK,
                    with his partner and children being a British-born,  and
                    he has lived the majority of his time in the UK with his
                    family.


                 c. the Appellant was also lawfully resident in the UK until
                    such time as he  became  appeal  rights,  exhausted  and
                    since that has advanced further  submissions,  which  he
                    has done without delay.


                 d. The Appellant's son is suffering from  serious  anxiety,
                    psychological damage and depression -like  symptoms  and
                    has   been   referred    for    further    psychological
                    investigation and treatment. A report of the full extent
                    will be available in due course,  but  a  social  worker
                    report has confirmed the extent of  the  damage  to  the
                    Appellant's son. In addition, letters  from  the  school
                    confirmed the effect it has had  on  the  Appellant  and
                    therefore  there  is  evidence  of  the  fact  that  the
                    deportation of  the  Appellant  will  cause  significant
                    damage to his son, which would be unduly harsh and  over
                    and  above  that  should  be   expected.   Whilst   some
                    discomfort  and  separation  is  expected  due  to   the
                    deportation order, it is argued  that  consideration  of
                    all the factors in favour of the  Appellant  means  that
                    the issues are linked  and  the  harm  caused  stretches
                    beyond the son, but it is suggested that the Appellant's
                    sons deportation will cause a complete breakdown of  the
                    family unit (SSHD vs Jamaica case No C5/2016/0587.


                 e.  The  Appellant's  partner  continues  to  suffer   from
                    depression and her mental state is such that  she  would
                    be unable to cope with the children in  the  Appellant's
                    absence. Evidence is that she barely managed to  survive
                    during the period in which he was in prison, and  to  go
                    through that again would mean a certain life of poverty.
                    She has a long documented history of depression and as a
                    victim   of   domestic   violence   from   a    previous
                    relationship, she seriously affected by the  eventuality
                    of the Appellant being deported and the children left in
                    her sole care. She has relied upon  him,  exceptionally,
                    particularly after the passing  of  her  father  shortly
                    after he was released from prison and the  role  he  has
                    taken  on  since  he  was  released,  caring  for  their
                    children,  means  that  the  disruptive  effect  of  his
                    deportation at this time would cause significantly  more
                    damage.  These  conditions  are  not  ideal  for   young
                    children  and  a  dynamic  in  the  household  is   very
                    delicate. Any disruption will be so severe as to cause a
                    severe mental health impact on the part of AR and NG  as
                    severe and significant disruption to the lives of E  and
                    M.


                 f. All of the  above  demonstrate  unduly  harsh  and  very
                    compelling circumstances over and above  the  exceptions
                    in section 117(c) NIA 2002."

   22. The submission relating to the cumulative effect upon the family unit
       as a whole was therefore a matter before the Judge in this appeal but
       is a factor of which the Judge was fully aware. At  [103]  the  Judge
       writes:

           "103.  I have taken into account all  the  evidence  as  to  the
                likely/possible mental health  effects  of  the  appellant's
                removal/deportation of members of his family. In particular,
                that includes:


                  - From page 77: the report of Dr  Latif  relating  to  the
                    appellant's son;


                  - from page 101: the report of Dr Ahmed relating to NG;


                  - from page 120: medical reports relating to NG;


                  - from page 128: school  letters  (etc)  relating  to  the
                    appellant's son;


                  -  from  page  136:  medical  reports  relating   to   the
                    appellant's son; and


                  - from page 139: Social Workers Report (dated 27 May 2019)
                    by Ms Meek."

   23. In relation to NG the Judge writes at [105 - 107]:

           "105.  As far as the material relating to NG is  concerned,  her
                medical records confirm levels  of  anxiety  and  depression
                (mental health difficulties which are understandable,  given
                the couple's troubled and uncertain history since they  were
                arrested in April 2015).


           106.   I accept that Dr Sehar  Ahmed  is  a  qualified  Clinical
                Psychologist with  more  than  adequate  qualifications  and
                experience to prepare a report of 2 March 2020.  (Pages  101
                to 119). Dr Ahmed confirms  that  since  2015  NG  has  been
                prescribed different medications by her GP to address mental
                health symptoms (Dr Ahmed's paragraph 7.6). Dr Ahmed saw  NG
                for approximately two hours  on  2  March  2020.  (Paragraph
                3.1). Dr Ahmed makes it clear more than once that  what  she
                says in her report is largely based on the self reporting of
                NG (Paragraph 7.2 for example).


           107.   From the report of Dr Ahmed I accept that  when  she  saw
                NG, symptoms were demonstrated that satisfy the criteria for
                Chronic Adjustment Disorder with Mixed Anxiety and Depressed
                Mood (paragraph 9.6). But there  appears  to  have  been  at
                least a degree of improvement in NG's mental health since Dr
                Ahmed saw her - as already noted, on 5 January the  evidence
                was that NG is involved in running her own  car  dealership,
                and presumably, therefore, is no  longer  isolating  herself
                and avoiding leaving the house (as referred to in Dr Ahmed's
                paragraph 9.4). Sadly, NG's father  died  some  three  weeks
                after the appellant left prison (paragraph 6.3 and  9.4).  I
                accept that NG's father seems to have provided a high degree
                of emotional and financial support whilst the appellant  was
                in prison (ibid). But in summary, there is not much  in  the
                report of Dr Ahmed - taken with the medical records relating
                to NG - which is of much materiality for the purpose of this
                deportation related appeal."

   24. The Judge analysed the evidence regarding to  AR  with  the  required
       degree of care and is not made out  the  Judge  was  unaware  of  the
       issues in the appeal, the evidence relied  upon  in  support  of  the
       claim, or the relevant issues to be determined.
   25. It is clear from a reading of the decision that the Judge  does  take
       into account the impact upon  all  members  of  this  family  if  the
       appellant is deported from the United Kingdom.  The  fact  the  Judge
       found the appellant is unable to succeed  does  not  mean  the  Judge
       failed to do what he was required to do.
   26. I accept it is also no  longer  correct  to  say  as  in  SSHD  v  PG
       (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA Civ 1213 that the 'commonplace' distress caused
       by separation from a parent or partner is insufficient  to  meet  the
       test, as  the  focus  should  be  on  the  emotional  impact  on  the
       particular child: HA(Iraq) (supra) [Underhill LJ 44-56, Peter Jackson
       LJ 157-159]. Whilst the Judge does  refer  in  the  decision  to  the
       effects of deportation not going beyond  what  would  necessarily  be
       involved for any child faced with the deportation  of  a  parent  the
       Judge also undertakes an assessment of the  impact  on  the  children
       individually. The question in this appeal has always been whether the
       appellant met the "over and above tests." In section 117  C  (6).  As
       the Judge considered all the evidence with  the  required  degree  of
       care, has made a number  of  findings  in  line  with  that  evidence
       supported by adequate reasons, and has come to a conclusion  open  to
       the Judge, the fact the appellant disagrees with same is not the  key
       issue.  To succeed it is incumbent upon the  appellant  to  establish
       perversity, irrationality, or unlawfulness in the decision.
   27. The appellant claims that the Judge  misunderstood  (i)  the  primary
       submission as to the effect of the combination of NG being unable  to
       cope looking after children by herself, without the  appellant,  (ii)
       the medical evidence regarding AR's fragile mental health, (iii)  the
       appellant's case, (iv) or the evidence relied upon.
   28. NG was noted by the Judge to be running her own car dealership and to
       have improved beyond the person described in  the  medical  evidence.
       Whilst it may be inconvenient for NG to have to resume responsibility
       for the care for the children if the appellant  is  deported,  either
       personally or with the use of others to assist (paid  or  otherwise),
       the finding the evidence of the impact upon NG did not establish that
       she will not be able to adequately parent the children and that  this
       and the impact upon AR  will  not  have  a  sufficiently  detrimental
       effect upon  AR or E such that the test is met,  has not  been  shown
       to be one not reasonably open to  the  Judge  on  the  evidence.  The
       Judge's finding,  having  weighed  those  points  in  favour  of  the
       appellant with the issues relied upon by the Secretary  of  State  in
       opposing the argument, that it had not been shown the requisite  test
       was satisfied has not been shown to be a finding outside the range of
       those  reasonably  available  to  this  very  experience   First-tier
       Tribunal Judge on the evidence.
   29. On that basis, and in line with recent guidance  from  the  Court  of
       Appeal that an error of law  should  not  be  found  unless  one  can
       clearly be identified, I find the appellant has failed  to  establish
       arguable legal error material to the decision to dismiss  the  appeal
       when the decision is read as a whole, sufficient to warrant the Upper
       Tribunal interfering any further in this matter.

Decision

   30. There is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand.

  Anonymity.

   31. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of
       the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

       I make such order pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 6 May 2021
