
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00875/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 7th August 2019                   |On 22nd August 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                  imran ali
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Holmes, Counsel instructed by Parkview
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs G Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born  on  16th  June  1987.   He
    made application to the respondent for recognition as  a  refugee,  but
    his claim was refused by the respondent on 17th January  2019  and  the
    appellant appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  basis  of  the
    appellant's claim was that he was attacked and shot in Pakistan in 2008
    and fears that on return to Pakistan he will be at risk of further harm
    from a Mr [H] because of his imputed political opinion.

2.   The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom as a visitor  in  2012,  he
    actually entered on 18th August 2012, but on 24th January 2016, he  was
    encountered at his home address and served with form RED001.

3.   On 26th March 2016, he applied for an  EEA  residence  card  which  was
    refused and applied again on 17th June 2017, for the  same  card  which
    again was refused.  On 23rd January 2018, he was detained and  on  25th
    January he was sent a letter detailing his planned departure  from  the
    United Kingdom by the respondent.  On 29th January 2018  the  appellant
    claimed asylum whilst in detention.  He was released from detention  on
    9th February  2018,  following  submission  of  a  Rule  35(3)  torture
    allegation.

4.   The basis of the appellant's claim is imputed political  opinion.   His
    uncle's political rivals are members of  the  Muslim  League  N  Group.
    They wanted to kill the appellant because he  witnessed  a  crime  that
    they  committed  and  because  he  supported  his   uncle's   political
    endeavours as a member of the Muslim League Q Group.

5.   Following information provided by the appellant, it was  accepted  that
    he was accompanying his uncle whilst he attended a court  hearing  over
    election disputes and Mr [H] and others opened fire at three cars  they
    were travelling in. Others were killed  and  the  appellant  was  badly
    injured.  Mr [H] was subsequently arrested and released and Mr [H]  has
    apparently since been sought by the police in respect  of  an  incident
    which occurred in 2013.  The respondent accepted that the appellant had
    been witness to a shooting in 2008.  The judge said at paragraph 91  of
    the determination:-

         "Taking account of the CPIN I am satisfied that with regards to the
         specifics in this case even if there was an ongoing threat (which I
         find there is not) the police have acted and would act  to  protect
         him and provide sufficiency of protection in all the  circumstances
         that are noted in his case."

     The judge went on  to  find  that  the  appellant  could  relocate  and
    dismissed the appeal.

6.   There were four challenges to the determination which  Mr  Holmes  very
    helpfully summarised for me.  The first is the failure of the judge  to
    deal with the risk to the appellant in his home area from Mr  [H].   Mr
    [H], the perpetrator of a shooting incident, has  not  been  prosecuted
    and is still at large.  He was  shown  by  the  appellant  to  have  an
    ongoing interest in firearms according to  posts  on  a  media  website
    showing Mr [H] in possession of guns.

7.   The second challenge is that the judge failed  to  understand  properly
    the appellant's account.  The appellant's claim was that [H]  was  sent
    by others who were waiting by a canal for the appellant to pass between
    2008 until 2012.  The judge has  taken  words  used  by  the  appellant
    literally.  It was not the appellant's  intention  to  imply  that  the
    perpetrator [H] had waited in the same place by  to  meet  him  by  the
    canal every day for the whole of that period.

8.   The third  error  is  the  question  of  the  continuing  risk  to  the
    appellant.  The judge simply has failed to deal with it and in relation
    to the ongoing risk, he also failed to properly assess the question  of
    the location and whether it would be unduly  harsh  for  the  appellant
    were he to return to Pakistan and seek to live somewhere other than his
    home area.

9.   Counsel accepted that  if  the  appellant  could,  without  difficulty,
    relocate to another part of Pakistan other than his home  area  without
    difficulty, then any other errors of law that there  might  be  in  the
    determination would not in fact be material.

10.  Counsel confirmed that there was no specific evidence  put  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge to suggest that it would be unduly  harsh  to
    expect the appellant to return to Pakistan and relocate to a  different
    area.  Mr Holmes accepted that the appellant's wife and children  still
    live in Pakistan and there has been no suggestion at all that  [H]  has
    visited to the appellant's wife making enquiries as to the  appellant's
    whereabouts.  If he was truly interested in locating the appellant,  he
    would have done so.  There is no evidence to suggest that [H]  is  part
    of an organisation which has links throughout Pakistan and so is  in  a
    position to easily locate the appellant.

11.  The appellant is 32 years old and as far as I am aware is a fit and
    healthy man. I do not believe that were he to be returned to Pakistan
    now, requiring him to relocate to an area other than his home area
    would involve him in any unreasonable harshness or difficulty
    whatsoever.  There is no reason at all why his wife and children could
    not go and live with him were he to relocate.  He appears to have very
    quickly adapted to live in the United Kingdom and there is no evidence
    to suggest that requiring him to return to Pakistan and live in an area
    where he would be free of any risk that Mr, [H] would find him would
    cause him any difficulties at all.  I am satisfied therefore that he
    could relocate without it being unreasonable in that he would be able
    to work, he would have the ability to go where he wishes and pursue his
    life and occupations as he wishes and would not be prevented from
    having his family members live with him if he and they chose to.

12.  Relocation would not cause the appellant undue harshness and given
    that any other errors of law that there are in the determination could
    not possibly be material, I uphold the judge's determination and
    dismiss the appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Richard Chalkley

Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley   Date: 16 August 2019


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Richard Chalkley
         Date: 16 August 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
