
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00044/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 August 2019                            |On 18 February 2020           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                                    M.B.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Gilbert of Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis &
Co.
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Norris, promulgated on 24 April 2019, dismissing the Appellant's appeal
    against a  decision  of  the  Respondent  dated  19  December  2018  on
    protection grounds and human rights grounds.


2.   The Appellant is a citizen of  Albania.  Her  personal  details  are  a
    matter of record on file and are not stated here in  keeping  with  the
    anonymity direction that has been made  in  these  proceedings  and  is
    hereby continued. Suffice to say for present purposes: when she claimed
    asylum on 25 February 2015 she had just turned 20; she has two sons who
    are dependents in these proceedings born  in  April  2015  and  October
    2018.


3.   The Appellant claims: that she was kidnapped in  Albania  in  2013  and
    raped; she was trafficked to Italy in June 2013 and forced to work as a
    prostitute; in June 2014 she was moved to Belgium and then to  the  UK;
    she was able to escape whilst in  the  UK.  On  25  February  2015  she
    claimed asylum. The Appellant fears that if  returned  to  Albania  she
    would be located by her kidnappers and traffickers who would  harm  her
    or her children. She has also expressed concerns about the circumstance
    of each of her sons, conceived by different fathers, having  been  born
    out of wedlock.


4.   The Appellant's asylum claim was initially refused  by  the  Respondent
    on 11 August 2015, and certified as clearly unfounded. It appears  that
    there  then  followed  a  protracted  process  of  representations  and
    reconsiderations - seemingly running in parallel with a referral  under
    the National Referral Mechanism ('NRM') in respect of  the  Appellant's
    claim  to  have  been  trafficked  -  including   a   judicial   review
    application:  ultimately  the  Appellant's  claim  for  protection  was
    refused on 19 December 2018 for  reasons  set  out  in  a  reasons  for
    refusal letter  of  that  date.  Although  under  the  NRM  a  positive
    reasonable grounds decision was made, the  Appellant  also  received  a
    negative NRM Conclusive Grounds decision on 4 April 2018. (Something of
    the procedural history is set out in the RFRL at  paragraphs  22-30;  a
    more detailed history is set  out  in  a  chronology  prepared  by  the
    Appellant's representatives that was before the First-tier Tribunal.)


5.   The Appellant appealed to the IAC.


6.   The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appeal for  reasons  set  out  in
    the decision of Judge Norris promulgated on 24 April 2019.


7.   The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Permission to appeal was  granted  by  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Macdonald  on  28  May  2019.  In  material  part  the  grant  of
    permission is in these terms:


         "The first ground of appeal is that the Judge by  her  conduct  and
         comments and determination displayed an  appearance  of  bias.  The
         second ground is that  the  Judge  took  account  of  material  not
         available to the parties before reaching a decision. Other  grounds
         are put forward including that the Judge acted  unfairly  embarking
         upon cross-examination of the appellant. The witness  statement  of
         the barrister [who appeared on behalf of the Appellant  before  the
         First-tier Tribunal] is attached [to the Notice of Appeal].


         The Judge's decision extends to 33 pages and numerous  reasons  are
         given  for  dismissing  the   appeal.   Nevertheless,   given   the
         allegations of bias etc it seems appropriate to grant permission to
         appeal on all grounds."




8.   The appeal was listed before the Upper Tribunal on  20  June  2019.  On
    that day the presiding Judge adjourned the appeal on the basis that  it
    was considered appropriate to obtain a  response  from  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge in respect of the allegation touching on her conduct and
    possible bias. A 'Memorandum' has since been prepared by Upper Tribunal
    Judge O'Connor, dated 2 July 2019, and disseminated to the parties,  in
    which the Judge's response to the Grounds is set out.


Consideration of Error of Law

9.   The Grounds of appeal in support of the application for  permission  to
    appeal comprise 6 grounds, drafted by Ms Griffiths of Counsel  who  had
    appeared before the First-tier  Tribunal.  Ms  Griffiths  attended  the
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal not as a representative, but prepared
    to give evidence in support of her statement (which had  been  appended
    to the Notice of Appeal in support of the Grounds). In the event Ms Pal
    did not seek to cross-examine Ms Griffiths, and accordingly she was not
    called.


10.  Before me, Mr Gilbert sought to introduce a seventh  ground  of  appeal
    drafted by him. Ms Pal did not object to the grounds being  amended  to
    include this  additional  ground,  and  accordingly  I  permitted  such
    amendment.


11.  In summary, and utilising the headings of the Grounds  themselves,  the
    grounds of challenge are:

         (i) Ground 1: "The FtTJ by her conduct/comments  and  determination
         displayed an appearance of bias thereby depriving the Appellant  of
         a  fair  hearing".  This  challenge  is  focused  on  the   Judge's
         observations in respect of a country expert report relied  upon  by
         the Appellant, and the Judge's engagement with a report by the same
         expert in an earlier appeal.

         (ii) Ground  2:  "The  FtTJ  took  account  of  material  not  made
         available to the parties before reaching her decision, giving  rise
         to unfairness". This ground is closely  linked  to  Ground  1:  the
         'material not made available' is the decision of the Judge  in  the
         previous case involving the same expert, a passage from  which  the
         Judge quoted in the Decision and Reasons herein.

         (iii) Ground 3: "The FtTJ failed to deal with and/or  give  reasons
         for rejecting relevant material, and in so doing,  erred  in  law".
         Having aired her concerns in respect of the expert  report  at  the
         hearing, the Judge had afforded the  Appellant  an  opportunity  to
         make written representations after  the  hearing.  The  Appellant's
         counsel sent an email on 12 March 2019 seeking to address the issue
         raised by the Judge. No reference was made to this communication in
         the Decision.

         (iv) Ground 4: "The FTT acted unfairly  in  embarking  upon  cross-
         examination of the Appellant". Complaint is  made  that  the  Judge
         asked "a large number of questions of the Appellant  (approximately
         90) on matters relating to the credibility...  [Which]  effectively
         amounted to cross examination".  It  is  said  that  the  questions
         exceeded in number those of the  Respondent's  Presenting  Officer,
         and that such questioning "was  excessive,  inappropriate,  leading
         and contained within it the risk of apparent bias  to  an  informed
         observer".

         (v) Ground 5: "The FTT materially  erred  in  failing  to  properly
         apply the 'Joint Presidential Guidance Note No 2  of  2010:  Child,
         vulnerable  adult  and  sensitive  appellant  guidance'  given  the
         Appellant's vulnerable mental  health".  This  basis  of  challenge
         substantially overlaps with Ground 4 in  that  it  is  the  Judge's
         questioning that  is  said  to  illustrate  the  claimed  error  of
         approach.

         (vi) Ground 6: "The FtTJ failed to have regard to material evidence
         relied on by the Appellant". It is pleaded that  beyond  mentioning
         the existence of a report by an independent trafficking consultant,
         there was no further reference to the report or its contents. It is
         also pleaded that the Judge disregarded other country evidence.

         (vii) Ground 7: "The Tribunal erred with respect to  its  treatment
         of MB's medical evidence and the approach to  be  taken  towards  a
         vulnerable witness". It is submitted that  the  Judge  had  in  her
         approach to a  expert  medical  report,  and  that  such  error  of
         approach impacted upon  consideration  of  the  report  of  another
         medical practitioner, and also  the  requirement  to  evaluate  the
         Appellant's evidence with regard to the nature and  extent  of  her
         vulnerability.


12.  Mr Gilbert commenced his submissions by addressing Ground  6  which  he
    characterised as a 'cleaner point', different in nature from the  other
    Grounds. I also consider it convenient and appropriate to address  this
    Ground first, because I have reached  the  conclusion  that  it  is  of
    sufficient merit to justify setting aside the Decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal for error of law.


13.  In support of her case the  Appellant  had  relied  on,  amongst  other
    things,  a  report  dated  26  August  2016  by  Dr  Abigail   Stepnitz
    (Respondent's bundle before the  First-tier  Tribunal  at  I8-I16).  Dr
    Stepnitz professed expertise "based on my  own  experience  identifying
    and supporting trafficked people for more than eight years, as well  as
    my familiarity with a  wide  range  of  expert  reports,  publications,
    government, NGO  and  intergovernmental  guidance  and  other  relevant
    sources" (I8). Dr  Stepnitz  stated:  "there  are  indicators  in  [the
    Appellant's] case that she was indeed trafficked from Albania to  Italy
    and the UK" (report at  paragraph  25);  that  the  Appellant's  "early
    childhood and young adult experiences... are highly consistent with the
    narratives of other  women  who  have  been  trafficked  from  Northern
    Albania" (paragraph 26); "I find her account of sexual exploitation  to
    be consistent, plausible and similar to the  accounts  of  other  women
    trafficked from Northern Albania to both Italy and the  UK"  (paragraph
    28); and "I find her account of sexual  exploitation  highly  credible"
    (paragraph 29). Dr Stepnitz nonetheless acknowledged  that  there  were
    elements  in  the  Appellant's  memory  of  her  abduction,   transfer,
    harbouring  and  escape  which  were  either  absent  or   inconsistent
    (paragraph 29), but noted in this regard the available medical evidence
    and considered that gaps in memory "are undoubtedly influenced  by  her
    experiences, and in particular by  her  mental  health  at  this  time"
    (paragraph 30). Dr Stepnitz ultimately expressed the opinion that "gaps
    in her memory and expressions of confusion or  uncertainty...  make  it
    difficult to conclude  that  [the  Appellant]  experienced  trafficking
    specifically, as opposed to meeting  the  legal  definition  of  forced
    labour (prostitution) or  sexual  assault"  (paragraph  31),  and  "her
    account of forced  sexual  labour  and  rape/sexual  assault  are  both
    credible" (paragraph 32).


14.  In  addition  to  these  particular  observations  in  respect  of  the
    Appellant's case, Dr Stepnitz also made comments as to  the  manner  of
    presentation of narrative accounts: "In my experience the narratives of
    people have experienced of trafficking or forced labour are  frequently
    disjointed, fragmented and  disclosed  in  a  non-chronological  order"
    (paragraph 10).


15.  The Appellant's reliance on the report of  Dr  Stepnitz  was  expressly
    raised before the First-tier Tribunal in the Skeleton Argument  drafted
    by Counsel  as  being  a  matter  that  "significantly  supported"  the
    Appellant's account: see Appellant's  Skeleton  Argument  at  paragraph
    22(iv).


16.  The Decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  references  "report  of  A
    Stepnitz dated 26 August 2016" in listing the documents included in the
    Respondent's bundle (Decision at paragraph 3.1). At  paragraph  5.1  of
    the  Decision  the  Judge  makes  a  general  statement  that  she  has
    "considered thoroughly" each of the bundles in the appeal, and  further
    comments to the effect  that  the  absence  of  mention  of  "a  detail
    specifically" is not an indication that it has not been read and/or its
    significance noted.


17.  Beyond noting the  existence  of  the  report  at  paragraph  3.1  -  a
    reference that does not in itself acknowledge  the  author's  title  or
    otherwise indicate any consideration as to her  level  of  expertise  -
    there is no further reference to the report or its contents. Ms Pal  is
    frank in acknowledging as much.


18.  In addressing Ground 6 Ms Pal drew my attention to the  fact  that  the
    Judge had had regard to the reports of  other  experts,  and  had  made
    findings in the appeal pursuant to the consideration of such reports. I
    was invited to conclude that overall the  Judge  had  demonstrated  due
    consideration to the evidence, and had otherwise  adequately  explained
    her findings.


19.  Even allowing for the premise of Ms Pal's submission - that  the  Judge
    had had due regard to the medical report  of  Dr  Abigail  Selzer,  the
    psychiatric report of  Dr  Krishna  Balasubramaniam,  and  the  country
    information report of Ms Antonia Young -  I  do  not  accept  that  the
    complete failure to engage with the report of a  professed  trafficking
    expert was not a material error of law. The evidence of Dr Stepnitz was
    relevant and significant; it was expressly relied upon;  the  Appellant
    was entitled to know what the decision-maker  made  of  such  evidence.
    Whilst I acknowledge  that  it  is  not  incumbent  upon  a  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge to deal  with  every  single  detail  of  evidence,  the
    potential importance of  Dr  Stepnitz's  evidence  to  the  Appellant's
    overall case was such that a fair and just decision required  not  only
    the Tribunal to take the report into account, but to make  findings  on
    it and explain those findings in the written Decision. I do not  accept
    that the Judge's 'protective' observations at paragraph 5.1 suffice  in
    this particular instance.


20.  In my judgement the error  in  this  regard  is  of  such  gravity  and
    materiality that it requires the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to
    be set aside. Given that the error impacts on the  credibility  of  the
    account, the case will require to be reheard with all issues at  large;
    the appropriate forum is the First-tier Tribunal.


21.  Given my  conclusion  in  respect  of  Ground  6  it  is  not  strictly
    necessary for me  to  engage  with  the  other  grounds  of  challenge.
    However, because of the very particular nature of the  challenge  under
    Grounds 1 and 2, I consider it appropriate that  I  make  some  further
    observations.


22.  As indicated above, the Appellant placed  reliance  in  part  upon  the
    evidence of a country  expert  Ms  Antonia  Young.  During  preliminary
    discussions the Judge raised some concerns in  respect  of  Ms  Young's
    reports. She did so with reference to a report by Ms Young that she had
    seen in another appeal. The Judge makes the following comments  in  the
    Decision:

         "... I also raised my concerns with the  report  (and  supplemental
         report) of Ms Antonia  Young  that  had  been  handed  up  for  the
         Appellant. I had previously had a report before me from Ms Young in
         another case some four months previously, in  which  she  had  been
         similarly instructed by [the Appellant's solicitors]. I have  noted
         that Ms Young sought to validate her credentials on  that  occasion
         by including congratulatory  emails  from  the  representatives  of
         successful appellants. I had raised it on that  occasion  with  the
         appellant's Counsel (who was not Ms Griffiths), who had agreed with
         me and indeed stated that she had noted it herself. I had said that
         Ms Young appeared to overlook her neutral  duty  to  the  Court  by
         including  emails  where  she   had   successfully   assisted   the
         appellants, losing the appropriate balance." (paragraph 3.8).


23.  The Judge then went on to quote from her Decision in the  other  appeal
    in respect of the use of "testimonials from different cases" (paragraph
    3.8). At paragraph 3.9 the Judge set out a further  critical  quotation
    from her earlier  decision,  and  at  paragraph  3.10  commented  "Most
    regrettably, these defects appear in the report... in this  case  too".
    The Judge continued:

         "These defects once more undermined Ms Young's credibility  because
         they mean she not only exaggerates but also strays again into being
         an advocate for Appellant rather than an unbiased expert - the very
         issues for which she was criticised by the Court of Appeal in MF. I
         emphasised that this means I will  placed  limited  weight  on  her
         report; however, those instructing Ms Griffiths had chosen to  rely
         on this report and I did not consider it appropriate to adjourn  so
         that a different one could be prepared." (paragraph 3.10).


24.  It is pleaded in Ground 1 that the Judge's conduct in this  regard  was
    "indicative of a pre-existing hostility and/or  predisposition  towards
    the Appellant's country expert which arose long before the  appeal  had
    begun, which impacted on her decision in the case", such that there was
    "a clear appearance of bias" (Grounds at paragraph 9 and 10).


25.  I do not accept this submission.


26.  It is not at all uncommon  for  Judges  in  this  jurisdiction  to  see
    reports in different cases from the same expert. In principle it  seems
    to me entirely appropriate that if a Judge had concerns about a report,
    or an expert, in relation to one case,  then  if  the  same  expert  is
    relied upon in another case and produces a report containing  the  same
    features that had given rise to  the  earlier  concerns,  that  such  a
    matter be raised with the Appellant's advocate. This does not  hint  at
    bias, but at consistency. It is also  an  essentially  fair  procedure,
    because it draws to the attention of the  advocate  a  matter  that  is
    troubling the Judge and thereby affords an opportunity  for  it  to  be
    addressed.


27.  Nor do I consider the fact that the Judge then quoted from her  earlier
    decision is indicative of bias. If anything,  this  is  a  point  about
    procedural fairness and natural justice: however,  in  so  far  as  the
    passages quoted from  the  earlier  decision  may  have  been  directly
    pertinent to the Judge's concerns in the instant decision,  I  can  see
    nothing in this point. Had the Judge pasted the  same  words  into  the
    present Decision without  setting  them  out  as  quotations  from  her
    earlier decision there could be no complaint in this regard. I  do  not
    see how the fact that they are set out as quotations  from  an  earlier
    case, or the fact that the Appellant's advocate had not  had  sight  of
    the  Judge's  decision  in  the  earlier  case,  makes   any   material
    difference.


28.  Whether or not the Judge's criticisms of Ms Young are well  founded  is
    a  different  issue.  The  criticisms  in  themselves  do  not,  in  my
    judgement, indicate bias.


29.   The  Appellant's  counsel  before   the   First-tier   Tribunal   made
    observations in respect of the Judge's concerns about Ms Young's report
    in an email dated 12 March 2019 sent to the  Tribunal  further  to  the
    leave given by the Judge to make further written submissions in respect
    of the medical evidence. The email actually notes  that  no  additional
    submissions are to be made in respect of the medical evidence,  and  as
    such it would appear the only purpose in sending it was to  communicate
    the comments in respect of Ms Young's report - notwithstanding that  on
    its face it is stated that counsel  does  "not  seek  to  make  further
    formal submissions on it". The relevant parts of the email are in these
    terms:

         "I have noted two matters which I would respectfully draw  to  your
         attention. In respect of the  emails  accompanying  the  report,  I
         noted that there is one which related to  an  unsuccessful  outcome
         and on a fair reading it does seem that what the expert is  seeking
         to do is simply show her reports have being useful  to  the  court,
         not necessarily leading  to  success.  On  the  use  of  the  words
         'literally' at page 42 of the report, having re-read  the  sentence
         in which it has been used, it does not appear that  the  expert  is
         saying literally every individual in Albania but rather it  is  the
         networks of kin and clans in which everyone  knows  eachother,  and
         that that Albania is formed of those networks."


30.  Ground 3 is based on the Judge's failure to engage  with  the  contents
    of this email. In the premises, it seems to me  that  that  is  a  bold
    submission when the email is drafted in terms where it declines to make
    submissions in respect of the matter upon which leave had been given to
    provide written submissions after the hearing, and in  respect  of  the
    issue upon which it does make comment, such comments are preceded  with
    the indication that counsel was not  seeking  to  make  further  formal
    submissions.


31.  In the event, the  Judge  in  her  comments  invited  pursuant  to  the
    adjournment on 20 June 2019 states that she did not receive the  email.
    I see no reason not to accept that the email may not have  been  passed
    on to the Judge.


32.  As indicated above it is  not  necessary  for  me  to  reach  any  firm
    conclusion in respect of this basis of challenge. I  merely  note  that
    there  does  seem  to  be  some  considerable   weight   to   counsel's
    observations in respect of the use of the  word  'literally'  as  being
    intended to indicate that 'literally everyone knows everyone  within  a
    network of kin and neighbours',  and  not  intended  to  indicate  that
    'everyone knows everyone in Albania'.


33.  I do not propose to make  any  findings  or  reach  any  conclusion  in
    respect of the Grounds pleading  that  the  Judge  breached  the  Joint
    Presidential Guidance in respect of vulnerable witnesses, or  otherwise
    inappropriately cross-examined the Appellant. For the record, I observe
    that the Judge has denied such allegations: in essence she states  that
    the number of her questions, and the concomitant time taken, arose  for
    the very reason that the Appellant was vulnerable  and  the  Judge  was
    seeking to 'set the scene' with short questions in  a  lead-up  to  the
    particular matters upon  which  clarification  was  sought.  The  Judge
    states  that  otherwise  she  sought  to  accommodate  the  Appellant's
    vulnerability, including prompting the Appellant to take a  break  when
    she appeared distressed during cross-examination.


34.  Similarly I do not propose to make  any  findings  in  respect  of  the
    amended Ground 7. It will be for the next  judicial  decision-maker  to
    determine anew what weight is to be  given  to  the  available  medical
    evidence,  and  to  determine  how  such  evidence   corroborates   the
    Appellant's account, and/or  offers  some  explanation  for  any  gaps,
    discrepancies, or fragmentation  of  the  narrative  account,  and  the
    extent to which the Appellant's evidence is to be evaluated through the
    prism of any vulnerabilities.


Notice of Decision

35.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law and is set aside.


36.  The decision in the appeal  is  to  be  remade  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by any judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Norris  with
    all issues at large.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:                                 Date: 13 February 2020

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
