
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00076/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Considered on the papers             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 November 2020                   |On 5 November 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                      A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge EMM
    Smith, promulgated on 11 March 2020. Permission to appeal  was  granted
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Adio on 28 April 2020.

Anonymity

 2. An anonymity direction was made previously  owing  to  the  appellant's
    then minority. I now make such a direction as he remains a young person
    and also owing to the nature of his protection claim.

Background

 3. The appellant is a citizen of  Iraq  who  entered  the  United  Kingdom
    clandestinely during March 2019, aged 16.  He applied for asylum on  20
    May 2019. It is the refusal of that claim, communicated in  a  decision
    dated 1 November 2019, which is the subject of this appeal.

 4. The basis of the appellant's protection claim is that he is of  Kurdish
    ethnicity, hails  from  Erbil  and  was  physically  assaulted  by  the
    relatives of his girlfriend, 'R.' R's family were said to have  a  high
    political  profile.  That  assault   left   the   appellant   requiring
    hospitalisation for 3 months, following which he stayed with  relatives
    in Sulaymaniyah for a further 6 months. He returned to Erbil for 3 days
    prior to leaving Iraq during 2016. The appellant  flew  to  Turkey  and
    thereafter  passed  through  a  series  of  European  countries  before
    arriving in the United Kingdom.

 5. In the decision letter of 1 November 2019, the respondent rejected  the
    central plank of the appellant's claim, that he  had  received  adverse
    attention from R's family. In addition,  it  was  considered  that  the
    appellant could obtain a CSID upon returning to Erbil, following  which
    he could relocate within the Iraqi Kurdish Region (IKR).

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 6. Following  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  judge
    concluded that the appellant had failed to substantiate his  claim  and
    that he was  an  economic  migrant.  The  judge  further  rejected  the
    appellant's claim that he would be unable  to  obtain  a  new  CSID  or
    equivalent,  considering  SMO  &  others   (Article   15(c);   identity
    documents) Iraq [2019] UKUT 00400 (IAC).

The grounds of appeal

 7. The grounds of appeal focused on the judge's findings  in  relation  to
    the appellant obtaining a replacement CSID and in applying SMO. It  was
    argued  that  the  judge  failed  to  take  relevant  aspects  of   the
    appellant's evidence into consideration.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis sought. In addition,  the
    judge granting permission noted that the  First-tier  Tribunal  wrongly
    referred to the balance of probability  at  [27]  in  relation  to  the
    credibility of the appellant's account regarding his ability to  access
    his CSID details.

The procedural history

 9. On 28 July 2020, the parties were sent directions which  expressed  the
    provisional  view  that  the  questions  of  whether   the   First-tier
    Tribunal's decision involved an error of law and whether it  should  be
    set aside, could be determined without a hearing.

10. The parties were invited to provide  submissions  and  respond  to  the
    proposal to consider the matter without a hearing.




11. The Secretary of State  provided  a  response  to  the  above-mentioned
    directions on  31  July  2020,  agreeing  that  this  appeal  could  be
    considered without a hearing. In  addition,  the  respondent  explained
    that the writer had not  seen  the  grounds  of  appeal  and  therefore
    submissions would address only the grant of permission. The  respondent
    did not accept that the First-tier Tribunal elevated  the  standard  of
    proof and made reference to paragraphs [16] and [28] which referred  to
    the appropriate standard. Furthermore, the phrase used by the judge was
    made solely in respect of the finding that the appellant's family  were
    still in their former home.

12. The appellant's response to directions was received on 10  August  2020
    and was accompanied by the grounds of appeal, for the  benefit  of  the
    respondent. The appellant agreed that the question as to whether  there
    was an error of law and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  should
    be set aside could be considered  without  a  hearing.  Otherwise,  the
    submissions amplified the grounds of appeal as  well  as  Judge  Adio's
    grant of permission.

13. Given the time that has elapsed since the grant of permission  as  well
    as the Upper  Tribunal  directions,  I  consider  that  it  is  in  the
    interests of justice that this appeal be progressed. In the absence  of
    any objections from  the  parties  or  any  other  apparent  reason  to
    consider this matter at an oral hearing, I have resolved to decide  the
    relevant issues on the papers.

Decision on error of law

14. I have taken into consideration both sets of submissions as well as all
    the evidence which was before the judge in reaching my decision.

15. At [27], the judge said the following  regarding  the  claim  that  the
    appellant does not have a CSID card and has no family in Iraq  to  help
    him obtain one as he has  no  idea  where  they  are.  "However,  I  am
    satisfied that bearing in mind that they had lived in the  family  home
    for 9 months after the incident and were still there when the appellant
    spoke with them when in Turkey, that it is more than probable that  the
    family are still living in the family home not least because of the job
    as a taxi driver the appellant's father had which requires knowledge of
    the area he worked." While  the  judge's  reference  to  the  incorrect
    standard was regrettable, it is the case that the correct standard  was
    applied to the overall claim, as evidenced  by  [28]  where  the  judge
    stated; "the appellant has not satisfied me even to the lower level  of
    proof that he does not know where his  parents  and  brother  are."  In
    addition,  at  [16],   the   judge's   self-direction   is   faultless.
    Nonetheless, I conclude that the judge's use of the word 'probable'  in
    relation to the sole and  crucial  issue  of  the  whereabouts  of  the
    appellant's family gives the  overwhelming  impression  that  a  higher
    standard was wrongly employed here.

16. Furthermore, the judge's conclusion that the appellant  could  turn  to
    his parents and  brother  for  assistance  with  obtaining  a  CSID  or
    equivalent was not supported by significant aspects of the evidence, to
    which the judge made no reference. Evidence to which the judge did  not
    refer includes the appellant's oral evidence that when he last spoke to
    his family, his father said that he was planning to sell the house  and
    move elsewhere.  The  appellant  stated  the  same  during  his  asylum
    interview at [115].

17. The appellant left Iraq in 2016 and last spoke to his family  upon  his
    arrival in Turkey, which was the first country he travelled through and
    where he spent only 10 days. This aspect of the appellant's account was
    worthy of consideration, in view of the four years  which  has  elapsed
    between his last contact with his family and the date of  the  hearing.
    Furthermore, I have no reason to doubt what is said in the  appellant's
    submissions that his evidence at the  hearing  was  that  he  had  made
    efforts to trace his family, via the Red Cross. There is no mention  of
    this matter in the decision and reasons. The  judge's  conclusion  that
    the appellant could obtain a CSID with the help of his family is  based
    solely on the finding that it was "more than probable" that his  family
    were still living where they were when the appellant last spoke to them
    in 2016, despite his father having specifically stated that the  family
    were going to move.

18. The failure of the First-tier Tribunal to cite the correct standard  of
    proof or to consider  relevant  evidence  regarding  the  core  of  the
    appellant's case which remained after his claim of persecution had been
    rejected, amounts to a material error of law, without which a different
    outcome might have been achieved. Accordingly, I set aside the decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal in relation to the ability of the  appellant
    to obtain a replacement CSID. There was no complaint in the grounds  in
    relation to the judge's findings at [17-24] regarding his alleged  fear
    of his girlfriend's family and those findings are preserved.



Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Birmingham, with a time estimate of 3 hours by any  judge  except  First-
tier Tribunal Judge EMM Smith.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:                                 Date 19 November 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara




                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent.


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email

