
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/00342/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 15 January 2019                        |On 08 March 2019                  |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                                WAHAB WAFADAR
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Bhatti
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a  citizen  of  Afghanistan.  His  date  of  birth  is
    disputed. By a decision dated 20 December 2017, the Secretary of  State
    refused  the  appellant's  claim  for  international  protection.   The
    appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  which,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 4 May 2018, dismissed  the  appeal.  The  appellant  now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Neither  the  grounds  of  appeal  nor  the  grant  of  permission  are
    particularly coherent. The  grounds  and  grant  appear  to  raise  two
    particular issues. First, the grounds challenge the age assessment upon
    which the judge relied. At [19], the judge recorded that, on entry into
    the United Kingdom in May 2016, the appellant claimed that  he  was  16
    years old. The appellant had been referred to Cambridge County  Council
    Child Services (CCCCS) for an age assessment. A letter written by CCCCS
    and dated 3 May 2016 gives an assessment of age  as  at  that  date  in
    excess of 18 years. At the hearing before the judge, the appellant  was
    unable to tell the judge his year of birth or his  age.  As  the  judge
    records, 'he stated variously that he was 19,  20  and  21  during  the
    hearing.' The judge found [22] the appellant was over 18 years  old  at
    the date of entry. The judge granting permission appears to  have  been
    concerned by the brevity of the  CCCCS  age  assessment.  However,  the
    appellant had not challenged that assessment by way of judicial review.
    I  find  that  the  judge  was  entitled  to   have   regard   to   it,
    notwithstanding its brevity.

 3.  The  second  ground  of  challenge  concerns   the   internal   flight
    alternative. The judge rejected  the  credibility  of  the  appellant's
    account but found, in the alternative, that would not be  unduly  harsh
    for the appellant 'a  fit  young  man  with  some  education'  and  'no
    particular vulnerabilities' who had demonstrated that he is  a  man  of
    'resilience and  resourcefulness'  having  travelled  overland  to  the
    United Kingdom to relocate to Kabul. The appellant  contends  that  the
    judge, incorrectly relying upon the  age  assessment,  failed  to  have
    regard to his vulnerability and failed  also  to  have  regard  to  his
    asylum interview in which he had complained that he was suffering  from
    memory loss. This, the grounds of appeal suggest,  indicates  that  the
    appellant my be suffering from mental illness which requires treatment.
    The appellant had not obtained any form of medical evidence the grounds
    assert that the judge should have adjourned the  hearing  to  enable  a
    medical report to be commissioned.  This  argument  is  wholly  without
    merit. No application was made  from  the  adjournment.  The  interview
    record touches briefly upon the appellant's complaint about his  memory
    but there is no suggestion at all that he is suffering from any  mental
    condition which would render  is  internal  flight  within  Afghanistan
    unduly harsh. Even by the appellant's  own  somewhat  incoherent  self-
    assessment, he was over the age of 18 years at the  date  the  tribunal
    hearing. The judge was unarguably entitled to conclude on the  evidence
    that internal flight to Kabul would not be unduly harsh.  That  finding
    as  regards  internal  flight  was   determinative   of   the   appeal,
    irrespective of the credibility of  the  appellant's  account  of  past
    events.



Notice of Decision

 4. This appeal is dismissed.




Signed                              Date 2 February 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

