
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00816/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |                                     |
|Remotely by Microsoft Teams          |                                     |
|On 10 June 2021                      |On 24 June 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                 Yassin [J]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Broachwalla instructed by Burton & Burton
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of the Gambia who was born  on  14  February
    1992.

 2. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in  August  2007,  aged  15
    years old.  She accompanied her mother and was  granted  leave  from  8
    August 2007 until 8 February 2008.  Thereafter,  she  overstayed.   Her
    mother returned to the Gambia leaving the appellant in the UK.

 3. On 9 September 2014, the appellant claimed asylum on the basis that  on
    return to the Gambia she would be at risk  of  a  forced  marriage  and
    Female Genital Mutilation (FGM).  On 12 February 2015, the Secretary of
    State  refused  the  appellant's  claims   for   asylum,   humanitarian
    protection and under the ECHR.

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a decision  sent
    on 11 December 2015, Judge McDade dismissed the appellant's  appeal  on
    all grounds.  He rejected her account which was that she  would  be  at
    risk of FGM on return to Gambia.  In addition, the judge dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal under the ECHR, including under Art  8.   Permission
    to appeal was refused by the First-tier Tribunal on 19 January 2016 and
    by the Upper Tribunal on 31 March 2017.  The  appellant  became  appeal
    rights exhausted on 31 March 2017.

 5. On 4 November 2019, the  appellant  lodged  further  submissions.   The
    basis of those submissions was that she was a  carer  for  her  sister,
    Ramou, in the UK who had indefinite leave  to  remain.   On  6  January
    2020, the Secretary of State refused the appellant's human rights claim
    under para 276 ADE(1) of the Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended)  and
    also outside the Rules under Art 8 of the ECHR.

 6. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a decision dated
    13 November 2020, Judge Parkes dismissed the appellant's  appeal  under
    both para 276ADE(1)(vi) and under Art 8 outside the Rules.

 7. The appellant sought permission  to  appeal  to  the   Upper  Tribunal.
    Initially, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge O'Garro)  refused  permission
    to appeal on 21 December 2020.  However, on 18 February 2021, the Upper
    Tribunal (UTJ Sheridan) granted the appellant permission to appeal.

 8. On 2 March 2021, the Secretary  of  State  filed  a  rule  24  response
    seeking to uphold the judge's decision.

The Grounds of Appeal

 9. The appellant's grounds of appeal, drafted  by  Mr  Broachwalla,  raise
    three points.

10. Ground 1 contends that the judge  failed  properly  to  carry  out  the
    proportionality assessment under Art 8 of the ECHR.  First,  the  judge
    failed properly to apply ss.117B(2), (3) and (4)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  (as  amended).   Secondly,  the  judge
    failed to take into account the impact  upon  the  appellant's  private
    life in the UK, rather than her family life with her sister, Ramou, for
    whom she was a carer.

11. Ground 2 contends that the judge  failed  properly  to  assess  whether
    there were "very significant obstacles" to the appellant's  integration
    on return to Gambia under para 276ADE(1)(vi), in particular by  failing
    to have regard to the fact that she arrived in the UK as  a  child  and
    her circumstances on return.

12. Ground 3 contends that the judge failed to give  adequate  reasons  why
    the appellant and her sister (if she travelled with  the  appellant  to
    the Gambia) would have family support on return.

The Submissions

13. In his oral submissions, Mr Broachwalla accepted  that  ss.117B(2)  and
    (3) had no positive impact upon the appellant's claim as the fact  that
    she was financially independent and spoke  English  were  both  neutral
    factors.

14. Mr Broachwalla, however, submitted that the judge had failed to grapple
    with the appellant's private life  claim,  focusing  instead  upon  the
    impact upon her sister  for  whom  she  claimed  to  be  a  carer.   He
    submitted that even though the focus of  the  appellant's  case  before
    Judge Parkes  was  the  impact  upon  the  appellant's  sister  if  the
    appellant returned to the Gambia, the judge nevertheless  was  required
    to  consider  the  impact  upon  the  appellant's  private  life   more
    generally, including that she had come to the UK as  a  child  and  had
    lived here since the age of 15.  The judge had also focused on the fact
    that the appellant had overstayed, even though she had been a child  at
    the time.

15. As regards the appellant's  situation  on  return  to  the  Gambia,  Mr
    Broachwalla submitted that the judge had failed to  engage  fully  with
    the evidence concerning the appellant's situation if  she  returned  to
    the Gambia, including that she had no relationship with her father  who
    lived there.  Mr Broachwalla submitted  that  the  judge  had  focused,
    instead, on the fact that the appellant's sister  could  accompany  the
    appellant to the Gambia.

16. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Tan submitted that  the  focus  of  the
    appellant's application for leave and case before  the  judge  was  the
    impact upon her sister for whom the appellant said she was a carer.  He
    submitted that there were no details of relationships with other family
    members or, indeed, more generally  of her private life in the UK which
    could have led the judge to allow the appellant's appeal under Art 8 if
    he had had regard to her  "private  life".   He  submitted  that  Judge
    McDade's decision in 2015  was  a  "starting  point"  on  all  relevant
    matters and, taking  into  account  the  way  in  which  the  case  was
    presented to the judge and the evidence relied upon,  it  was  properly
    open to Judge Parkes to dismiss the appellant's appeal under Art  8  of
    the ECHR.

Discussion

17. Mr Broachwalla relied upon the summary of the approach to Art 8  claims
    set out in the Court of Appeal's decision in  GM  (Sri  Lanka)  v  SSHD
    [2019] EWCA Civ 1630 (Green and Simler LJJ).  At [25]-[32],  the  Court
    of Appeal set out six "general points about the proportionality  test".
    It is helpful to set that out as a background to the submissions.   The
    substance of those points is at [27]-[32] as follows:
         "27. First, the IR and section 117B must  be  construed  to  ensure
         consistency with Article 8. This accords with  ordinary  principles
         of legality  whereby  Parliament  is  assumed  to  intend  to  make
         legislation which is lawful (see for example R v SSHD ex p. Simms 2
         AC   115    at    page    131;    and Bennion    on    Statutory
         Interpretation (7th Edition) at page  718  -  there  is  "a  high
         threshold for rebutting this presumption"). Were it otherwise  then
         domestic legislation could become inconsistent with  the  HRA  1998
         and the ECHR and be at risk of a declaration of incompatibility.
         28. Second, national authorities have a margin of appreciation when
         setting the weighting to be  applied  to  various  factors  in  the
         proportionality assessment: Agyarko (ibid) paragraph  [46].  That
         margin of appreciation is not unlimited but is nonetheless real and
         important (ibid). Immigration control  is  an  intensely  political
         matter and "within limits" it can accommodate different approaches
         adopted by different national  authorities.  A  court  must  accord
         "considerable weight" to the policy of the Secretary of State at  a
         "general level": Agyarko paragraph [47] and paragraphs [56] - [57];
         and see also Ali paragraphs [44] -  [46],  [50]  and  [53].  This
         includes the policy weightings set out in Section 117B.  To  ensure
         consistency with the HRA 1998 and  the  ECHR,  section  117B  must,
         however, have injected into it a limited degree of  flexibility  so
         that the application of the statutory provisions would always  lead
         to an  end  result  consistent  with  Article  8: Rhuppiah (ibid)
         paragraphs [36] and [49].
         29. Third, the test for an assessment outside the IR is  whether  a
         "fair balance" is  struck  between  competing  public  and  private
         interests.  This  is  a  proportionality   test: Agyarko (ibid)
         paragraphs [41] and [60]; see also Ali paragraphs  [32],  [47]  -
         [49]. In order to ensure that references in the IR and in policy to
         a case having to be "exceptional" before leave  to  remain  can  be
         granted, are consistent with Article  8,  they  must  be  construed
         as not imposing any incremental requirement over and  above  that
         arising out of the application  of  an  Article  8  proportionality
         test,  for  instance  that  there  be  "some  highly  unusual"   or
         "unique" factor or feature: Agyarko (ibid) paragraphs  [56]  and
         [60].
         30. Fourth, the proportionality  test  is  to  be  applied  on  the
         "circumstances of the individual case": Agyarko (ibid) paragraphs
         [47] and [60]. The facts  must  be  evaluated  in  a  "real  world"
         sense: EV (Philippines) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874 at  paragraph
         [58] ("EV Philippines").
         31. Fifth,  there  is  a  requirement  for  proper  evidence.  Mere
         assertion by an applicant as to his/her personal circumstances  and
         as to the evidence will not  however  necessarily  be  accepted  as
         adequate: In Mudibo v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1949 at paragraph [31]
         the applicant did not give oral evidence during the appeal  hearing
         and relied upon  assertions  unsupported  by  documentary  evidence
         which were neither self-evident  nor  necessarily  logical  in  the
         context of other evidence. The FTT and the Court of Appeal rejected
         the evidence as mere "assertion".
         32. Sixth, the list of relevant  factors  to  be  considered  in  a
         proportionality assessment is "not closed". There is  in  principle
         no limit to the factors which might, in a given case,  be  relevant
         to an evaluation  under  Article  8,  which  is  a  fact  sensitive
         exercise. This obvious point was recognised by  the  Supreme  Court
         in Ali (ibid) at paragraphs [115ff]] and by the Court  of  Appeal
         in TZ (Pakistan) and PG (India) v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 1109 ("TZ")
         at paragraph [29]. Nonetheless, there is in practice  a  relatively
         well trodden list of factors which tend to arise in the  cases.  We
         address those of relevance to this appeal below. But others  exist,
         identified in  Strasbourg  and  domestic  case  law,  such  as  the
         personal conduct of an applicant or family member  in  relation  to
         immigration control eg. breach of  immigration  rules  or  criminal
         law, or public order  considerations;  the  extent  of  social  and
         economic ties to the UK; and the existence of  prolonged  delay  in
         removing the applicant during which time  the  individual  develops
         strong family and social ties: See  generally Ali paragraph  [28]
         citing with approval Jeunesse v The Netherlands (2014) 60 EHRR 17
         ("Jeunesse")"




18. Mr Broachwalla submitted that Judge Parkes had failed in paras 19-20 of
    his determination, properly to assess proportionality,  and  carry  out
    the balancing exercise inherent in  it,  in  accordance  with  GM  (Sri
    Lanka).  At paras 19-20, Judge Parkes said this:

         "19. In assessing where the balance lies  the  private  and  family
             life of the appellant and her sister are relevant.   As  noted
             above care is provided by their other sister and is  available
             from various state agencies.  Ramou has  travelled  to  Gambia
             with the appellant's assistance where they still have  family.
             The appellant no doubt provides care and is company for  Ramou
             and may well do more than a paid carer would.

         20.  Against that is the fact that the arrangements now  relied  on
             were not raised at the hearing before Judge  McDade  and  came
             into being after the asylum had been rejected  and  both  knew
             what the appellant's status was.  Before  that  the  appellant
             had remained in the UK without leave  and  her  situation  had
             always been at best precarious and  latterly  illegal.   There
             are alternatives to the care provided by the appellant and  in
             the circumstances I find that the balance  does  not  fall  in
             favour of the appellant.  As matters stand  I  find  that  the
             appellant's  removal  would  not  be  disproportionate  having
             regard to Article 8 in the situation she has created".

19. Although the grounds contend that the judge failed to  consider  s.117B
    of the 2002 Act, Mr Broachwalla resiled from  that  contention  in  his
    oral submissions.  He was right to do so.  First, the judge  refers  to
    s.117B in para 4 of his determination  as  relevant  to  the  balancing
    exercise  in  assessing  whether  the  appellant's  circumstances   are
    outweighed by the public interest.  Secondly, Mr  Broachwalla  accepted
    that the fact that the appellant could speak English and that  she  was
    financially independent did not provide any  positive  support  to  her
    claim.  That, in my judgment, is the proper position and  understanding
    of the law as set out by the Supreme Court in Rhuppiah  v  SSHD  [2018]
    UKSC 58 at [57].

20. Likewise, as regards the appellant's "family  life"  with  her  sister,
    Ramou in the UK, s.117B(4) has no application.  Even though her  family
    life was formed essentially whilst the appellant  was  "unlawfully"  in
    the UK, s.117B(4) only applies such  that  "little  weight"  should  be
    given to that family life, where it relates to "a  relationship  formed
    with a qualifying partner".  That does not  apply  to  the  appellant's
    family life and relationship with her sister.  Of course,  family  life
    formed, at a time when both  parties  realise  that  the  existence  of
    family life would be "precarious", is relevant in assessing what weight
    should  be  given  to  family  life  and   whether   there   would   be
    "unjustifiably harsh consequences" (see Jeunesse v  Netherlands  (2015)
    60 EHRR 17  and R(Agyarko and another) v SSHD [2017] UKSC 11  at  [49]-
    [53]; [54]-[55] and [60]).

21. That said, it is far from clear to  me  that  the  judge  did  apply  a
    "little weight" approach to the impact upon the appellant's family life
    with her sister under s.117B(5).  What the  judge  said,  at  para  17,
    related to Jeunesse and was, in my judgment, entirely  consistent  with
    it.  There he said:

         "Both (the appellant and her sister) are obliged to comply with and
         respect the Rules that apply to them as Jeunesse makes clear and  a
         situation created when a person is in  an  ECHR  contracting  state
         without leave attracts less protection.  States are not obliged  to
         accept the circumstances created unlawfully, and in  the  knowledge
         that they are in breach of the relevant laws, as a fait accompli".

22. In my judgment, that was not, on its face, a  misdirection  as  to  the
    proper approach.

23. However, in addition under ground 1  Mr  Broachwalla  submits,  relying
    upon para 7 of his grounds, that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  the
    appellant's "private life" claim, particularly in regard  to  the  fact
    that she had come to the UK as  a  15  year  old  child  in  2007  and,
    although she had overstayed, she had done so at a time when she  was  a
    child.

24. It is clear on reading Judge Parkes'  decision  that,  apart  from  the
    consideration of the impact upon the appellant's private life in Gambia
    under para 276ADE(1)(vi), the judge did not deal with the  impact  upon
    her private life in the UK formed since 2007 when she first arrived  in
    the UK as a child.  That is, perhaps, understandable given the  way  in
    which the case was presented  to  the  judge.   The  appellant  relied,
    before the judge, principally upon the impact on her relationship  with
    her sister as her sister's  carer.   There  nevertheless,  remained  an
    aspect of the appellant's claim which was about her own private life in
    the UK.  She had been in the UK for some thirteen years since  she  was
    15 years old.  Mr Tan is undoubtedly correct to submit that there  was,
    at best, limited evidence concerning the appellant's private  life  and
    the impact upon it if she were to leave the UK.   The  judge,  however,
    did not consider the appellant's private life, in this regard, at  all.
    The point was an obvious one.  Even though it was not a  focus  of  the
    appellant's claim, given those circumstances, it  was  in  my  judgment
    incumbent upon the judge to consider the extent to which, if  any,  the
    appellant's private life in the UK would be affected by her removal and
    whether or  not  that,  as  part  of  the  overall  assessment  of  her
    circumstances, would result in a disproportionate interference with her
    Art 8 rights.

25. Although Mr Tan did not explicitly put it in these terms, the issue  is
    raised as to whether that failure was material.  There is, in my  view,
    some merit in Mr Tan's submission that the appellant's claim based upon
    her "private life" was not particularly strong on the  material  before
    the judge.  However, in order for his failure to consider it not to  be
    material, I must  be  satisfied  that  her  claim  under  Art  8  would
    certainly or inevitably fail if the judge had  considered  her  private
    life formed since a 15 year old in the UK over the intervening fourteen
    years.

26. Of course, the appellant's private life claim under Art 8 of  the  ECHR
    is, in part, connected to her reliance upon  para  276ADE(1)(vi)  which
    the judge did deal with in paras 22 and 23 of his determination.  There
    he said this:

         "22. So far as the appellant's ability to return and reintegrate to
             Gambia is concerned I note that there is still the appellant's
             parents living there and clearly there is contact between  the
             family in the UK and in Gambia.  Relations  are  close  enough
             for Ramou to have travelled there and living  conditions  must
             have been deemed to be sufficient for her having regard to her
             needs.  The suggestion the appellant  would  have  no  support
             there and cannot reintegrate is not sustainable.

         23.  That the appellant would prefer to remain in the UK is obvious
             but does not show that if returned to Gambia  she  would  face
             any significant obstacles or that the situation could be  said
             to be unduly harsh.  On the evidence there are  no  compelling
             circumstances that would justify a grant of leave outside  the
             Immigration Rules".

27. That passage is challenged in Grounds 2 and 3.  There is  merit  in  Mr
    Broachwalla's submission that the judge has failed to grapple with  the
    appellant's witness statement, in particular para 21 of that statement,
    where she points out that she has no siblings in the  Gambia  and  that
    her relationship with her father has broken  down  and  that  she  last
    spoke to  him  around  six  years  previously.   In  stating  that  the
    appellant has family in the Gambia and that there  is  contact  between
    the family in the UK and in the Gambia,  the  judge  has  not  resolved
    whether or not the appellant has family (in particular a  parent)  with
    whom she has a relationship and from whom she could obtain  support  as
    part of her reintegration on return.  The judge,  instead,  focuses  on
    the fact that the appellant's sister  Ramou  had  travelled  there  and
    focuses upon her sister's ability to live in  the  Gambia  rather  than
    that of the appellant.  As is clear from the evidence, the  appellant's
    sister went for a three week holiday which  would  not  equate  to  the
    appellant's situation if  she  were  being  required  to  return  on  a
    permanent basis to live in the Gambia.

28. Mr Broachwalla recognised that there were, to some extent,  overlap  in
    the grounds in relation to the issue of the  appellant's  circumstances
    on return to the Gambia.  But, even those findings, do  not  deal  with
    the impact of removal on the appellant's private life in the  UK  which
    is the focus of Ground 1.

29. In my judgment, the judge erred in law both in assessing the  issue  of
    "very significant obstacles" to integration in para  276ADE(1)(vi)  and
    the appellant's private life claim outside the Rules under Art 8.

30. I am unable to conclude  that  any  such  claim  would  inevitably  and
    certainly fail even though the claims might not be the  strongest.   It
    is also worth noting that the appellant's private life claim  was  only
    perfunctorily dealt with by Judge McDade at para 8 of his  decision  in
    December 2015.   This  is  not,  therefore,  simply  a  case  where  an
    individual's private life claim was rejected on appeal and now,  a  few
    years later, is again relied upon essentially on  the  basis  that  the
    individual has been in the UK a  few  years  longer.   The  appellant's
    private life claim has never really been  judicially  examined  in  any
    detail.

31. For these reasons, therefore, I am satisfied that the judge  materially
    erred in law in dismissing the appellant's appeal under Art  8  of  the
    ECHR.



Decision

32. For the above reasons, the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal involved the making of an error of  law.
    That decision cannot stand and is set aside.

33. In my judgment, none of Judge Parkes' findings should be preserved  and
    the appeal should be heard de novo at a fresh hearing  by  a  different
    judge.  Accordingly, I remit the appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  to
    be heard de novo, with no findings preserved, by  a  judge  other  than
    Judge Parkes.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                                15 June 2021

