
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00594/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 January 2020                    |On 15 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                              ABDULLAH HAZARBUZ
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Knight, of Duncan Lewis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal J H L Shepherd (the judge) who, in a decision  promulgated
         on 10 September 2019, dismissed the appellant's appeal against  the
         respondent's decision of 15 January 2019 to refuse  his  protection
         and human rights claim.

Background

      2. The appellant is a national of Afghanistan. His date of birth is 15
         February 1988. He was born and lived in Rodat District, a  district
         in the centre  of  Nangarhar  Province.  He  is  married  with  two
         children. His immediate family as well as his four sisters and  two
         brothers continue to reside in Afghanistan. He arrived in the UK on
         8 September 2017 and claimed asylum on the same date.

      3. I summarise the appellant's asylum claim. He feared Daesh (the Arab-
         language acronym for Islamic State of Iraq and the  Levant  [ISIL],
         also known as Islamic State [IS], and, in  respect  of  Afghaistan,
         Islamic State Khorasan Province [ISKP]) in his home area because he
         either killed or badly injured his uncle, a commander in Daesh. The
         uncle's involvement with Daesh only became known to  the  appellant
         and the rest of his family some 3 months  prior  to  his  departure
         from the country. The appellant's father was informed by the Afghan
         authorities of the uncle's involvement with  the  organisation.  At
         this time the uncle lived with the appellant and  his  family.  The
         Afghan authorities  came  looking  for  the  appellant's  uncle  on
         several occasions, but he was not at  home.  Eventually  the  uncle
         left the appellant's family home but returned  3  days  before  the
         appellant left Afghanistan. The uncle accused the appellant and his
         father of being infidels and cowards.  The  appellant  became  very
         angry and swore at his uncle. About 15 minutes  later  the  uncle's
         wife informed the appellant's wife that the  uncle  had  telephoned
         for his colleagues in Daesh to attend the home in  the  morning  as
         the appellant was "the cause of the  problem."  The  appellant  was
         angry and went to speak to his uncle who was in his own  room.  The
         appellant grabbed a weapon that was leaning against a wall  in  the
         uncle's room and shot his uncle. The appellant ran to  a  road  and
         escaped to Kabul in a taxi. He remained in Kabul for 2 days  hiding
         at a friend's house. The friend helped the appellant find an  agent
         during  those  2  days  and  the  appellant  left  Afghanistan.  He
         travelled to Pakistan  by  car,  then  to  Italy  by  plane.  After
         spending 5 days in Italy he went to France where he remained for  a
         few months before entering the UK in a lorry.

      4. The respondent was not satisfied the appellant gave a  coherent  or
         credible account of events that caused him to leave Afghanistan. In
         her Reasons for Refusal Letter the respondent relied,  inter  alia,
         on  inconsistencies  between  the  information  recorded   in   the
         appellant's  Screening  Interview  and  his  subsequent   evidence,
         including the appellant's knowledge as to whether  his  uncle  died
         when he was shot, and the appellant's failure  to  mention  in  his
         Screening Interview that he feared the Afghan government, a fear he
         advanced  in  his  substantive  asylum  interview.  The   appellant
         exercised his right of appeal pursuant to s.82 of the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      5. The respondent failed to comply with directions to provide a bundle
         of documents for the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing.  All  relevant
         documents  however,  other  than  the  Screening  Interview,  where
         available to the parties. The appellant was legally represented  by
         Mr Sharma of Counsel and a bundle of documents running to 171 pages
         was provided on his behalf, including his initial asylum  statement
         dated 23 July 2018, a copy  of  his  substantive  asylum  interview
         dated 12 September 2018 and an appeal statement  dated  24  January
         2019. The bundle of documents  additionally  included  the  Country
         Policy and Information  Notes  (CPIN)  'Afghanistan:  Security  and
         Humanitarian Situation' of April 2018, and  'Afghanistan:  Fear  of
         Anti-Government Elements (AGEs)' of December 2016. The judge  heard
         oral evidence from the appellant.

      6. In her decision the judge accurately set out  the  relevant  burden
         and standard of proof, summarised  the  basis  of  the  appellant's
         protection claim and the Reasons for Refusal Letter, and summarised
         the appellant's oral evidence.

      7.  The  judge's  assessment  of  credibility  and  findings  of  fact
         contained from [37] to [50] of her  decision.  At  [39]  the  judge
         stated,

             "I bear in mind that the record  of  the  screening  interview
             upon which the respondent relies  in  making  two  attacks  in
             respect of the appellant's account, on the  basis  of  claimed
             inconsistencies, was not before the Tribunal nor had been seen
             by  either  representative  at  the  hearing.  In  one   sense
             therefore it is not before me in this appeal. Nevertheless, it
             is not said by the appellant  that  the  answers  recorded  at
             interview by the respondent where not in fact what  was  said.
             For example the appellant does not aver that  he  did  mention
             his fear of the Afghan government in his screening  interview,
             by way of rebuttal of the respondent's identification  of  its
             omission from the screening interview  (paragraph  34,  RFRL).
             Again in respect of the other significant discrepancy  between
             what is said by the respondent as to the  screening  interview
             (paragraph  32,  RFRL),  that  the  appellant  stated  in  the
             screening interview that his uncle had died after he had  shot
             him (SCR.1), the appellant does not claim that  that  was  not
             the answer given. I may take it therefore that the two answers
             upon which the respondent relies in  the  screening  interview
             are taken from a record accurate of  what  was  said  at  that
             interview. Furthermore I am not told otherwise than  that  the
             appellant and/or his representatives received a  copy  of  the
             screening interview (as would be standard practice)  and  that
             no challenge was made to the contents of  it  at  that  point.
             Finally, Mr Sharma for the appellant at the  hearing  did  not
             ask me to exclude the respondent's references to the screening
             interview on the grounds of irrelevance,  or  inadmissibility,
             or at all. I take it therefore that the respondent's  reliance
             on these alleged inconsistencies are within  my  consideration
             as part of the evidence in the appeal."

      8. The judge went on to identify several internal inconsistencies  and
         implausibilities in the appellant's  account.  At  [40]  the  judge
         detailed, at some length, the inconsistent evidence  given  by  the
         appellant  in  his  screening  interview,  his  substantive  asylum
         interview, his appeal statement and his oral evidence  with  regard
         to whether his uncle died, a point acknowledged by Mr  Sharma.  The
         judge also noted that the  appellant  had  been  able  to  maintain
         contact with his family when  he  was  in  Belgium  in  2010/11  in
         respect of an earlier asylum claim, and his claim that his  parents
         died after he  entered  the  UK,  and  found  this  undermined  the
         appellant's assertion  that  he  had  no  contact  with  anyone  in
         Afghanistan.  The  judge  found  the  appellant's  account  of  the
         aftermath of the shooting implausible [44] and considered (at [45])
         the appellant's immigration history  (including  the  record  of  a
         failed attempt by the appellant to obtain entry clearance  in  2009
         and a failed asylum claim in Belgium and his subsequent  return  to
         Afghanistan). At [46] to [48] the judge considered  the  background
         evidence upon which the appellant  relied  including  the  December
         2016 CPIN and the April 2018 CPIN  in  respect  of  his  fear  from
         Daesh. At [50] the judge stated,

             "Taking what I find to be a barely  credible  account  of  the
             appellant to have been  specifically  targeted  by  a  leading
             member of Daesh in his local area,  together  with  background
             evidence which does not place Daesh in  his  district  at  the
             time at which he claims (and I am mindful of the fact that  my
             attention has not been drawn to any of the background material
             by those arguing  the  case  on  the  appellant's  behalf),  I
             conclude that whilst in his home area in Nangarhar province he
             may well have  been  aware  that  Nangarhar  was  one  of  the
             districts in which Daesh were attempting to  infiltrate,  that
             the background evidence does not support  his  claim  to  have
             been in an area where Daesh sway and where  his  uncle  would,
             for example be able to call upon people to come and  kill  him
             with a simple phone call."

      9. The judge concluded that the appellant did not face a  well-founded
         fear  of  persecution  in  his  home  area  from  Daesh.   In   the
         alternative, at [52], the judge considered that the appellant could
         avail  himself  of  the  internal  relocation  alternative  as  the
         appellant had previously stayed with a friend in Kabul and that the
         security situation did not render it unreasonable for him  to  live
         there.

     10. The judge dismissed the appeal.

The challenge to the judge's decision

     11. The challenge can be crystallised into three distinct grounds.  The
         1st ground contends that the judge misdirected herself  in  law  by
         relying on information said to have been  given  by  the  appellant
         during his Screening Interview in circumstances where the Screening
         Interview  had  not  been  seen  by  the   judge   or   the   legal
         representatives. It was impermissible for the judge to  rely  on  a
         document not before the Tribunal and to rely  on  the  respondent's
         comments in her Refusal Letter as to the accuracy of the  Screening
         Interview. The 2nd  ground  essentially  contends  that  the  judge
         failed to adequately engage with the background  evidence  relating
         to Daesh. The judge referred to background evidence at [48] of  her
         decision indicating that ISIL managed to  maintain  a  presence  in
         southern Nangarhar, but  concluded  at  [50]  that  the  background
         evidence did not place Daesh in the appellant's  district.  It  was
         unclear, according to the  grounds,  how  the  judge  reached  this
         latter conclusion. The 3rd ground challenges the judge's assessment
         of the viability of the internal relocation alternative  to  Kabul.
         This ground contends that the judge failed to give adequate reasons
         for her findings, failed to properly consider the country  guidance
         case of AS (Safety of  Kabul)  Afghanistan  CG  [2018]  UKUT  00118
         (IAC), and failed to consider up-to-date evidence such as the UNHCR
         eligibility guidelines for assessing the  international  protection
         needs of asylum-seekers from Afghanistan issued on 30 August  2018,
         the EASO Country of Origin Information Report issued in  May  2018,
         and the Human Rights Watch World Report 2019.

     12.  At  the  'error  of  law'  hearing  Ms  Jones,  representing   the
         respondent, provided a copy of the Screening Interview. Mr  Knight,
         representing the appellant, had  an  opportunity  to  consider  the
         Screening Interview and maintained that although  the  Reasons  for
         Refusal Letter accurately recorded the information contained in the
         Screening Interview the judge was nevertheless not entitled to rely
         on information contained in a document that was not before her.  Mr
         Knight drew my attention to 5.2 of the  December  2016  CPIN  which
         referred to an AESO report published in September 2016  identifying
         the districts in which Islamic State in Khorasan (ISKP, which,  for
         present purposes, is the same as Daesh) had a firm presence, and to
         7.3.5 and 7.3.6 of the April 2018 CPIN which  indicated  that  ISIL
         maintained a presence in southern  Nangarhar  Province.  Mr  Knight
         submitted that the judge failed to consider that the appellant  was
         a married man when assessing the internal relocation alternative.

Discussion

     13. I consider the 1st ground. It is clear from  [39]  of  the  judge's
         decision that she was acutely aware that  the  Screening  Interview
         was not before her and the potential consequences flowing from  the
         absence of the document. She stated that, "in one  sense  therefore
         [the Screening Interview] is not before me  in  this  appeal."  She
         properly noted however that the  appellant  had  not  taken  issue,
         either in his statements or in his oral evidence, with the accuracy
         of the  references  in  the  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  to  the
         information  recorded  in  the  Screening  Interview.   The   judge
         additionally noted that the appellant's barrister did not  ask  her
         to exclude the references in the Reasons for Refusal Letter to  the
         Screening Interview. In these circumstances, where the accuracy  of
         the references to the Screening Interview contained in the  Reasons
         for Refusal Letter were not disputed, the  judge  was  entitled  to
         rely on those extracts as being  accurate.  The  provision  of  the
         Screening Interview at the 'error of law'  hearing  confirmed  that
         the references in  the  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  were  indeed
         accurate, both in respect of the recording that the appellant  said
         his uncle had died and in respect of the omission of any  reference
         to  fearing  ill-treatment  from   the   Afghan   authorities.   As
         acknowledged by Mr Knight himself, even if the judge was  in  error
         in relying on references to a document not before her,  this  could
         not have made any material difference  to  the  particular  adverse
         credibility inferences drawn by  the  judge  based  on  information
         recorded in the Screening Interview. This ground is not made out.

     14. I consider  the  2nd  ground.  At  [46]  the  judge  made  specific
         reference to the December  2016  CPIN  noting,  with  reference  to
         7.3.1, that, at the time of publication, Daesh had settled  in  the
         southern district of Nangarhar, and that its main  base  was  Achin
         District. According to government sources  ISK  (Daesh)  was  dealt
         serious blows and was expelled from Achin District.  At  6.1.7  the
         judge referred to a SIGAR report indicating that ISIL's safe  haven
         in Nangarhar had been greatly reduced. At [48] the judge considered
         the April 2018 CPIN report and made specific reference to 7.3.5 and
         7.3.6  noting  that  ISKP  remained  in  a  handful  of  Nangarhari
         districts and that ISIL had  managed  to  maintain  a  presence  in
         southern Nangarhar despite increased  military  operations  carried
         out by the USA and  Afghan  defence  and  security  forces.  It  is
         apparent that the judge did engage  with  the  background  material
         made available to her relating to  Nangarhar  Province.  Mr  Knight
         relied on an extract from an EASO  report  published  in  September
         2016 and contained at 5.2 of the December  2016  CPIN  report,  but
         this did not identify Rodat District, the  district  in  which  the
         appellant lived and which is located in  central  Nangarhar,  as  a
         district in which Daesh had a firm presence. Mr Knight additionally
         relied on 7.3.5 and 7.3.6 of the April 2018 CPIN report  but  these
         sections indicate that Daesh  maintained  a  presence  in  southern
         Nangarhar Province  and  does  not  mention  the  appellant's  home
         district of Rodat. The judge  fully  engaged  with  the  background
         evidence made available to her and her conclusion at [50], that the
         background evidence did not place Daesh  in  the  appellant's  home
         district at the relevant time, was consistent with the  information
         contained in both CPIN documents. This ground is not made out.

     15. I now consider the 3rd ground. I note  first  that  the  bundle  of
         documents provided by the appellant's representative for the First-
         tier  Tribunal  hearing  did  not  contain  the  UNHCR  eligibility
         guidelines for assessing  the  international  protection  needs  of
         asylum-seekers from Afghanistan issued on 30 August 2018, the  EASO
         Country of Origin Information Report issued in  May  2018,  or  the
         Human Rights Watch World Report 2019. Nor did the skeleton argument
         prepared by Mr Sharma refer to these documents. Nor  is  there  any
         reference in the record of proceedings to the judge  being  invited
         to consider any of these documents. A judge cannot be  expected  to
         consider background evidence that has not been provided to her. The
         3rd ground is, in any event, premised on the  appellant  holding  a
         well-founded fear of persecution in his home area.  The  judge  did
         not however find  the  appellant  to  be  a  credible  witness  and
         rejected his account of fearing ill-treatment from Daesh. The judge
         gave detailed and cogent reasons for  disbelieving  the  appellant.
         The issue of internal  relocation  did  not  therefore  arise.  The
         judge's brief assessment of the viability  of  internal  relocation
         and  the  Country  Guidance  case  of  AS  was  considered  in  the
         alternative (see [52]). Having found that the appellant was not  at
         risk of persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment in  his  home  area,
         there was no need for the judge to consider internal relocation  to
         Kabul. This ground is not made out.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed

D.Blum   8 January 2020

Signed   Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
