
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00819/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport Immigration and Asylum Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 June 2016                               |On 01 August 2016             |
|Prepared 27 June 2016                         |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY

                                   Between

                                     S K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Edwards, Adam - Khattak Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant, a  national  of  Pakistan,  date  of  birth  [  ]  1966,
    appealed against a decision [D] of First-tier Tribunal Judge Y J Jones,
    who on 7 January 2016 dismissed the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    decision dated  18  August  2015  to  refuse  an  asylum,  Humanitarian
    Protection, and human rights claim to remain.

2.   When the matter came before the judge, she heard a  range  of  evidence
    concerning amongst other things the fear of ill-treatment held  by  the
    Appellant  and  the  availability  of  internal  relocation   and   the
    sufficiency of protection to which the Appellant could  have  recourse.
    At its heart the judge rejected the Appellant's credibility taking  the
    view and expressed as such that the Appellant was  simply  an  economic
    migrant.  Permission to appeal that decision was given by a  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge in January 2016.     .

3.   The Appellant's  credibility  was  substantially  challenged  by  three
    particular points although there were other aspects in which her  claim
    was not wholly accepted.  First, [D 56] the judge found a difference in
    accounts as undermining the Appellant's credibility.   I  have  to  say
    that the difference lit upon is a difference without  any  significance
    and it is hard to see, in the reasoning disclosed; why  that  should  o
    against the Appellant's credibility. I bear in mind, as it appears  the
    judge did not, the low standard of proof to be applied in asylum cases.

4.   The second discrepancy,  set  out  by  the  judge  at  [D  16],  was  a
    difference in recollection as  to  the  date  when  she,  that  is  the
    Appellant, became a head teacher.  The difference between  whether  she
    was appointed a head teacher on 10 December 2014 to take up the post  a
    week to ten days later really adds very little to the matter.  I cannot
    see how that discrepancy on a rational basis could form a proper way to
    assess credibility rather than looking at the evidence as a whole.

5.   The third criticism of the  Appellant's  claim  was  her  inability  to
    provide independent evidence of a  particular  attack,  which  she  had
    given  evidence  about,  and/or  her  husband's  inability  to   obtain
    independent evidence to confirm her claim.

6.   It is said by the Appellant that had the judge put her mind to  it  she
    would have taken into account that there was no willing informant as to
    the circumstances of the attack and it was not as  widely  reported  as
    other attacks had been.  It seems to me again once the judge  had  made
    up her mind to reject the claim this criticism is very superficial  and
    appears to be again unreasoned.

7.   Accordingly I find the inadequate reasons for the adverse  findings  on
    the  Appellant's  credibility  significantly  undermine   the   overall
    assessment of risk on return and the extent to which the Appellant  had
    indicated that she was concerned of risk to herself.   To  some  extent
    there is a clear  point  to  be  made  by  reference  to  the  case  of
    Bagdanavicius [2003] EWCA Civ 1605,  reported  [2004]  1  WLR  1207  at
    paragraph 55 where there is a  familiar  recitation  of  the  essential
    elements of an asylum claim but in particular the  effectiveness  of  a
    system of protection is to be judged by the systemic ability  to  deter
    or prevent persecution of which there is a risk.

8.   It was not an issue that teachers in particular parts of Pakistan  were
    facing risks and the government was  contemplating  providing  firearms
    training and  firearms permits to be  issued  to  teachers  who  wanted
    protection.  Whether or not it is really sufficient protection for  the
    State to arm the individual teachers is perhaps not a matter  that  the
    judge was ever in a position to resolve but it seemed to me that absent
    of a level of police protection for schools it  was  hard  to  see  how
    arming teachers was ever going to be a  protection  from  attacks  upon
    them.  Nevertheless I do not find that that  was  an  issue  which  was
    determinative of the matter.  Rather parties to a decision are entitled
    to expect  adequately  and  sufficiently  reasoned  findings.   In  the
    circumstances I do not find that the judge provided those  reasons  not
    least in the context of the background evidence with  which  the  judge
    had been provided.

9.   Accordingly it is with considerable reluctance that  I  interfere  with
    the judge's decision and findings of fact but it appears to me that the
    wrong standard of proof was actually being applied to  that  which  was
    said  to  be  applied  and  there  was  a  lack  of  adequate  reasons.
    Accordingly I am satisfied that the Original Tribunal  decision  cannot
    stand.

10.  Mr Edwards submits that without the credibility findings  much  of  the
    Appellant's case has never been subject to findings of  fact.   In  the
    circumstances he seeks this matter  to  be  remade  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

11.  In the light of the President's direction I am  content  that  this  is
    just about an appropriate case for it to be remade and no  findings  of
    fact stand.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is allowed to the extent the decision returned to the  First-tier
Tribunal on all grounds.

INSTRUCTIONS FOR LISTING

(1)  Return to the First-tier Tribunal.

(2)  List for hearing two hours.

(3)  Not before First-tier Tribunal Judge Y J Jones.

(4)  Interpreter required in Urdu.

(5)  Any fresh evidence to be served not later than ten working days  before
    the resumed hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.

(6)  Issues on remaking: grounds previously argued unless  the  Tribunal  is
    otherwise informed.

(7)  If any witnesses are to be  called  other  than  the  Appellant  notice
    should be given to the Respondent including particulars of the witness'
    nationality and/or identity document relied upon  not  later  than  ten
    working days before the date of the resumed hearing.

ANONYMITY ORDER

An anonymity order is appropriate in the  circumstances  of  the  case,  not
least when one was previously made but also because of the issues raised.

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date 22 July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
