
 [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/00006/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 3 August 2017                   |On 14 August 2017                  |
|                                   |                                   |


                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                                    S M Z
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms E Mendoza (counsel) instructed by Halliday Reeves Law
Firm
For the Respondent: Ms R Petterson, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS


1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge  Handley  promulgated  on  06/02/2017,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.



Background


3. The Appellant was born on [  ]  1987  and  is  a  national  of  Iraq.  On
09/12/2016 the Secretary of State refused the Appellant's protection claim.


The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Handley ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of  appeal  were  lodged  and  on  22/05/2017  Judge  Page
granted permission to appeal stating

      "The grounds of appeal are arguable. They take issue with the  finding
      by the Judge that the appellant could relocate to the IKR and that the
      Judge has erred in law in  considering  AA  (article  15(c))  Iraq  CG
      [2015] UKUT 544 as the appellant has never lived in the IKR  and  this
      would not be  return  but  relocation.  The  grounds  argue  that  the
      appellant would be return to Baghdad but he was from outside  the  IKR
      and return to the IKR would require  the  appellant  to  have  resided
      there previously and for their  identity  to  be  pre-cleared  by  the
      authorities.  It  is  arguable   that   the   decision   provides   no
      consideration of the difficulties that the appellant had  claimed.  At
      paragraph 47 of the decision I note that  the  Judge  found  that  the
      appellant's passport, which the respondent had retained, would  enable
      the appellant to obtain the required  documents  on  return  to  Iraq.
      The background reports confirm that the "Civil Status  Identity  Card"
      (CSIC) and the Iraqi Nationality Certificate (INC) are  the  two  most
      important forms of civil documentation. The Judge referred to AA where
      it was held that the CSIC was generally required in order for an Iraqi
      to access assistance from the authorities. It  is  arguable  that  the
      appellant may face insurmountable difficulties in relocating and  that
      the Judge may have erred  in  finding  it  reasonable  to  expect  the
      appellant to return to the IKR when he had never lived there.  If  the
      appellant could not obtain the necessary documentation  on  return  it
      begs the question as to whether he could reasonably be expected to  go
      to the IKR. The grounds of appeal are arguable so permission to appeal
      is granted."

The Hearing

5. (a) Ms Mendoza, counsel for the  appellant,  adopted  the  terms  of  the
skeleton argument and the grounds of appeal. She told me that the  appellant
is from Kirkuk, which is outside the IKR. At [6] of the decision  the  Judge
clearly finds that the appellant  is  from  Kirkuk,  but  having  made  that
finding goes on to conclude  that  the  appellant  can  return  to  IKR.  Ms
Mendoza told me that the finding that the appellant can  return  to  IKR  is
the foundation of a material error of law.

(b) Because the appellant is from Kirkuk, he  will  return  to  Baghdad.  Ms
Mendoza  told  that  the  Judge  failed  to   consider   the   pre-clearance
requirement for entry to IKR set out in AA (Iraq) CG [2017]  EWCA  Civ  944.
She told me that the Judge failed to  consider  the  importance  of  a  CSID
card, and that the Judge had failed to consider how the appellant could  get
from  Baghdad  to  IKR.  She  told  me  that  the  decision  is   devoid  of
consideration of what would happen to the appellant if he  enters  IKR.  She
told me that the decision is fundamentally flawed.

(c) Ms Mendoza referred me to BA(Returns to Baghdad)  Iraq  CG  [2017}  UKUT
00018 (IAC) and AA (Iraq) CG [2017] EWCA Civ 944. She asked me to allow  the
appeal, to set the decision aside and thereafter  remit  this  case  to  the
First-tier for further fact-finding.

6. (a) For the respondent, Ms Petterson told me that the decision  does  not
contain errors, material or otherwise. Ms Petterson focused  on  [47],  [48]
and [49] of the decision. She agreed with Ms Mendoza that  the  Judge  finds
that the appellant is from Kirkuk. She told me that between  [34]  and  [45]
the Judge considers the substance of the  appellant's  claim,  and  at  [46]
rejects the appellant's claim to have a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution
because of an adulterous relationship. She told me that at  [46]  the  Judge
correctly turns his attention to assessing risk on return to Iraq.

(b) Ms Petterson told me that the Judge's assessment of risk starts at  [49]
of the decision, where, having  considered  the  background  materials,  the
Judge finds that the situation in Kirkuk has  changed  since  the  appellant
arrived in the UK. IS no longer have  a  presence  there.  Kirkuk  has  been
liberated. She told me that the  Judge's  finding  that  the  appellant  can
therefore return to his home area is correct.

(c) Ms Petterson told me that this appellant has never claimed not  to  have
a CSID. The Judge finds that the appellant travelled to  the  UK  using  his
passport, and at [47] the Judge  finds  that  the  appellant  can  use  that
passport to return, and use  that  passport  to  ensure  that  his  CSID  is
reissued.

(d) Ms Petterson told me that  at  [47]  the  Judge  clearly  considers  the
background materials. The Judge's consideration  of  relocation  to  IKR  is
unnecessary because the appellant's home area is now safe. If  there  is  an
error in the Judge's consideration of returned to IKR  it  is  not  material
because there is no risk to the appellant in his home area.

(e) Ms Petterson asked me to  dismiss  the  appeal  and  allow  the  Judge's
decision to stand.

Analysis

7. The Judge's  decision  was  written  in  February  2017  and,  relied  on
background materials which were carefully considered by  the  Judge  between
[47] and [49]. Relying on those background materials, the Judge  found  that
three areas, including Kirkuk,  no  longer  meet  the  threshold  to  engage
article 15(c). On 22 June 2017, the Court of Appeal issued  updated  country
guidance on Iraq. In the annex to the decision of AA (Iraq) CG  [2017]  EWCA
Civ 944 the Court of Appeal said

      A.     INDISCRIMINATE  VIOLENCE  IN  IRAQ:  ARTICLE  15(C)   OF   THE
         QUALIFICATION DIRECTIVE


         1. There is at present  a  state  of  internal  armed  conflict  in
              certain parts of Iraq, involving government  security  forces,
              militias of various kinds, and the  Islamist  group  known  as
              ISIL. The intensity of this armed conflict  in  the  so-called
              "contested  areas",  comprising  the  governorates  of  Anbar,
              Diyala, Kirkuk, (aka Ta'min), Ninewah  and  Salah  Al-din,  is
              such that, as a general matter, there are substantial  grounds
              for believing that any  civilian  returned  there,  solely  on
              account of his or her presence there, faces  a  real  risk  of
              being  subjected  to  indiscriminate  violence  amounting   to
              serious  harm  within  the  scope  of  Article  15(c)  of  the
              Qualification Directive.

8. In making that finding the Court of Appeal adheres to what  was  said  in
AA Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 0054 (IAC)

9. The Judge's finding at [49] is therefore not safe. There is no  error  in
the Judge's fact-finding between [34] and [46]. The  Judge  finds  that  the
appellant's claim does not succeed under  the  refugee  convention,  however
the country guidance given by the Court of Appeal  in  June  2017  indicates
that the appellant's claim for humanitarian  protection  must  succeed.  The
guidance given by  the  Court  of  Appeal  four  months  after  the  Judge's
decision confirmed the guidance given in 2015, and is directly  contrary  to
the background reports the respondent relied on.

10. Because what is contained at [49] is a material error of law I must  set
the Judge's decision aside. But there is sufficient material  before  me  to
enable me to substitute my own decision. As I have  already  indicated,  the
Judge's findings of fact in relation to the refugee  convention  are  beyond
criticism. The Judge's error of law relates to the  assessment  of  risk  on
return to Iraq.

11. I therefore find, on the facts as  the  Judge  found  them  to  be,  the
appellant cannot succeed under the refugee convention.

12.  It  is  common  ground  that  the  appellant  comes  from  Kirkuk.  The
respondent intends to return him to Baghdad and insists that he  can  return
to his home area. The guidance given by the Court of Appeal in AA (Iraq)  CG
[2017] EWCA Civ 944 clearly indicates  that  the  respondent's  position  is
wrong. If the appellant return to his home area  he  must  succeed  both  in
terms of article 15(c) of the qualification directive and on article 3  ECHR
grounds. The question for me to determine  becomes  whether  or  not  it  is
reasonable for the appellant to internally relocate.

13. The appellant is a Kurdish Sunni Muslim. He has only a  basic  grasp  of
the Arabic language. The background materials indicate  that  there  are  so
many internally displaced persons in Iraq that UNHCR refers  to  the  plight
of internally displaced people there as a humanitarian  crisis.  The  simple
question that I have to answer is whether or not it is  reasonable  to  make
the appellant a displaced person anywhere in Iraq.

14. I take the following guidance from AA (Iraq) CG [2017] EWCA Civ 944

    D.     INTERNAL RELOCATION WITHIN IRAQ (OTHER THAN THE IKR)


    14.    As a general matter, it will not be unreasonable or unduly harsh
         for a person from a contested area to relocate to Baghdad  City  or
         (subject to paragraph 2 above) the Baghdad Belts.


    15.    In assessing whether it would be unreasonable/unduly harsh for P
         to relocate to Baghdad, the following factors are, however,  likely
         to be relevant:


         (a)      whether P has a CSID or will be able to  obtain  one  (see
             Part C above);


         (b)      whether P can speak Arabic  (those  who  cannot  are  less
             likely to find employment);


         (c)      whether P has family members or friends in Baghdad able to
             accommodate him;


         (d)       whether  P  is  a  lone  female   (women   face   greater
             difficulties than men in finding employment);


         (e)      whether P can find a sponsor to access  a  hotel  room  or
             rent accommodation;


         (f)      whether P is from a minority community;


         (g)      whether there is support available for P bearing  in  mind
             there is some evidence that returned failed asylum seekers are
             provided with the support generally given to IDPs.


    16.    There is not a real risk of an ordinary civilian travelling from
         Baghdad airport to the  southern  governorates,  suffering  serious
         harm en route to such governorates so as engage Article 15(c).




    E.     IRAQI KURDISH REGION


    17.    The Respondent will only return P to the  IKR  if  P  originates
         from the IKR and P's identity has been 'pre-cleared' with  the  IKR
         authorities. The authorities in the IKR do not require P to have an
         expired or current passport, or laissez passer.


    18.    The IKR is virtually violence free. There is  no  Article  15(c)
         risk to an ordinary civilian in the IKR.


    19.    A Kurd (K) who does not originate from the IKR can obtain  entry
         for 10 days as a visitor and then renew this entry permission for a
         further 10 days. If K finds employment, K can  remain  for  longer,
         although K will need to register with the authorities  and  provide
         details of  the  employer.  There  is  no  evidence  that  the  IKR
         authorities pro-actively remove Kurds from the  IKR  whose  permits
         have come to an end.


    20.     Whether K, if returned to Baghdad, can reasonably  be  expected
        to avoid any potential undue harshness in that city  by  travelling
        to the IKR, will be fact sensitive; and is  likely  to  involve  an
        assessment of (a) the practicality of travel from  Baghdad  to  the
        IKR (such as to Irbil by air); (b) the likelihood of  K's  securing
        employment in the IKR; and (c) the availability of assistance  from
        family and friends in the IKR.


    21.     As a general matter, a non-Kurd who is at real risk in  a  home
        area in Iraq is unlikely to be able to relocate to the IKR.


15. On the facts as the Judge found them to be, the  appellant  has  only  a
limited grasp of Arabic. He is  distinguishable  by  his  religion  and  his
ethnicity, and so will be viewed as a member of  a  minority  community.  He
has no network of support in Iraq. Although he  is  a  Kurd,  he  has  never
lived in IKR. With that profile, it  cannot  be  reasonable  to  return  the
appellant to Iraq. Internal relocation is unduly harsh.

16. The appellant is  therefore  entitled  to  humanitarian  protection  and
succeeds on article 3 ECHR grounds.

Decision

17. The First-tier Tribunal decision  promulgated  on  6  February  2017  is
tainted by material errors of law. The decision is set aside.

18. I substitute my own decision.

19. The appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds

20. The appeal is allowed on humanitarian protection grounds.

21. The appeal is allowed on article 3 ECHR grounds.


Signed                Paul Doyle
  Date 11 August 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle



