
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00444/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 May and 24 September 2018               |On 6 November 2018            |
|Dictated: 1 October 2018                      |                              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                                     MS
                           (ANONYMITY order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                             Anonymity Direction
I make an order under r.14(1) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any  matter  likely
to lead members of the public to identify the appellant. No report of  these
proceedings shall directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.   This  direction
applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and all  other  persons.
Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings. Liberty to apply.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Franco (29/5) and Mr D Mold (24/9), instructed
                    by Schneider Goldstein Immigration Law
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding (29/5) and Ms K Pal (24/9), Senior
                    Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh,  born  in  August  1983.   He
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") against a decision  of  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department ("SSHD") dated  28  November
    2016, refusing his application for leave to remain  on  protection  and
    human rights grounds.

 2. That appeal came before FtT Judge Steer and was dismissed in a decision
    promulgated on 07  July  2017.   Permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal was  thereafter  granted,  on  12  September  2017,  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Rintoul.  Thus, the matter comes before me.

FtT's decision

 3. The gravaman of the appellant's case is that he is gay  and  that  upon
    return to Bangladesh  he  will  be  persecuted  by  either  his  family
    members, the state, the mullahs or the general populace, or indeed  all
    four.

 4. The FtT found "the appellant and his witness" credible in the  evidence
    they gave and made a specific finding that "the Appellant is gay" [24].
     The Tribunal then went on to consider the risk to the  appellant  upon
    return, its core findings on this issue being found  in  paragraphs  36
    and 37 of its decision:

         "36. In relation to non-state  actors,  the  Respondent  maintained
             that, even when taken cumulatively, the societal treatment  of
             LGBT persons in Bangladesh did not reach the  level  of  being
             persecutory  or  otherwise  inhuman  or  degrading  treatment.
             Again, the country evidence  cited  in  the  Policy  Note,  as
             referenced by Mr Franco,  was  limited  to  "some  reports  of
             violence ... Harassment and  discrimination  are  more  likely
             than violence.  There is a range of reactions to "coming  out"
             which may  include  serious  harm  (most  likely  from  family
             members)".   There  were  no  specific  examples,  details  or
             statistics provided, in support of assertions in  relation  to
             non-state actors, which would lend support to the  Appellant's
             claim that the actions were persecutory  in  nature.   Further
             the assertions were somewhat contradictory, stating on the one
             hand that  harassment  and  discrimination  were  more  likely
             reactions than violence, but that the range of  reactions  may
             include serious harm (most likely from family  members).   The
             Appellant did not provide  any  plausible  evidence  that  his
             family members in Bangladesh would actively seek him  out,  in
             order to persecute him, or cause him serious harm,  should  he
             return there now.

         37.  In the absence of any specific examples, details or statistics
             of persecutory treatment by state or non-state actors, and  no
             plausible evidence that the Appellant's family  members  would
             actively seek him out and cause him  harm,  should  he  return
             there now, I find  that  the  Appellant  is  not  at  risk  of
             suffering ill-treatment amounting to  persecution  or  serious
             harm upon return to Bangladesh now."

Setting aside of FtT's decision

 5. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal on 29 May, Mr Wilding accepted
    that the FtT had erred in law in failing to make an explicit finding as
    to "how the appellant would live upon return to Bangladesh",  by  which
    he was referring to whether the appellant would 'live openly as  a  gay
    person upon return or would attempt in some way to conceal  his  sexual
    orientation'.  Mr Wilding further accepted that consideration  of  this
    issue was integral to the proper assessment of  whether  the  appellant
    would be at risk upon return, following the  decision  of  the  Supreme
    Court in HJ (Iran)[2010] UKSC 31.  To  use  Mr  Wilding's  words,  "the
    consequence of [the FtT's] failure is that  the  consideration  of  the
    background material by the FtT was linear" and,  therefore,  the  FtT's
    decision should be set aside.

 6. I concurred with Mr Wilding's view and for those reasons  I  set  aside
    the FtT's decision.

 7. I further observed, in my written decision promulgated on 12 June 2018,
    that the FtT's consideration of the risk from  the  appellant's  family
    was also entirely inadequate.  The  only  references  in  the  decision
    relating to this  issue  focused  on  whether  the  appellant's  family
    members would be likely to actively seek out the appellant in order  to
    persecute  him.  However,  the  appellant  grew  up  in  a  village  in
    Bangladesh and on the available evidence his family still live in  that
    village. There was no explanation  by  the  FtT  as  to  why,  in  such
    circumstances, the appellant's family would have to 'seek him out'. The
    question the FtT  ought  to  have  asked  itself  is  whether,  if  the
    appellant were to return to his home village  it  would  be  reasonably
    likely that his family would come to know that he is gay.  If  this  is
    answered in the affirmative, then an  assessment  of  the  consequences
    should have followed. The Tribunal failed to evaluate this scenario.

 8. I adjourned the re-making of the decision for the reasons set out in my
    decision of 12 June, preserving the FtT's finding that the appellant is
    gay.

Re-making of the decision

Legal Framework

 9. Article 9 of Council Directive 2004/83/EC defines acts  of  persecution
    in the following terms:

       "1.    Acts of persecution within the meaning of Article 1A  of  the
           Geneva Convention must

             (a)  be sufficiently serious by their nature or repetition  as
                  to constitute a severe violation of basic human rights, in
                  particular the rights from which derogation cannot be made
                  under Article 15(2) of the  European  Convention  for  the
                  Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms; or

             (b)   be  an  accumulation  of  various  measures,   including
                  violations of human rights which is sufficiently severe as
                  to affect an individual in a similar manner  as  mentioned
                  in (a).

         2.   Acts of persecution as qualified in paragraph  1,  can,  inter
             alia, take the form of:

             (a)  acts of physical or mental violence,  including  acts  of
                  sexual violence;

             (b)  legal, administrative, police, and/or  judicial  measures
                  which  are  in  themselves  discriminatory  or  which  are
                  implemented in a discriminatory measure;

             (c)  prosecution or punishment which  is  disproportionate  or
                  discriminatory;

             (d)    denial   of   judicial   redress   resulting    in    a
                  disproportionate or discriminatory punishment;

             (e)  prosecution or punishment for refusal to perform military
                  service in a conflict, where performing  military  service
                  would include crimes or acts falling under  the  exclusion
                  clauses as set out in Article 12(2);

             (f)  acts of gender-specific or child-specific nature.

         3.   In accordance with Article 2(c) there  must  be  a  connection
             between the reasons mentioned in Article 10 and  the  acts  of
             persecution as qualified in paragraph 1."

10. Article 10 of the Directive  identifies  the  reasons  for  persecutory
    treatment  capable  of  engaging  the  Directive.  These  include   the
    following:

         "1(d) a group shall be considered to form an  innate  social  group
        where in particular;

                  1) members of that group share an  innate  characteristic
                     or a common background  that  cannot  be  changed,  or
                     share  a  characteristic  or   belief   that   is   so
                     fundamental to identity or conscience  that  a  person
                     should not be forced to renounce it, and

                  2) that group has a distinct  identity  in  the  relevant
                     country because it is perceived as being different  by
                     the surrounding society;

        depending  on  the  circumstances  in  the  country  of  origin,  a
        particular social group might include a group  based  on  a  common
        characteristic of sexual orientation..."


11. Paragraph 65 of HJ and HT  [2010]  UKSC  31  summarises  the  basis  of
    protection provided in cases such as the instant one:

         "... so far as the social group of  gay  people  is  concerned  the
         underlying rationale of the Convention is that they should be  able
         to live freely and openly as gay men  and  lesbian  women,  without
         fearing that they may suffer harm of  the  requisite  intensity  or
         duration because they are gay or lesbian. Their home  state  should
         protect them and so enable them to live in that way. If it does not
         and they will be threatened with serious harm if they live  openly,
         then most people threatened with persecution will be forced to take
         what steps they can to avoid it."

12. Lord Rodger at [82] sets out the nature of the assessment to be carried
    out by a decision-maker:

          i. When an applicant applies for asylum on the ground of a  well-
             founded fear of persecution because he is  gay,  the  tribunal
             must first ask itself whether it is satisfied on the  evidence
             that he is gay,  or  that  he  would  be  treated  as  gay  by
             potential persecutors in his country of nationality.


         ii. If so, the  tribunal  must  then  ask  itself  whether  it  is
             satisfied on the available evidence that gay people  who  live
             openly would be  liable  to  persecution  in  the  applicant's
             country of nationality.


        iii. If so, the tribunal must go on to consider what the individual
             applicant would do if he were returned to that country.


         iv. If the applicant would in fact  live  openly  and  thereby  be
             exposed to a real risk of persecution, then  he  has  a  well-
             founded fear of persecution - even if he could avoid the  risk
             by living "discreetly".


          v. If, on  the  other  hand,  the  tribunal  concludes  that  the
             applicant  would  in  fact  live  discreetly  and   so   avoid
             persecution, it must go on to ask itself why he would do so.


         vi. If the tribunal concludes that the applicant would  choose  to
             live discreetly simply because that was how he  himself  would
             wish to live, or because of social pressures, e g, not wanting
             to distress his parents or embarrass  his  friends,  then  his
             application should be rejected. Social pressures of that  kind
             do not amount to persecution and the Convention does not offer
             protection against them. Such a  person  has  no  well-founded
             fear of persecution because, for reasons that have nothing  to
             do with any fear of persecution, he himself chooses to adopt a
             way of life which means that he is not in fact  liable  to  be
             persecuted because he is gay.


        vii. If, on the other hand, the tribunal concludes that a  material
             reason for the applicant living discreetly on his return would
             be a fear of the persecution which would follow if he were  to
             live openly as a gay man, then, other things being equal,  his
             application should be accepted. Such  a  person  has  a  well-
             founded fear of persecution. To reject his application on  the
             ground  that  he  could  avoid  the  persecution   by   living
             discreetly would  be  to  defeat  the  very  right  which  the
             Convention exists to protect - his right to  live  freely  and
             openly as a gay man without fear of persecution. By  admitting
             him to asylum and allowing him to live freely and openly as  a
             gay man without fear of persecution, the receiving state gives
             effect to that right by affording the  applicant  a  surrogate
             for the protection  from  persecution  which  his  country  of
             nationality should have afforded him.


13. In X, Y and Z (Cases  C-199/12  to  C-201/12)  the  CJEU  considered  a
    reference relating to three asylum applicants, respectively from Sierra
    Leone, Uganda and Senegal. In each country homosexuality is a  criminal
    offence punishable by a  term  of  imprisonment.  The  Raad  van  State
    requested a preliminary ruling from the CJEU on the following matters:

             "(1) Do foreign nationals with a homosexual orientation form a
             particular social group as referred to in Article 10(1)(d) [of
             the Directive]?


             (2)  If the first question is to be answered in the
             affirmative: which homosexual activities fall within the scope
             of the Directive and, in the case of acts of persecution in
             respect of those activities and if the other requirements are
             met, can that lead to the granting of refugee status? That
             question encompasses the following sub-questions:


                  (a)     Can foreign nationals with a homosexual
                  orientation be expected to conceal their orientation from
                  everyone in their [respective] country of origin in order
                  to avoid persecution?


                  (b)     If the previous question is to be answered in the
                  negative, can foreign nationals with a homosexual
                  orientation be expected to exercise restraint, and if so,
                  to what extent, when giving expression to that orientation
                  in their country of origin, in order to avoid persecution?
                  Moreover, can greater restraint be expected of homosexuals
                  than of heterosexuals?


                  (c)     If, in that regard, a distinction can be made
                  between forms of expression which relate to the core area
                  of the orientation and forms of expression which do not,
                  what should be understood to constitute the core area of
                  the orientation and in what way can it be determined?


             (3)  Do the criminalisation of homosexual activities and the
             threat of imprisonment in relation thereto, as set out in the
             Offences against the Person Act 1861 of Sierra Leone (Case C-
             199/12), the Penal Code Act 1950 of Uganda (Case C-200/12) or
             the Senegalese Penal Code (Case C-201/12) constitute an act of
             persecution within the meaning of Article 9(1)(a), read in
             conjunction with Article 9(2)(c) of the Directive? If not,
             under what circumstances would that be the case?"


14. The CJEU ruled as follows:

         "1.    Article 10(1)(d) of Council Directive 2004/83/EC of 29 April
             2004 on minimum standards for the qualification and status  of
             third-country nationals or Stateless persons as refugees or as
             persons who otherwise need international  protection  and  the
             content of the  protection  granted  must  be  interpreted  as
             meaning that the existence of criminal laws, such as those  at
             issue in each of the cases  in  the  main  proceedings,  which
             specifically target homosexuals,  supports  the  finding  that
             those persons must be regarded as forming a particular  social
             group.


         2.      Article 9(1)  of  Directive  2004/83,  read  together  with
             Article 9(2)(c) thereof, must be interpreted as  meaning  that
             the  criminalisation  of  homosexual  acts  per  se  does  not
             constitute  an  act  of  persecution.  However,  a   term   of
             imprisonment which sanctions  homosexual  acts  and  which  is
             actually applied in the country of origin which  adopted  such
             legislation must be regarded as being a  punishment  which  is
             disproportionate or discriminatory and thus constitutes an act
             of persecution.


         3.      Article 10(1)(d) of Directive 2004/83, read  together  with
             Article 2(c) thereof, must be interpreted as meaning that only
             homosexual acts which are  criminal  in  accordance  with  the
             national law of the Member States are excluded from its scope.
             When  assessing  an  application  for  refugee   status,   the
             competent authorities cannot reasonably expect,  in  order  to
             avoid the risk of persecution, the  applicant  for  asylum  to
             conceal his homosexuality in  his  country  of  origin  or  to
             exercise reserve in the expression of his sexual orientation."

Decision and Discussion

15. It is prudent to consider sequentially  the  questions  posed  by  Lord
    Rodger in HJ & HT.

Is the Appellant gay?

16. The FtT found in the appellant's favour on this issue and the SSHD  has
    not sought to undermine that finding, either  at  the  initial  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal or after having heard further  evidence  from
    the appellant at the hearing on 24 September. I, therefore,  find  that
    the appellant is gay.

Are gay people who live openly liable to persecution in Bangladesh?

17. The respondent's "Country  Policy  and  Information  Note,  Bangladesh:
    Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity" of  November  2017,  states  as
    follows:

         "3       Policy Summary

         3.1.1    Male same-sex sexual acts are criminalised  in  Bangladesh
             under Section 377 of the Penal Code  and  punishable  by  life
             imprisonment.  However there have only ever been  two  arrests
             under the provision and no convictions.  Sex between women  is
             not criminalised and transgender persons (hijras) are  legally
             recognised.  There are, however,  reports  that  Section  377,
             together with other legal  instruments,  have  sometimes  been
             used  by  the  police  to  arbitrarily  arrest,   harass   and
             intimidate LGBT persons.  There have also been reports  police
             use physical and sexual violence against LGBT persons.

         3.1.2    However, in  general,  the  available  evidence  does  not
             establish that LGBT persons are  systematically  targeted  and
             subject to treatment amounting to persecution or serious  harm
             by the state.

         3.1.3    Reports indicate that LGBT persons  are  reluctant  to  be
             open  about  their  sexual  identity  due  to  social  stigma,
             pressures and norms, and to avoid a  level  of  discrimination
             and violence by non-state actors, including family members and
             Islamic extremists, arising from this.   Similarly,  the  LGBT
             'community' is closed and private.

         3.1.4    Women are less able than men to withstand family  pressure
             to marry and, for example, may be  more  restricted  in  their
             movements.  Decision makers must consider all of the  person's
             circumstances.

         3.1.5    In general, an LGBT person  who  does  not  conceal  their
             sexual orientation or  gender  identity  may  be  at  risk  of
             treatment, which by  its  nature  and  repetition  amounts  to
             persecution  or  serious  harm.   The  nature  and  degree  of
             treatment may vary according to geography and  social-economic
             status.  Gay rights activists and bloggers may be  at  greater
             risk due to their profile.  Each case must  be  considered  on
             its facts and merits.

         3.1.6    In general, the state appears able but unwilling to  offer
             effective  protection.   However,  each  will   need   to   be
             considered on its facts.

         3.1.7    Internal relocation may be  reasonable  depending  on  the
             person's individual circumstances,  for  example:  where  they
             have chosen to live discreetly  due  to  social  or  religious
             pressures.  However, internal relocation will not be an option
             if  it  depends  on  the  person   concealing   their   sexual
             orientation  and/or  gender  identity  in  the  proposed   new
             location for fear of persecution.

          8. Where a claim is refused, it is unlikely to be certifiable  as
             'clearly unfounded'."

         (emphasis added)

18. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal Ms Pal conceded, in line  with
    the evidence of the respondent set out above, that if the Tribunal were
    to find that the appellant would live openly upon return to  Bangladesh
    there would be a real risk that he  would  be  persecuted  there  as  a
    consequence of being  gay,  and  there  would  be  no  viable  internal
    relocation alternative. She accepted that  there  was  nothing  on  the
    facts of the appellant's case, if he were to be found to  be  truthful,
    that would take him outwith the generality of  openly  gay  persons  in
    Bangladesh, of whom it is said may be at risk of suffering  persecutory
    treatment.

Would the appellant live openly upon return to Bangladesh?

19. The parties did not assist the Tribunal as to the meaning of the phrase
    'live openly', nor is it immediately  obvious  how  the  assessment  of
    whether the appellant would  'live  openly'  in  Bangladesh  should  be
    undertaken.

20. Given that the underlying task for the Tribunal is to determine whether
    there is a real risk of the appellant suffering  persecutory  treatment
    in Bangladesh, it seems to me that the question that requires answering
    at this stage is  "Whether  the  appellant's  actions  upon  return  to
    Bangladesh would be such as to lead  to  a  real  risk  that  potential
    persecutors would perceive him to be gay?"

21. The following evidence is relevant to this issue:

          i) Home Office record of interview with the  appellant  dated  15
             November 2016. I need not set out a summary of the contents of
             this record herein but observe that it is entirely  consistent
             with  evidence  provided  by  the  appellant  in  his  witness
             statement of 8 February 2017 and in oral evidence  before  the
             Tribunal.

         ii) Witness Statement dated 8 February 2017:

             "6.  At the age of 15 I started to enjoy the company of  other
                  boys in my area.  I knew that this feeling was not  normal
                  because I  enjoyed  touching  them,  hugging  them  and  I
                  started to fantasise other  things.   I  used  to  imagine
                  which boy had the best lips and body and I was  very  fond
                  of macho and masculine boys.

             7.   Some of the boys used to laugh at me and  call  me  names
                  and taunted me.  I had no other choice but to  stay  quiet
                  and keep my feelings discreet. ...

             10.  My father regularly ridiculed me  that  I  was  good  for
                  nothing and just a waste of space.  He  used  to  tell  me
                  that I sometimes behaved like a 5 year old and  there  was
                  something wrong with me.  However, he never took me  to  a
                  specialist to see if I had any  learning  disabilities  or
                  not.

             11.  My feelings for boys increased and over time and  I  used
                  to touch boys but I did not have the courage to ask anyone
                  if they were also gay as I feared if  they  were  not  gay
                  they would go and tell everyone and I would be in trouble.

             12.  I was sometimes told off by my close friends not to touch
                  them or hug them as it was not  normal  but  they  usually
                  laughed it off  and  thought  I  was  a  bit  strange.   I
                  sometimes took the risk in touching them as  I  could  not
                  control my feeling but I used to pretend it was a friendly
                  touch or hug but I actually knew it was probably a  crush.
                  Although I was still in denial to myself, however,  I  was
                  becoming clearer over time that I am a homosexual. ...

             20.  I began a life of sadness, fear and frustration.  I could
                  not talk to anybody that I was gay and I was always scared
                  that no matter how much I try and  keep  my  homosexuality
                  discreet,  fearing  the  religious  people   and   police,
                  eventually it would all come out and my life would  be  at
                  risk.  The constant fear and frustration was nothing  less
                  than mental torture.

             21.  I started to realise that living in Bangladesh meant  one
                  day either the police or religious people would kill me if
                  they found out that I am gay.  I floated the idea of going
                  abroad with my father and he was eventually happy with it.
                   My brother was settled in the UK and I thought  I  should
                  come to the UK.

             22.  I then applied for a working holidaymaker visa to the  UK
                  and this was approved and I entered the UK on 05 September
                  2007.  I still kept my sexual orientation  discreet  as  I
                  had language barriers and did not know where to seek  help
                  and advice.  For 2  years  I  worked  in  restaurants  and
                  visited different places in the  UK.   After  2  years  my
                  leave  to  remain  expired  but  I  did  not   return   to
                  Bangladesh.  As I was in the UK I knew nobody  could  harm
                  me here.  I did sometimes wonder that  I  don't  have  any
                  leave to remain in the UK and one day I would probably  be
                  forced to return to Bangladesh and this  used  to  terrify
                  me. ...

             24.  In 2010 I began to come out  openly  as  a  gay.   I  was
                  always  worried  who  to  tell  fearing  their  reactions.
                  Unfortunately,  people  did  not  take  my  sexuality  too
                  sympathetically and most people shunned me.  Eventually my
                  brother also found out and asked me if the rumours he  was
                  hearing about my homosexuality was true or not.  As I  was
                  living in his house there was no point hiding this  matter
                  from him any longer so I admitted that I was gay.

             25.  My brother told me that he was not  happy  but  was  fine
                  with it as long as I kept my homosexual activities outside
                  his home as he felt I  was  not  a  good  example  to  his
                  children.  My parents also found out in Bangladesh that  I
                  was  living  openly  in  the  UK  as  a  gay.   They  were
                  devastated  and  said  they  did  not  want  me  back   in
                  Bangladesh and even  threatened  me,  however,  over  time
                  their anger gradually cooled down and they agreed to  send
                  me money as long as I remain outside Bangladesh.

             26.  I continued to visit a gay bar in Leicester Square  where
                  I sometimes had casual gay relationships mainly with Asian
                  guys as I  could  not  speak  English.   The  longest  gay
                  relationship I had was with a guy called Jay which  lasted
                  for about 3 months.  I used to spend  a  few  hours  or  a
                  night with a man and that would be the end.  I have  never
                  had a proper relationship with another man. ...

             30.  I am a homosexual and I am aware that  due  to  religious
                  beliefs and cultural stigma in homosexuals are  constantly
                  persecuted in Bangladesh.  The government authorities  and
                  the people of Bangladesh do not  consider  homosexuals  as
                  normal human beings and homosexuals  all  over  Bangladesh
                  are treated inhumanely. ...

             32.  After entering the UK I felt so much at peace.  I did not
                  have to worry about any risks due to my sexual orientation
                  any longer.  I was experiencing freedom and  I  wanted  to
                  seize this time.  Unfortunately, my brother threw  me  out
                  of his house in June 2016 due to pressure from his wife as
                  she is a very religious woman.  I am  now  living  with  a
                  friend in Stratford, London who  is  kindly  providing  me
                  with food and accommodation.

             33.  My only fear of returning  to  Bangladesh  is  my  sexual
                  orientation.  I dread even thinking of ever  returning  to
                  Bangladesh in the current circumstances as  I  am  certain
                  that I will be beaten to death due  to  my  homosexuality.
                  Moreover, it would be difficult to hide  my  homosexuality
                  after openly being a gay in the UK."

         (iii)    Oral evidence before the Tribunal

                . The appellant confirmed that he lives  as  an  openly  gay
                  person in the United Kingdom;

                . The way he  would  conduct  himself  in  Bangladesh  would
                  necessarily expose his homosexuality if he were to  return
                  there;

                . He would want to  engage  in  relationships  with  men  in
                  Bangladesh and he would not be able to hide the fact he is
                  gay;

                . His family would  beat  or  kill  him  upon  return,  they
                  currently live in Sylhet, in the same place that they have
                  always lived. This is a village of about  150-200  people.
                  He has no contact with his parents,  or  with  friends  in
                  Bangladesh;

                . He does not have a long term or permanent relationship  in
                  the United Kingdom, but does associate  with  friends  who
                  are gay;

                . He goes clubbing in a gay club in Leicester Square two  to
                  three times per month and plays sport in  the  local  park
                  with his gay friends. He attended  Gay  Pride  in  London,
                  although he cannot recall the route he took,  neither  can
                  he remember the name of the club he attends.

22. Ms Pal invited the Tribunal to find there was very little evidence that
    the appellant would live openly in Bangladesh and reminded the Tribunal
    that the appellant was unable to name  the  club  that  he  claimed  to
    attend 2-3 times per month, nor could he remember the  route  which  he
    took when he allegedly attended Gay  Pride.   She  submitted  that  the
    appellant's evidence that he intended  to  live  openly  in  Bangladesh
    should not be believed and further observed that the appellant had done
    little in the United Kingdom to  openly  explore  his  sexuality.   She
    submitted that the appellant  would  live  discreetly  upon  return  to
    Bangladesh, not through fear of being persecuted but  because  this  is
    how he generally conducts himself.

23. Mr Mold directed the Tribunal's attention to the evidence given by  the
    appellant as to his lifestyle in the United Kingdom  and  reminded  the
    Tribunal that the appellant would not marry in Bangladesh nor would  he
    have a girlfriend, which of itself would eventually arouse  suspicions.
    The appellant had not had to conceal his homosexuality  in  the  United
    Kingdom and would not be able to hide it if he returned to  Bangladesh.
    A casual slip of the  tongue  or  his  behaviour  would  bring  to  the
    attention to others the fact that he  is  gay.   Mr  Mold  invited  the
    Tribunal to accept the appellant's evidence as to his activities in the
    United Kingdom and, as a consequence, conclude that the appellant would
    be at risk of suffering persecutory treatment in Bangladesh.

24. Having considered the totality of the evidence before me I  accept,  to
    the lower standard, that the  appellant  is  a  witness  of  truth.  As
    alluded to above, the FtT found the appellant to  be  credible  in  the
    evidence he gave and there is nothing in the evidence before  me  which
    leads me to conclude  otherwise.  In  particular,  I  reject  Ms  Pal's
    assertion that the appellant's inability to recall the  route  he  took
    during Gay Pride or the name of the night club he attends in  Leicester
    Square should lead me to reject  the  appellant's  assertions  that  he
    undertakes either of these activities. In doing so I observe  that  the
    appellant has consistently stated throughout the entirety of the asylum
    application process that he attends gay bars in the UK, giving  details
    of one bar that he attends - see for example the answers  to  questions
    76, 78, 87, 91, 97 to 100 and 130 to136 of the asylum interview record.
    I further observe that in the decision letter the  respondent  accepted
    the existence of the bar referred to by the appellant,  and  that  this
    bar was both situated and decorated  as  the  appellant  had  asserted.
    Looked at as a whole, I find the appellant's evidence to  be  generally
    consistent and entirely plausible.

25. The appellant's evidence is that when previously living  in  Bangladesh
    he touched, hugged and kissed his male friends on  the  lips  and  face
    because he was gay; actions which his friends thought were 'not  right'
    but which the appellant explained away as a joke  between  friends.  It
    was not until approximately 3 years after he came to the  UK  that  the
    appellant started to live a more openly gay life. He  visits  gay  bars
    and clubs in the UK and has had a number of casual  relationships  with
    men and one longer relationship which lasted 3  months.  I  accept  the
    appellant's evidence that he  wishes  to  live  openly  in  Bangladesh,
    although this intention does not sit easily  with  his  fear  of  being
    killed should he  do  so.  Nevertheless,  given  the  evidence  I  have
    accepted as to how the  appellant  conducted  himself  when  previously
    living in Bangladesh and that since that time he has the opportunity in
    the United Kingdom to fully participate in society  as  an  openly  gay
    person I accept that there is a real risk of  the  appellant's  actions
    and behaviour in Bangladesh revealing to those around him  that  he  is
    gay,  particularly  in  the  appellant's  home  village  which  has   a
    population of only 150-200 people. Of course, his parents already  know
    that the appellant is gay.

26. As indicated above, Ms Pal accepts that if the appellant  is  known  in
    Bangladesh to be gay he would face a real risk of suffering persecutory
    treatment there - there being nothing in the facts of this  case  which
    takes the appellant outside the category of the  generality  of  openly
    gay persons who would suffer such treatment. It has also been accepted,
    in line with the respondent's guidance, that persons who have  a  well-
    founded fear of persecution in their home area cannot generally turn to
    the state for protection nor is  there  a  reasonable  internal  flight
    alternative  if  it  depends  on  a  person  concealing  their   sexual
    orientation  in  the  proposed  alternative  location   for   fear   of
    persecution - as would be the case for the instant appellant.

27. For these reasons  the  appellant  has  demonstrated  to  the  required
    standard that his removal  would  lead  to  a  breach  of  the  Refugee
    Convention. I also conclude, for the same reasons, that there is a real
    risk of the appellant suffering treatment in Bangladesh that  would  be
    contrary to Article 3 ECHR.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law capable  of
affecting the outcome of the appeal and is set aside.

The appellant's  appeal  is  allowed  on  the  basis  that  his  removal  to
Bangladesh would lead to a breach of the Refugee Convention  and  Article  3
ECHR


Signed:                             Date: 26 October 2018

Mark O'Connor
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor





