
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/00053/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields              |        Decision & Reasons        |
|                                    |Promulgated                       |
|On 3 August 2017                    |        On 8 August 2017          |
|                                    |                                  |

                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                                SHARIF IFFAT
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr A Khan (counsel)  instructed by Thomson & Co,
solicitors
For the Respondent: Ms R Petterson, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge  Carroll  promulgated  on  31/01/2017,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.




Background


3. The Appellant was born on 03/06/1973 and is a national  of  Pakistan.  On
15/12/2015 the Secretary of State refused the Appellant's protection claim.


The Judge's Decision

4. The appellant entered the UK on 25 June 2015 as a visitor. The  appellant
applied  for  asylum  on  10  August  2015.  The  respondent  refused   that
application on  15  December  2015.  The  appellant  appealed  against  that
refusal. In  a  determination  promulgated  in  July  2016  her  appeal  was
dismissed. She appealed to the Upper Tribunal successfully. On 20  September
2016, the appeal against the respondent's decision dated  15  December  2015
(to refuse her protection claim) was remitted  to  the  First-tier  tribunal
for a fresh decision on all issues. First-tier Tribunal Judge Carroll  ("the
Judge") dismissed the appeal against the Respondent's decision.


5. Grounds of appeal were lodged and  on  23/05/2017  Judge  Andrew  granted
permission to appeal stating

      2. It is arguable that in coming to his conclusions the Judge did  not
      take account of all the evidence before  him  including  letters  from
      Ahmadiyya  Muslim Association contained in the appellant's bundle  for
      the first hearing of her appeal.


      3. Further, it is arguable that in coming to his  findings  the  Judge
      did not correctly apply the guidance in  MN  and  others  [2012]  UKUT
      00389 (IAC)


      4. I find that there are arguable errors of law in the decision.

The Hearing

6. (a) For the appellant, Mr Khan moved the grounds of appeal. He  explained
the procedural history of this case. Because there  have  already  been  two
hearings before the First-tier, there are two bundles of documents. He  told
me that at [18] and [19] of the decision the  Judge  refers  to  one  letter
from the Ahmadiyya Muslim Association UK, dated 7 January 2017. He  told  me
that the Judge had failed to take account  of  the  four  letters  from  the
Ahmaddiya  Muslim  Association  UK,  two  of  which  can  be  found  in  the
appellant's bundle prepared for the hearing before the First-tier  in  2016,
one is in the respondents bundle at E9, the fourth (the one referred  to  by
the Judge) dated 7 January 2017 is in the appellant's  bundle  prepared  for
the hearing on 20 January 2017.

(b) Mr Khan told me that, because the Judge had not considered each  of  the
four letters, the Judge had failed to take account of a  material  fact.  He
told me that the appellant had referred to  each  of  the  four  letters  at
paragraphs 11 and 12 of the  witness  statement  prepared  for  the  hearing
before the Judge on 20 January 2017.

(c) Mr Khan then moved to the second ground of appeal. He told  me  that  at
[23] of the decision the Judge considers the appellant's activities  in  the
UK as a sur place claim. He told me the Judge was incorrect  to  do  so.  He
took me to [4] of the Judge's decision, where  the  Judge  quotes  from  the
appellant's skeleton argument. He told me that  the  appellant's  activities
in the UK are indicative of the manner in which she will  conduct  her  life
if returned to Pakistan. Relying on paragraph 5 of  MN and  others  (Ahmadis
- country conditions - risk) Pakistan CG [2012]  UKUT  00389(IAC).  Mr  Khan
told me that the Judge has considered the appellant's activities in  the  UK
in the wrong context.

(d) Mr Khan then moved to the third ground of appeal were told me  that  the
judge failed to make findings on material aspects of the case.  He  told  me
that the facts and circumstances of this case fall within the discussion  at
2(i) of MN and that  the  judge  had  failed  to  consider  the  appellant's
evidence  contained  in  the  answers  to  the  questions  asked  at  asylum
interview. He told me that the judge had five consideration  to  the  effect
of proselytising in preaching, when the appellant's inability to pursue  her
religion in Pakistan is a relevant consideration.

(e) Mr Khan urged me to allow the appeal and set the decision aside.

7. For the respondent, Mr Petterson told  me  that  the  decision  does  not
contain errors, material or otherwise. She told  me  that  no  emphasis  had
been  placed  on  the  older  three  letters  from  the   Ahmadiyya   Muslim
Association UK, and that, as these had not been drawn to  the  attention  of
the Judge, the Judge could not be criticised. She took me  to  [12]  of  the
decision and reminded me  that  the  Judge  found  that  the  appellant  has
departed from a claim to be specifically targeted by KN. At [13]  the  Judge
quotes from the appellant's asylum interview record and at  [15]  the  Judge
records that the appellant retracts an aspect of  her  claim.  Ms  Petterson
told me that the grounds of appeal failed to grapple with  the  reasons  the
Judge gave for rejecting the appellant's claim. She urged me to dismiss  the
appeal and to allow the Judge's decision to stand.

Analysis

8. The first ground of appeal is that the Judge failed to consider  material
evidence before reaching his conclusion. At [18] and [19] of  the  decision,
the Judge clearly considers the letter from Ahmadiyya Muslim Association  UK
dated  7  January  2017.  There  are  three  other,  earlier,  letters  from
Ahmadiyya Muslim Association UK.

9. The first letter  from  Ahmadiyya  Muslim  Association  UK  is  dated  20
November 2015 and can be found in the respondent's  bundle.  It  is  a  very
brief letter which just confirms that the  appellant  is  a  member  of  the
Ahmadiyya Muslim community. The letter goes on to say that a process  is  to
be followed at the end of which

           ...an appropriate letter will be sent to the Home Office.

10. The second and third letters are in the appellant's bundle prepared  for
a hearing on 15 June 2016. The second  letter  is  dated  25  May  2016.  It
confirms that  the  appellant  attended  sermons/players;  attended  general
meetings;  attended  an  annual  gathering  and  participated  in  a   Quran
exhibition; & that she has followed the Ahmadi  faith  and  participated  in
acts of charity.

11. The third letter  is  dated  9  December  2015.  It  confirms  that  the
appellant is an Ahmadi Muslim by birth, that she has adhered to  that  faith
and follows the tenets of that faith. The letter  confirms  aspects  of  her
participation in the Ahmadi community in the UK. The letter then goes on  to
rehearse the generalised difficulties in  practising  the  Ahmadi  faith  in
Pakistan.

12. The Judge clearly takes account of  the  letter  from  Ahmadiyya  Muslim
Association  UK  dated  7  January  2016.  That  letter  confirms  that  the
appellant is a member of the Ahmadi faith, and participates  in  faith-based
activities in the UK. The letter goes on to refer to the difficulties  faced
by Ahmadi Muslims in Pakistan, and refers to objective materials.

13. The earlier three letters  from  Ahmadiyya  Muslim  Association  UK  add
nothing to letter dated 7 January 2016. Is true  that  the  Judge  does  not
refer to the earlier three letters, but to do so  would  simply  repeat  the
evidence contained in  the  letter  of  7  January  2016,  which  the  judge
manifestly takes account of at [17] and [18] of the decision. The fact  that
the Judge has not mentioned three repetitive letters does not mean that  the
Judge has failed to consider material evidence. At [17] and [18]  the  Judge
clearly focuses on material evidence in  a  succinct  manner.  There  is  no
substance in the first ground of appeal

14. The second ground of appeal says the Judge  has  failed  to  follow  the
case of  MN and others (Ahmadis - country conditions  -  risk)  Pakistan  CG
[2012] UKUT 00389(IAC).

15. In  MN and others (Ahmadis - country  conditions  -  risk)  Pakistan  CG
[2012] UKUT 00389(IAC) the Tribunal held  that  (i)  This  country  guidance
replaces previous guidance in MJ & ZM (Ahmadis -  risk)  Pakistan  CG   2008
UKAIT 00033 and IA &  Others  (Ahmadis  Rabwah) Pakistan  CG  [2007]  UKAIT
00088. The guidance we give is based in part on the developments in the  law
including the decisions of the  Supreme  Court  in HJ  (Iran) [2010]  UKSC
31, RT (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC 38 and the CJEU decision in Germany v. Y  (C-
71/11) & Z (C-99/11). The guidance relates principally to  Qadiani  Ahmadis;
but as the legislation which is the  background  to  the  issues  raised  in
these appeals affects Lahori Ahmadis also, they  too  are  included  in  the
country guidance stated below; (ii) (a)  The background to the  risk  faced
by Ahmadis is legislation that restricts the way  in  which  they  are  able
openly  to  practise  their  faith.  The  legislation  not  only   prohibits
preaching and other forms of proselytising but also  in  practice  restricts
other elements of manifesting one's religious beliefs, such as holding  open
discourse  about  religion  with  non-Ahmadis,  although  not  amounting  to
proselytising. The prohibitions include openly referring to one's  place  of
worship as a mosque and to one's religious leader as an Imam.  In  addition,
Ahmadis are not permitted to refer to the call to  prayer  as  azan  nor  to
call themselves Muslims or refer to their faith as Islam. Sanctions  include
a fine and imprisonment and if blasphemy is found, there is a  risk  of  the
death penalty which to date has not been carried out  although  there  is  a
risk of lengthy incarceration if the penalty is  imposed.  There  is  clear
evidence that this legislation is used by non-state actors to  threaten  and
harass Ahmadis. This  includes  the  filing  of  First  Information  Reports
(FIRs) (the first step in any criminal  proceedings)  which  can  result  in
detentions whilst prosecutions are being pursued. Ahmadis are  also  subject
to attacks by non-state actors from sectors of  the  majority  Sunni  Muslim
population; (ii) (b) It is, and has  long  been,  possible  in  general  for
Ahmadis to practise their faith on a restricted basis either in  private  or
in community with other Ahmadis, without infringing domestic  Pakistan law;
(iii) (a) If an Ahmadi is able to  demonstrate  that  it  is  of  particular
importance to his religious identity to  practise  and  manifest  his  faith
openly in Pakistan in defiance of the restrictions  in  the  Pakistan  Penal
Code (PPC) under sections 298B and 298C, by engaging in behaviour  described
in paragraph  (ii)(a)  above,  he  or  she  is  likely  to  be  in  need  of
protection, in the light  of  the  serious  nature  of  the  sanctions  that
potentially apply as well as the risk of prosecution under section 295C  for
blasphemy; (iii)(b) It is no  answer  to  expect  an  Ahmadi  who  fits  the
description  just  given  to  avoid  engaging  in  behaviour  described   in
paragraph (ii)(a) above ("paragraph (ii)(a) behaviour") to avoid a  risk  of
prosecution; (iv)  The need for  protection  applies  equally  to  men  and
women. There is no basis for considering that Ahmadi women as  a  whole  are
at a particular or additional  risk;  the  decision  that  they  should  not
attend mosques in Pakistan was made  by  the  Ahmadi  Community  following
attacks on the mosques in Lahore in 2010. There is no evidence that  women
in particular were the target of those attacks; (v) In light of the  above,
the first question the decision-maker must ask is (1) whether  the  claimant
genuinely is an Ahmadi. As with all judicial  fact-finding  the  judge  will
need to reach conclusions on all the evidence as a whole giving such  weight
to aspects of that evidence as appropriate in accordance with Article  4  of
the Qualification Directive.  This is likely to include an enquiry  whether
the claimant was  registered  with  an  Ahmadi  community  in Pakistan and
worshipped and engaged there on a regular basis. Post-arrival activity  will
also be relevant. Evidence likely to be relevant includes confirmation from
the UK Ahmadi  headquarters   regarding   the   activities   relied   on
in Pakistan and confirmation from the local community in the UK where the
claimant is worshipping; (vi) The next step (2)  involves  an  enquiry  into
the claimant's intentions or wishes as to his  or  her  faith,  if  returned
to Pakistan.  This is relevant because of the need to establish whether it
is of  particular  importance  to  the  religious  identity  of  the  Ahmadi
concerned to engage in paragraph (ii)(a) behaviour. The  burden  is  on  the
claimant to demonstrate that any intention or wish to practise and  manifest
aspects of the faith openly that are not permitted  by  the  Pakistan  Penal
Code (PPC) is genuinely held and of particular importance  to  the  claimant
to preserve his or her religious identity.  The  decision  maker  needs  to
evaluate all the evidence. Behaviour since arrival in the UK may  also  be
relevant. If the claimant discharges this burden he is likely to be in  need
of  protection;  (vii)  The  option  of  internal   relocation,   previously
considered to be available in Rabwah, is not in general reasonably  open  to
a claimant who genuinely wishes to engage n paragraph (ii)(a) behaviour,  in
the  light  of  the  nationwide  effect  in Pakistan of  the  anti-Ahmadi
legislation; (viii) Ahmadis who are not able to  show  that  they  practised
their faith at all in Pakistan or that they did so on  anything  other  than
the restricted basis described in  paragraph  2(ii)  above  are  in  general
unlikely to be able to show that their genuine intentions or wishes  are  to
practise and  manifest  their  faith  openly  on  return,  as  described  in
paragraph 2(a) above; (ix) A sur place claim by an Ahmadi  based  on  post-
arrival conversion or revival in belief and practice  will  require  careful
evidential analysis. This will probably include  consideration  of  evidence
of the head of the claimant's local United  Kingdom Ahmadi  Community  and
from the UK headquarters, the latter particularly in cases where there has
been a conversion. Any adverse findings  in  the  claimant's  account  as  a
whole may be relevant to the assessment of likely behaviour on  return;  (x)
 Whilst an Ahmadi who has been found to be not reasonably likely to  engage
or wish to engage in paragraph 2(a) behaviour is, in general,  not  at  real
risk on return to Pakistan, judicial fact-finders may in certain cases  need
to consider whether that person would nevertheless be reasonably  likely  to
be targeted by non-state actors  on  return  for  religious  persecution  by
reason of his/her prominent social and/or business profile.


16. In FA (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2016]
EWCA Civ 763 it was held that when considering the  right  to  asylum  of  a
national of Pakistan of the Ahmadi faith, the First-tier Tribunal had  erred
by failing to address the findings made in the most recent country  guidance
case. The Upper Tribunal had been entitled to find that internal  relocation
was available to the Claimant. The Court of Appeal effectively endorsed  and
followed MN and Others (Ahmadis - country conditions  -  risk)  Pakistan  CG
[2012] UKUT 389 (IAC), recognising that it  was  possible  to  identify  two
broad  categories  of  Ahmadis.  The  first  category  was  those  who  felt
compelled to manifest their faith, if  necessary  in  contravention  of  the
Pakistan Penal Code, and the second was  those  who  were  content  to  live
quietly and practise their faith in  private.  Those  who  openly  practised
their Ahmadi faith were acknowledged as being  likely  to  need  protection,
while those who practised their  faith  on  a  restricted  basis  either  in
private or in  a  community  with  other  Ahmadis,  without  infringing  the
domestic law of Pakistan, were not.

17. At [12], [13] and [14] of the decision, the Judge makes  it  clear  that
by January 2017 the appellant's claim was said to be a fear because  of  the
general situation an Ahmadi Muslim faces in Pakistan rather  than  that  she
had been  singled  out  and  targeted.  At  [15]  the  Judge  sets  out  the
appellant's activities as an Ahmadi in Pakistan. After discussing  competing
strands of evidence,  the  Judge  finds  at  [23]  that  the  appellant  has
exaggerated aspects of the case, and that the  appellant  does  not  have  a
prominent role in the Ahmadi community in Pakistan.

18. At [24] the Judge takes  account  of  those  findings  and  specifically
finds that the appellant will not practice and manifest her faith openly  in
defiance of the Pakistan penal code and so  will  not  engage  in  behaviour
described in paragraph 2(i) of the headnote in MN.

19. There is no merit in the second ground of appeal. The judge has  clearly
followed the guidance in MN. The Judge has made findings of fact  which  the
appellant does not like and disagrees with, but they are  findings  of  fact
which were well within the range of findings reasonably open  to  the  Judge
to make. The Judge has clearly taken a  holistic  view  of  each  strand  of
evidence before reaching those findings. Having reached those findings,  the
Judge manifestly takes correct guidance in law.

20. The third ground of appeal amounts to nothing more than  a  disagreement
with the facts as the Judge found them to be and the weight that  the  Judge
gave various strands of evidence.

21. In Green (Article 8 - new rules) [2013] UKUT  254  (IAC)   the  Tribunal
said that "Giving weight to a factor one way or  another  is  for  the  fact
finding Tribunal and the assignment of weight will rarely give  rise  to  an
error of law". In the decision promulgated on 31  January  2017,  the  Judge
clearly took account of each strand  of  evidence  and  reached  conclusions
which were well within the range of conclusions available to him.

22.   In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside)  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)
the Tribunal held that the Upper Tribunal would not  normally  set  aside  a
decision of the First-tier Tribunal where there has been no misdirection  of
law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised and the relevant  Country
Guidance has been taken into  account,  unless  the  conclusions  the  Judge
draws from the primary data were not reasonably open to him or her.

23. In this case, there  is  no  misdirection  in  law  &  the  fact-finding
exercise is beyond criticism.  The decision is not  tainted  by  a  material
error of law. The Judge's decision, when read as a whole, sets out  findings
that are sustainable and sufficiently detailed.

CONCLUSION

24. No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

25. The appeal  is  dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
stands.

Signed                 Paul Doyle
  Date  7 August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle



