

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal No PA/00170/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|on 17 May 2016                                |on 19 May 2016               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                              ALI REZA TABRIZI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr D McGlashan, of McGlashan MacKay, Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran. On 7 June 2012  he  was  detected,
      with his family, at Glasgow airport while travelling to  Canada  in  a
      false identity. He sought asylum, claiming to  be  at  risk  from  the
      Iranian authorities because he had converted from Islam to Baha'ism.

   2. First-tier Tribunal Judge D'Ambrosio dismissed the appellant's  appeal
      against refusal of that claim by decision promulgated on 11 July  2013
      (case AA/02504/2013).  Those proceedings have been exhausted, and that
      decision stands.

   3. On 23 April 2014 the appellant made an assisted  voluntary  return  to
      Iran.

   4. The appellant returned to the United Kingdom and claimed asylum  again
      on 5 May 2015, basing his claim on conversion to Christianity.

   5. The respondent refused this second claim on 27th May  2015,  declining
      to accept that the appellant is a genuine convert to Christianity, but
      holding also that "at highest" he is an ordinary convert,  not  likely
      to be an active evangeliser, and so not at risk on return.

   6. First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  by
      decision promulgated on 22 December 2015.

   7. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,  on
      the grounds that the judge failed to take account of his conversion to
      Christianity; failed to  distinguish  between  his  first  and  second
      claims; erroneously took Christianity and Baha'ism to be the  same  or
      similar faiths; fell for that reason into the error  of  treating  the
      previous decision not merely as the starting point  but  also  as  the
      endpoint, contrary to the principles of  Devaseelan;  failed  to  deal
      with the evidence of supporting witnesses; and referred in error to  a
      statement by the appellant's wife, when there was no such statement.

   8. Permission was granted by the Upper Tribunal on 16 March 2016, on  the
      view that it  was  arguable  that  Judge  Fox  incorrectly  considered
      Baha'ism to be a variant of Christianity, and erred in  his  treatment
      of the decision by Judge D'Ambrosio.

   9. In a rule 24 response, the respondent submits that paragraphs  18  and
      19 of the decision show that the judge was aware  that  the  appellant
      was now claiming asylum on the basis of conversion to Christianity.

  10. That observation is  correct  as  far  as  those  two  paragraphs  are
      concerned, but other parts of the decision do suggest that  the  judge
      failed to distinguish between the two  faiths.  At  paragraph  14  the
      judge says, "It was not believed that [the appellant] or his wife  had
      any real interest in converting to Christianity and in  particular  to
      the Baha'i faith. If his interest  in  this  faith  were  in  any  way
      credible he (and his wife) would  not  have  left  it  so  long  after
      returning  to  Iran  in  picking  up  the  threads  of  their  claimed
      interest". That passage shows an element of confusion,  which  plainly
      feeds into the extent to which the judge thought  the  prior  decision
      had settled the issue.

  11. Mrs O'Brien acknowledged that the judge failed to deal with supporting
      evidence, including evidence from a church pastor.

  12. Mr McGlashan pointed out certain other errors. The respondent was  not
      represented  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  judge  explains   at
      paragraph 2 that he refused a written application  by  the  respondent
      for an adjournment. He did not advise Mr McGlashan at the hearing that
      any such application had  been  made.  Mr  McGlashan  would  not  have
      opposed it. This by itself does not disclose any error of law, but  it
      is  indicative  of  a  certain  carelessness  of  approach,  which  Mr
      McGlashan illustrated further (a) at paragraphs 4  and  9,  where  the
      judge  incorrectly  says  that  he   heard   oral   submissions   from
      representatives on both sides; (b) by  the  judge  references  to  the
      "uncorroborated" evidence of the appellant, when evidence had been led
      from three other witnesses, including the church pastor;  and  (c)  at
      paragraph 2, where the judge refers to the case being  dealt  with  in
      the fast track procedure, when it had been removed from that procedure
      (which has never been followed in hearings in Glasgow).

  13. Mr McGlashan further advised that at the outset  of  the  hearing  the
      judge indicated that Mr McGlashan would be permitted  to  address  new
      matters only, the case having largely been decided by Judge D'Ambrosio
      and there being therefore formidable difficulties in the  way  of  the
      appellant. Although there is no ground of appeal in that  respect,  it
      would also have been an error to pre-judge to that extent.  The  prior
      decision is a significant starting point but no more, and a judge  has
      in the end to assess a case on materials both old  and  new.  However,
      there is sufficient in the errors which are disclosed by  the  grounds
      of appeal on which permission was granted without considering  whether
      further grounds might be entertained.

  14. Mrs O'Brien fairly and correctly conceded that there  had  been  legal
      error, that it was material, and  that  the  appropriate  outcome,  as
      sought by the appellant, was to remit to the First-tier Tribunal.  She
      put on record that  the  respondent  adheres  to  the  view  that  the
      appellant's conversion to Christianity  is  no  more  than  a  cynical
      device.

  15. The decision of the first-tier Tribunal is  set  aside.  None  of  its
      findings are to stand. The nature of the  case  is  such  that  it  is
      appropriate in terms of section 12(2)(b)(i) of the  2007  Act  and  of
      Practice Statement 7.2 to remit the case to  the  first-tier  Tribunal
      for an entirely fresh hearing.

  16. The member(s) of the first-tier Tribunal chosen to consider  the  case
      are not to include Judge Fox or Judge D'Ambrosio.

  17. No anonymity order has been requested or made.


            [pic]


            17 May 2016
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




