
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00646/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2nd September 2016                |On 1st November 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                  Hawre [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hossein of Counsel instructed by Morgan Dias
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Ince  made
    following a hearing at Bradford on 16th March 2016.

    Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq  born  on  1st  November  1985.   He
    arrived in the UK on 10th May 2015 and  applied  for  asylum.   He  was
    refused on 7th July 2015.

 3. The basis of the appellant's claim is that he is an Iraqi  national  of
    Kurdish ethnicity and lived in Mosul.  He said that he  was  threatened
    by five members of IS  because  he  was  selling  women's  clothes  and
    cosmetics in his shop.  He was lashed some twenty to  30  times.   When
    his sisters were told that they were going to be forcibly  married  and
    fined 10,000,000 dinars for failing to wear their  hijabs,  the  family
    decided to leave.  The appellant telephoned a  relative,  his  mother's
    cousin, who was a  taxi  driver,  who  agreed  to  drive  them  to  the
    Iraqi/Syrian border.  At the point of meeting the  agent  and  boarding
    the lorry the family were separated and the appellant travelled alone.

 4. The respondent did not believe that the appellant was telling the truth
    about the circumstances leading to his departure from Iraq.  The judge,
    however, found that he had been truthful and that he feared persecution
    from non-state actors, namely IS, if he returned to Mosul.

 5. He cited the decision in AA (Article 15(c)) CG [2015] UKUT 544 and then
    wrote as follows:

         "It would appear that, as the appellant has a PDS  card,  it  would
         not be difficult for him to obtain a replacement CSID card,  either
         from the Iraqi Embassy prior to return to Baghdad, or by having his
         relative in Mosul obtain one for him using  a  power  of  attorney.
         That would enable him to obtain a passport  or  laissez-passer.   I
         appreciate that he has not been in contact with  his  relative  for
         about a year but there is no evidence before me that contact cannot
         be established since the appellant's evidence is that  he  had  not
         attempted such contact.  In addition, the case of AA indicates that
         an alternative civil  status  affairs  office  of  the  appellant's
         governorate, namely Mosul, has been established in  Baghdad,  which
         can assist him in obtaining a CSID card."

 6. The judge concluded that it would be feasible  for  him  to  return  to
    Baghdad and on that basis dismissed the appeal.

    The Grounds of Application

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal on two grounds.  First  that,
    according to AA,  the  appellant  did  not  possess  the  documentation
    required to obtain a replacement CSID card from outside of Iraq and his
    inability to obtain a replacement one would expose him to a  real  risk
    of destitution. Second, in his consideration of  internal  flight,  the
    judge had confined his analysis to financial sustainability  which  was
    an error of law.

 8. Permission to appeal was initially refused by Judge Foudy on  24th  May
    2016.

 9. The appellant then renewed his grounds to the  Upper  Tribunal  arguing
    that Judge Foudy had failed to engage with the arguments.

10. Permission to appeal was subsequently granted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Frances on 1st August 2016.

11. The respondent served a reply on 31st August 2016  asserting  that  the
    Grounds of Appeal amount to no more than a mere disagreement  with  the
    decision.

    Submissions

12. Mr Hossein submitted that the judge's findings in relation to the  CSID
    were unreasoned.  There  was  no  evidence  that  he  could  contact  a
    relative in Mosul in order to obtain the relevant documentation.

13.  Mrs  Pettersen,   having   initially   defended   the   determination,
    acknowledged its shortcomings.

    Consideration of whether there is an Error of Law

14. The crux of this appeal is the appellant's ability, or lack of  it,  to
    obtain a CSID card.  If he could do so  it  is  likely  that  he  could
    reasonably return to Baghdad. If not relocation to Baghdad is likely to
    be unreasonable/unduly harsh in accordance with paragraph 15 of AA.

15. It does not seem to have been explored at the hearing whether the  taxi
    driver who took the appellant and his family to the border is still  in
    Mosul or indeed if there are other relatives in Iraq who could  assist.
    That evidence is crucial to the outcome of this appeal.

16. There is less merit in Ground 2. However the judge did err  in  law  in
    failing to identify the evidence  upon  which  he  had  concluded  that
    relatives would be in a position to assist the appellant in replacing a
    CSID card.

17. The decision is set aside.

    Resumed hearing.

18. When this matter came back before me I heard brief oral  evidence  from
    the appellant who confirmed that the contents  of  his  latest  witness
    statement dated 8th September 2016 were true and correct.

19. In that statement Mr [A] reiterated his case, which  was  found  to  be
    credible by the Immigration Judge, that he would be at risk  on  return
    to Mosul on account of being targeted by  ISIL,  having  owned  a  shop
    selling cosmetics and women's clothing.  He also  said  that  his  life
    would be in danger as his father was an informant loyal to  the  Ba'ath
    Party, which meant that they were not on good terms  with  the  family.
    When they left Iraq he was separated from his mother and  sisters,  and
    his mother kept his Iraqi ID card and his  nationality  ID  card.   The
    only document which he had was his monthly ration book.

20. He said that he  had  no  way  of  obtaining  a  CSID  card  but,  when
    questioned by Mrs Pettersen, acknowledged that he  had  not  approached
    the Iraqi Embassy for any help.  Neither had he been  in  contact  with
    any family member since he left.

21. Mrs Pettersen accepted that, in reality, given the present situation in
    Mosul, it would not be possible for the appellant to access  help  from
    anyone there in obtaining a CSID card, although she submitted  that  it
    was unlikely that he had no contact  numbers  for  any  relative  there
    because it was in his own interest to say that  he  had  lost  contact.
    She did however submit that it was  likely  that  the  appellant  could
    obtain a replacement CSID card on the basis of his ration book and  the
    fact that he had made no  attempt  to  do  so  indicated  his  lack  of
    interest in obtaining one.

22. Mr Hussain submitted that the present situation in Mosul prohibited any
    possibility of obtaining assistance in getting a card from  there.   He
    also submitted that the Iraqi Embassy in London would not issue a  CSID
    card on the basis of a ration book (paragraph 177, AA  (Article  15(c))
    (Rev 1) CG [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC)).  If he  was  unable  to  obtain  the
    CSID, relocation to Baghdad would not be reasonable.  On that basis  he
    asked that the appeal be allowed on  humanitarian  protection  grounds,
    with respect to Article 3.

    Findings and Conclusions

23. Mrs  Pettersen  realistically  accepted  that  any  argument  that  the
    appellant could realistically contact a relative in Mosul in  order  to
    ask him to go to the Civil Status Affairs Office there was hopeless  in
    the light of the major offensive  by  the  Iraqi  Army  which  in  fact
    commenced today.

24. So far as the Iraqi Embassy here is concerned, at paragraph 177  of  AA
    the Tribunal said:

         "In summary, we conclude that it is possible for an Iraqi  national
         living in the UK to obtain a CSID through the consular  section  of
         the Iraqi Embassy in London, if such a person is able to produce  a
         current or expired passport and/or the book  and  page  number  for
         their family registration details.   For  persons  without  such  a
         passport,  or  who  are  unable  to  produce  the  relevant  family
         registration details, a  power  of  attorney  can  be  provided  to
         someone in  Iraq  who  can  thereafter  undertake  the  process  of
         obtaining the CSID from such person from the Civil  Status  Affairs
         Office in their home governorate.  For reasons  identified  in  the
         section that follows below, at the present  time,  the  process  of
         obtaining a CSID from Iraq is likely to be severely hampered if the
         person wishing to obtain the CSID is from  an  area  where  Article
         15(c) serious harm is occurring.  ... As a result of the  violence,
         alternative CSA Offices for Mosul, Anbar and Saluhaddin  have  been
         established  in  Baghdad  and  Kerbala.  The  evidence   does   not
         demonstrate that the 'Central Archive' which exists in  Baghdad  is
         in practice able to provide CSIDs to those in need of them.   There
         is however a National Status Court in Baghdad  to  which  a  person
         could  apply  for  formal  recognition  of  identity.  The  precise
         operation of this court is, however, unclear".

25. When I asked Mrs Pettersen specifically whether she had any information
    upon which her rather optimistic submission that  the  appellant  could
    obtain a CSID in London on the basis of his ration card, she said  that
    she had no such information.

26. The appellant has been found to be credible in all material respects by
    the previous Immigration Judge.  There is therefore no basis  to  doubt
    his word that he does  not  have  the  relevant  documents,  namely  an
    expired passport or a record of the family registration details.

27. His inability to obtain a CSID  is  important,  because,  according  to
    paragraph 151 of AA:

         "A person returned to Iraq who was unable to  replace  their  Civil
         Status ID Card or Nationality Certificate (who would) be likely  to
         face  significant  difficulties  in  accessing   services   and   a
         livelihood and would face destitution which is likely to reach  the
         Article 3 threshold".

28. AA held, at paragraph 11 of the head note:

         "Where P's return to Iraq is found by the Tribunal to be  feasible,
         it will generally be necessary to decide whether P has a  CSID,  or
         will be able to obtain one, reasonably soon after arrival in  Iraq.
         A CSID is generally required  in  order  for  an  Iraqi  to  access
         financial assistance from the authorities;  employment;  education;
         housing; and medical treatment.  If P shows there are no family  or
         other members likely to be able to provide means of support,  P  is
         in general likely to face a real risk of destitution, amounting  to
         serious harm, if, by the time  any  funds  provided  to  P  by  the
         Secretary of State or her agents to assist  P's  return  have  been
         exhausted, it is reasonably likely that P will still have no CSID".

29. It was not argued at the hearing  that  there  is  any  other  possible
    relocation  alternative  to  Baghdad.   The  first  Immigration   Judge
    concluded that there was no evidence  that  the  appellant  had  family
    members or friends there able to accommodate or otherwise  assist  him.
    Although the appellant is a Kurd he does not originate from the IKR and
    therefore permission to enter there would only be given for an  initial
    ten days extended by a further ten days on renewal.




Notice of Decision

30. The original judge erred in law and his decision has  been  set  aside.
    It is re-made as follows.  The appeal is allowed on Article 3 grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed[pic]                             Date 31 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
