
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00487/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 8 August 2019                   |On 30 August 2019                  |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                                MUHAMMAD RAZA
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr C. Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant seeks  to  challenge  the  determination  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Phull whose determination was  promulgated  on  28  May
      2019.

   2. By letter dated 25 July 2019 the appellant's solicitors  informed  the
      Tribunal that the appellant would be representing himself  in  person.
      They explained there would be no supplementary bundle; nor would there
      be any further evidence. However, his solicitors made reference  to  a
      letter from the Boleyn Medical Centre dated 11  February  2019  and  a
      printout relating to agricultural land in Pakistan.  They  invited  my
      attention to the Skeleton Argument and  submissions  made  before  the
      First-tier Tribunal

   3. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan was born on 9 December 1986. He
      is now aged 32. He had been granted a visit visa due to  expire  on  2
      June 2005, at which point he  would  already  have  reached  his  18th
      birthday. He overstayed. On 3 April 2009 he sought  further  leave  to
      remain  outside  the  Rules  which  was  refused  in  September  2009.
      Subsequently, this decision was reconsidered  and  confirmed.  He  was
      served with process as a preliminary to the respondent  removing  him.
      Notwithstanding his past unsuccessful applications, he made a  further
      application on 16 January 2013 on the basis of his private life  which
      was refused on 6 December 2013 without a right of  appeal.  A  further
      application was made, refused and the appeal struck out. It  was  only
      at this stage over 10 years after his arrival that he claimed  asylum.
      The application was made on 5 August 2015. The  refusal  decision  was
      made on 21 December 2018. It was the appeal against this decision that
      was the subject matter of the appeal before the  First-tier  Tribunal.
      On any view, this was a dismal immigration history.

   4. The appellant's asylum claim was summarised by the judge in paragraphs
      9 to 11 of his determination. In short, he claimed he feared his elder
      brother who lives in Pakistan as a result of  abuse  and  pressure  he
      exerted upon  him.  He  suffered  mental  health  problems.  Land  was
      transferred to the appellant and his brother. He arrived in the United
      Kingdom as a holidaymaker in 2005 and decided to stay as he feared his
      brother and was happier in the United Kingdom. He claimed his  brother
      wishes to become the sole owner of the jointly held property.  It  was
      his belief that his parents had passed away. On return to Pakistan, he
      has no support network, home  or  job.  He  claimed  his  brother  had
      threatened to kill him if he were to return and that he would  receive
      no protection because  his  brother  had  influential  friends  within
      political circles and within the police.

   5. The First-tier Judge did not believe the appellant was at risk  as  he
      claimed.

   6. This was a claim based on threats by a non-state agent.  Assuming that
      the brother had the settled intention to harm the appellant, the focus
      moved on to whether the Pakistani legal system afforded him any relief
      against the brother's attempts to deprive  him  of  his  property  and
      whether the police  were  incapable  of  offering  the  appellant  the
      appropriate level of protection against  physical  harm  or  coercion.
      This required the appellant to establish  that  his  brother  had  the
      naked power to orchestrate his scheme by silencing the lawyers, judges
      and police or by enrolling them onto his  side.   Further,  the  claim
      required  the  appellant  to  establish  that  the  brother  had   the
      logistical capability of  ascertaining  if  and  when  and  where  the
      appellant returned to Pakistan and then the further capacity to  trace
      the appellant wherever he might attempt to relocate across the  length
      and breadth of Pakistan.  It was a Herculean task that  the  appellant
      spectacularly failed to perform.  Indeed, even the most  sophisticated
      mechanisms of most States would be daunted by the challenge,  even  if
      they had access to airline passenger  manifests  and  the  information
      held by local and central government agencies.

   7. The appellant has two other brothers who live in the  United  Kingdom.
      It is a curiosity of the claim that they have no legal interest in the
      disputed property. The appellant, however, claims through his previous
      representatives that, although they  are  not  owners,  they  have  an
      interest in it as the older brother had a duty of fairness to  provide
      them with their  share.  This  account  sits  uncomfortably  with  the
      appellant's claim that his brother has no scruple about depriving  him
      of what is rightfully his. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  noted  that,
      although living in the United Kingdom,  they  had  not  submitted  any
      evidence to confirm that interest.

   8. It only required taking a step back to make a casual consideration  of
      the claim to realise that it was bogus.

   9. The clear lack of merit in the claim has, however,  been  obscured  by
      focusing upon issues which have little bearing on its substance. Large
      amounts of argument were directed towards the documentary evidence  in
      relation to proving ownership of the disputed land which the appellant
      had claimed was transferred to him when he was aged  only  five.  This
      has resulted in the appellant's skeleton argument calling  into  issue
      whether the documents provided were a lease or  an  inspection  report
      conducted  every  four  years  and  whether  dates  contained  in  the
      documents referred to the data transfer or something else.

  10. There was also an issue about the production of a  Power  of  Attorney
      about which it is said the  judge  made  a  factual  error  about  its
      provenance.

  11. None of these points, which have engendered considerable  controversy,
      are germane to the central issue of risk.

  12. It was for the appellant to establish, even if he had also managed  to
      establish the existence of a land dispute and threats of coercion  and
      physical harm on the part of his brother, that this was sufficient  to
      require the British authorities to afford him  sanctuary.  Inevitably,
      he was asked to provide evidence to support his claim that his brother
      had the degree of influence over politicians, the police and all other
      relevant authorities that was the foundation  of  his  case  that  the
      State of Pakistan was unable to offer him appropriate  protection.  In
      paragraph 2.10 of the skeleton  argument,  it  is  conceded  that  the
      appellant clearly stated he was  unaware  of  how  his  older  brother
      formed the strong connections  with  the  police  and  politicians  in
      Pakistan. The appellant's complaint is that '...it seems like that the
      Interview Officer was not accepting "I don't know" as an answer.'  The
      skeleton continues:

           "It is submitted that the appellant's answer was  not  vague  or
           speculative, if he is unaware of how or who  his  older  brother
           associates with, then the SSHD should accept this as answer  and
           not expect the appellant to have knowledge  of  everything.  The
           SSHD should appreciate that the appellant left Pakistan and came
           to the UK 14 years ago, he since has not returned  to  Pakistan,
           nor has he spoken to his brother in a way  where  he  could  ask
           about  his  connections.   Therefore,   the   appellant   cannot
           reasonably be expected to know this information required by  the
           SSHD."

  13. The submission continues that the appellant should  not  be  penalised
      for poor questioning of the interviewing officer and if the SSHD  felt
      the answers were unclear then further details should have been sought.

  14. This is a quite extraordinary submission. It was for the appellant  to
      establish that his brother had the influence that was  so  central  to
      the success of his claim. He failed to do so. There was no credible in
      evidence.

  15. This effectively disposes of the claim. It also disposes of any viable
      claim that the appellant is at risk of a malicious prosecution brought
      by his brother such that, on return he would be arrested, detained and
      ill-treated.

  16. In the absence of any persuasive evidence that the appellant's brother
      has sufficient sway in Pakistan to  involve  the  authorities  in  his
      attempt to abuse or coerce the appellant,  there  is  an  unanswerable
      case that it would be reasonable to expect him to relocate to any area
      he might choose, even if he is a risk from his  brother  in  his  home
      area.

  17. I am aware that the appellant has produced a letter dated 11  February
      2019 from the Boleyn Medical Centre which confirms  the  appellant  is
      known to suffer from clinical depression and is currently on an  anti-
      depressant drug. The purpose of the letter was that the appellant told
      his General Practitioner that due to the effects of the depression and
      especially his forgetfulness, he felt he would not be in a  fit  state
      to attend the court at the hearing in February 2019.

  18. That does not materially advance his case.

  19. In granting permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge L. Murray was properly concerned that there had been  a
      delay of just over three months between the date of the hearing on  21
      February 2019 and the date on which the determination was prepared and
      promulgated, namely, 28 May 2019. No arguments were  addressed  to  me
      that the delay has had any bearing on the outcome of the  appeal.  The
      judge recorded in paragraph  7  that  there  had  been  oral  evidence
      provided by the appellant and a record of proceedings had been kept of
      it. The appellant's representative has not called for  the  production
      of the Record of Proceedings, as far as I am aware.

  20. As Judge Murray rightly  observed,  there  is  no  rule  of  law  that
      vitiates a determination if more than three months has elapsed between
      hearing and  promulgation.  There  is  nothing  in  the  body  of  the
      determination to  suggest  that  the  appellant's  oral  evidence  was
      crucial to his overall assessment. There is a reference to the  cross-
      examination in paragraph 27 of the determination in  which  the  judge
      makes the sensible and proper point about his good relations with  his
      other two brothers living in the United Kingdom but their  failure  to
      provide evidence in support of the appellant. As I have set out above,
      the appellant's claim fails largely on the basis  that  the  appellant
      was unable to establish the risk that he claimed existed. This was not
      a matter which is over-concerned with issues  of  credibility  arising
      from his oral evidence. Although the delay is mentioned  in  paragraph
      11 of the grounds, it is only suggested as a  'possibility'  that  the
      judge missed crucial information when determining the appeal. In order
      to pursue such a point, the appellant's representative would have  had
      to have produced their record of proceedings or required the  Tribunal
      to produce its own Record of Proceedings.  It  would  then  have  been
      necessary to identify the areas in which the judge overlooked  crucial
      information resulting in findings of  fact  which  were  made  without
      regard to that evidence or were contradicted by it.

  21. The point was  not  elaborated  in  the  appellant's  representative's
      letter to the Tribunal of  25  July  2019  inviting  the  Tribunal  to
      determine the appeal without recourse to further documentation.

DECISION

      The First-tier Tribunal Judge made no error of law in her handling  of
      this appeal and her determination shall stand.

      My findings do not necessitate the making of an anonymity direction.




                                                               ANDREW JORDAN

                                                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE

                                                              21 August 2019



