






Upper Tribunal
(Immigration And Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/00455/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                 |        Decision and Reasons         |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On: 2 November 2017                   |        On: 24 November 2017         |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between


                                 Mr S M S A
                         (anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr A Gilbert, counsel (instructed by Milestone
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant
      is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
      indirectly identify them or any member of their family. This direction
      applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply
      with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

   2. The appellant appeals with permission  against  the  decision  of  the
      First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  promulgated  on  27  February  2017.  She
      concluded that the appellant would not be at real risk of  persecution
      in Bangladesh, either from the authorities or from anyone else  if  he
      were to return.

   3. The appellant claimed that he was an atheist and that he had published
      anti-Islamic atheistic views. The Judge  found  that  the  appellant's
      published views on his Facebook and CEMB  accounts  are  open  to  the
      public [32]. His beliefs would be recognised as insincere.

   4. On  11  September  2017  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Perkins  granted  the
      appellant permission to appeal.  He inclined  to  the  view  that  the
      Judge was entitled to be sceptical about the depth  and  sincerity  of
      the appellant's irreligious views. However, he was concerned that  the
      Judge may have erred in concluding that his expressed  views,  however
      superficial  or  insincere,  would  not  create  a  risk  for  him  in
      Bangladesh.  It  was  arguable  that  even  if  the  Judge  reached  a
      permissible conclusion, the explanation in the  decision  and  reasons
      was inadequate.

   5. Mr Gilbert, who did not appear on  behalf  of  the  appellant  at  the
      hearing, adopted the grounds that he subsequently prepared in  support
      of the permission application.

   6. He submitted that the Judge erred in her approach to the assessment of
      whether or not there was a real risk of persecution on  the  basis  of
      imputed religious views. Her findings at [34] constituted  a  material
      error. There the Judge held that the appellant's contributions did not
      fit the profile of a secularist and human rights  blogger  (academics,
      intellectuals) in Bangladesh who have drawn the adverse  attention  of
      fundamentalists and the authorities. She stated that:

              "Given my findings  of  his  lack  of  credibility  there  are
      substantial grounds to believe that he will not           continue  to
      blog if he was returned to Bangladesh. I also do not  accept  that  he
      and his family have lost      contact."

   7. He submitted that the finding that only contributions  from  academics
      and intellectuals and those of an  academic  or  intellectual  nature,
      have been persecuted, was unsupported by the background evidence.  Nor
      did the general  evidence  about  the  behaviour  of  authorities  and
      fundamentalists support a tendency to rational careful  assessment  of
      sincerity. There was  evidence  of  a  repressive,  arbitrary  regime,
      acting in the context of offences to religious sentiment. The  Judge's
      presumption of a rational assessment was counter intuitive to the rest
      of the unchallenged evidence.

   8. The Judge found at [32] that  the  appellant  had  since  the  end  of
      December 2016 made himself a presence on the Internet in the UK, which
      was barely three months as at the date of  hearing.  There  was  scant
      evidence  that  his  atheism  had  attained  a   level   of   cogency,
      seriousness, cohesion and importance such that he  would  be  at  real
      risk of persecution in Bangladesh by  the  authorities  or  non  State
      actors [33].

   9. Mr Gilbert referred to the evidence before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
      contained in a bundle consisting of about 250 pages. At page 104 there
      is reference to a rally regarding blasphemy laws and  demanding  death
      to atheists in Dhaka in 2013. An estimated 100,000 Islamists  took  to
      the streets calling for "death to the atheist bloggers." Jamat  called
      for a new blasphemy law with a death penalty. The prime minister noted
      that there are existing laws against the insult to religion which were
      enough to prosecute the bloggers.

  10. Mr Gilbert referred to section 295A of the Bangladesh Penal Code which
      provides that any person who has deliberate  or  malicious  intent  to
      hurt religious sentiments can be imprisoned. This  has  been  used  in
      practice to prosecute and imprison atheists and secularist activists.

  11. At page 105 there was reference to three men known for  their  writing
      on humanist, atheist and secularist topics who were murdered  in  2015
      in Bangladesh. This included a Mr Avijit Roy who was  murdered  on  27
      February 2015. He was a blogger of  great  humanism,  a  proponent  of
      secularism and a critic of Islamist fundamentalism.

  12. Mr Gilbert submitted that within the framework of the evidence  before
      her, the Judge  had  additional  evidence  which  did  not  limit  the
      persecutory treatment only to academics or intellectuals. This applied
      as well to Facebook bloggers.

  13. The evidence  before  her  included  the  article  at  page  144.   An
      extremist Islamic group in Bangladesh listed 84 of such free  thinking
      bloggers on a hit list. This was in 2013. Of those 84 named  in  2013,
      ten bloggers have been brutally  killed  and  three  others  seriously
      injured.

  14. Mr Gilbert noted that that Judge correctly acknowledged at  [29]  that
      activities other  than  bona  fide  political/religious  protests  can
      create refugee status sur place - YB (Eritrea) [2008]  EWCA  Civ  390.
      The issue is whether the authorities would be likely  to  observe  and
      record the claimant's activities, and whether they would realise or be
      persuaded that the activities  were  insincere.  He  referred  to  the
      various arrests or jailing of bloggers simply for "liking" a  Facebook
      page and others for just "liking" his "like".

  15. Mr Gilbert also referred to the appellant's  Facebook  activity  which
      was produced in evidence.  The findings at [33] that  the  appellant's
      beliefs would be recognised as "insincere" was inadequately  reasoned.
      In Bangladesh the sincerity or otherwise of a publication would not be
      relevant to a successful prosecution. The question is whether  he  has
      deliberately acted.  All  that  is  required  is  that  a  person  has
      deliberate or malicious intent to hurt  religious  sentiments.  Intent
      "goes out of the window."

  16. The approach of the government in  prosecuting  such  people  suggests
      that it does not act on the basis of rational assessment but rather in
      accordance with populist sensibilities.

  17. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Avery submitted  that  the  Judge  has
      looked at the profile of the appellant as well  as  the  circumstances
      prevailing in Bangladesh to see whether it would  be  likely  that  he
      would face difficulties.

  18. The Judge conducted her analysis from paragraph 24-25. There she found
      that the great majority of his contributions  amount  to  "likes"  and
      "shares" of links about a range  of  issues  including  Islam,  Donald
      Trump, God, Christians in Pakistan and so on.

  19. She also acknowledged that they were accompanied by photographs of the
      appellant online [24]. She found that they had been read by between 50
      and 198 people. One of  his  posts  entitled  "Religion  is  a  Deadly
      Poison" read like an academic essay [25].

  20. Mr Avery submitted  that  the  finding  at  paragraph  [34]  that  the
      appellant did not have a significant profile was thus entirely proper.
      He submitted that it is a question of assessing  the  evidence  as  to
      whether hardliners would take action. It cannot be asserted  that  the
      evidence is such as the description in YB (Eritrea). The government in
      Bangladesh is not acting in the same way.  The  government  has  taken
      action against those whom they think appropriate.

  21. Her assessment of the risks  and  the  likelihood  that  he  would  be
      affected on return is sustainable.

  22. Mr Gilbert in reply submitted that the evidence before the Tribunal as
      set out at [8] is that his mother told him in January 2016  to  return
      to marry a cousin. When  he  told  her  that  he  is  an  atheist  she
      threatened to kill him if he returned. Bloggers have been  killed  for
      writing against religion. People will know he is an atheist because he
      will not fast or attend mosque. He will have to be open  to  them.  He
      cannot be a Muslim again. He will continue to blog there.

  23. He  submitted  that  this  indicated  the  'chilling  effect'  on  the
      appellant's beliefs having regard to  a  hit  list  of  bloggers.  The
      government responds to public complaints. He submitted that there is a
      pattern. The consequence is that they are mostly not  willing  to  put
      their heads above the parapet. The Judge was too narrow in her finding
      regarding risk that would result.

      Assessment

  24. I have referred to the Judge's findings at [34]. There is force in  Mr
      Gilbert's contention that the Judge incorrectly limited  the  category
      of persons who would draw the adverse attention  from  fundamentalists
      and the authorities. This does not only apply to secularists and human
      rights bloggers, who are academics and intellectuals in Bangladesh.

  25. Although the Judge made findings regarding  the  appellant's  lack  of
      credibility she did accept at [32] that the  appellant  had  expressed
      anti Islamic sentiment, having made himself a presence on the internet
      in the UK. She found this on the basis  that  his  CEMB  and  Facebook
      accounts are open to the public.

  26. I have had regard to the relevant background evidence produced in  the
      appellant's  bundle,  some  of  which  I  have  already  referred  to,
      regarding the potential difficulties to atheist bloggers.

  27. In the appellant's  Facebook  entries  before  the  Judge  there  were
      several examples of anti Islamic  sentiment.  At  page  53  there  was
      reference to brainwashed and indoctrinated persons from  birth.  Islam
      is not a  religion,  it  is  a  brainwashing  cult  advocating  death,
      paedophilia, domination and genocide to all others. The  Koran  should
      be banned from the face of the earth.

  28. At page 54 there is a blog which the appellant "likes" describing  the
      historical Muhammad as in fact an ambitious  terrorist,  criminal  and
      murderer - his entire life was  based  on  victimising  innocents  and
      indulging in  violence,  carnage  and  massacre.   There  are  further
      examples at pages 56 and 57. The prophet Muhammad was referred to as a
      robber.

  29. At page 58 there is a  reference  to  'nice  things'  about  being  an
      atheist. There is a post by the appellant  at  page  66  referring  to
      intellectual  killings  by  religious  fundamentalists  which  has   a
      thousand year history. Ahmad Rony 'made  a  wonderful  video  on  this
      killing'. The link is given.

  30. At page 74 there is a photograph in which Islam and  Islamisation  are
      described as terrorist and terrorism, two bodies, one name. There is a
      post at page 76 which the appellant "likes" where there  is  reference
      to Buqba mocking Muhammad in Mecca and writing derogatory words  about
      him. Muhammad ordered him to be executed. The  prophet  coldly  stated
      that hell would look after  his  children.   At  page  102  there  are
      photographs produced which are said to include the appellant as well.

  31. The blogging and Facebook entries by and "liked" by the appellant  are
      provocative and anti Islamic.

  32. The evidence thus pointed to bloggers, who are not only  academics  or
      intellectuals in Bangladesh, who have been at risk  of  serious  harm.
      This includes ten bloggers who were murdered by non State  agents  who
      track persons down  by  poring  over  Facebook  comments  and  secular
      websites - pages 138-9.

  33. The Judge  has  not  properly  assessed  the  potential  risk  to  the
      appellant (which would not be based upon his sincerity or  otherwise),
      from fundamentalists and the authorities who would seek to crack  down
      on those who are perceived as expressing  anti Islamic sentiment.

  34. I accordingly find  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      contains an error on a point of law. I set aside the decision. I  have
      had regard to  the  Senior  President's  guidelines  relating  to  the
      remitting of cases to the First-tier Tribunal. This will be a complete
      rehearing requiring detailed findings of fact.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge involved the  making  of
      an error on a point of law. It is accordingly set aside.


      The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (Taylor House) for a
      fresh decision to be made before another Judge.


      Anonymity direction continued.






      Signed                             Date 23 November 2017


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer

