
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00374/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination issued                 |
|on 2 February 2015                   |on 11 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                     F G
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representatives:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Templeton, of Quinn, Martin & Langan,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a decision by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Morrison, promulgated on 2 December 2015, dismissing her appeal against
    refusal of recognition as a refugee.

 2. The 4 grounds of appeal may be summarised as follows:

      1. The judge founded at paragraph  28  on  a  perceived  inconsistency
         between the appellant's account at interview of how the authorities
         became aware that she had given medical treatment to a demonstrator
         and her  account  in  her  witness  statement,  but  there  was  no
         discrepancy.

      2. The judge found  at  paragraph  29  that  if  of  interest  to  the
         authorities the appellant would have been detained  when  departing
         through the airport.  This was speculative.

      3. The judge found at paragraph 33 that if aware  of  her  involvement
         with demonstrators, the  authorities  would  have  taken  steps  to
         contact her promptly, and not months after she  left  the  country.
         This was also speculative.

      4. In finding that the authorities had not shown any interest  in  the
         appellant, the judge wrongly found  background  evidence  on  human
         rights violations to be irrelevant.

 3. The judge sets out the respective passages of evidence at paragraph 28,
    but fails to demonstrate any change in the  appellant's  account.   The
    respondent accepted that even on reference to the underlying materials,
    no significant discrepancy could be detected.

 4. On ground 2, I think the judge may have gone rather far  by  saying  in
    the penultimate sentence that the appellant "would have been detained".
     However, that must be read in context.  The following sentence  is  to
    the effect that the failure to show  interest  in  her  when  she  left
    "suggests that at that stage she was of no interest."

 5. Mr Templeton criticised the  finding  as  entirely  speculative,  being
    based only on lapse of time, when there was no  evidence  to  show  how
    long it might take for the authorities  to  develop  and  pursue  their
    interest,  and  the  appellant  was  a  relatively  minor  figure.   He
    suggested also that the reference to the small size of Bahrain and  its
    geographic situation was irrelevant.

 6. I do not agree  with  those  submissions.   The  judge's  reasoning  is
    sensible.  It was obviously pertinent to bear in mind that Bahrain is a
    relatively small and well organised country, not a massive and  chaotic
    one.  This was not a point which might by itself determine the  appeal,
    but it is one the judge was entitled to make.

 7. Exactly similar considerations apply to the third  ground.   The  judge
    said  that  her  family  had  significant  connections  to   the   Shia
    opposition, and although her own involvement was at  a  relatively  low
    level, the judge was entitled to find it unlikely that the interest  of
    the authorities would have developed only so long after  they  came  to
    know of her involvement and after she had left the country.

 8. Mr Templeton acknowledged that ground 4 is a relatively minor point.  I
    do not think there is much in it.  The paragraph as a whole is  plainly
    designed to put on record that the judge was aware  of  the  background
    evidence, yet found that the appellant did not fall into  the  category
    of persons against whom abuses were likely.

 9. Mr Templeton's final submission was that the first 3 grounds  were  all
    good, and sufficient not only for the determination to be set aside but
    to show that there were  no  remaining  reasons  by  which  an  adverse
    credibility conclusion could be sustained, and that  the  determination
    should therefore be reversed.

10. Mrs O'Brien's final submission was that although  ground  1  was  good,
    there was nothing in the remaining grounds, and  the  adverse  findings
    which survived scrutiny were sufficient for the determination to stand.



11. I have indicated above my views  on  the  respective  strength  of  the
    grounds, in which light I think that  the  final  submissions  on  both
    sides went too far.

12. Whether a decision survives excision of an error is always a matter  of
    fact and degree.  The structure of the  judge's  decision  is  that  at
    paragraphs 25, 26 and 27 he makes findings favourable to the  appellant
    on points advanced by the  respondent.   His  first  significant  point
    against the appellant is at paragraph 28, which has been accepted to be
    mistaken.  His next point is at paragraph 29.    Paragraph  30  settles
    another minor point in her favour.  At paragraph 31 the judge notes the
    appellant's account of her husband's family being  well  known  to  the
    authorities, which reinforces his view that they would have taken steps
    to arrest her or prevent her from leaving.   This  overlaps  with  both
    paragraphs 29 and 32.  Those are all the main points in  the  decision.
    Paragraph 28 is lengthy and detailed and seems to have played  quite  a
    significant part in the judge's thinking.  I do not think it can safely
    be said that but for the error, he would inevitably have  come  to  the
    same view, and his decision should therefore stand.

13. Grounds 2 and 3 do not amount to more than disagreement.  I am  equally
    unable therefore to accept that there  are  no  reasons  which  survive
    scrutiny, so that the decision falls to be reversed.

14. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  None of its
    findings are to stand.  Under section 12(2)(b)(1) of the 2007  Act  and
    Practice Statement 7.2 the nature and extent of judicial  fact  finding
    necessary for the decision to be remade is such that it is  appropriate
    to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.  The members of the First-
    tier Tribunal chosen to reconsider the case are not  to  include  Judge
    Morrison.

15. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.




           [pic]
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


           6 February 2016


