
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00036/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 8 February 2018                   |On 13 February 2018                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                     MA
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Symes, Counsel, instructed by Londonium
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Telford (the judge), promulgated on  30  August  2017,  in
         which he dismissed the appellant's appeal against the  respondent's
         decision dated 22 December 2016 refusing his asylum claim.

Factual Background

      2. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh, date of birth [ ]  1991.
         He entered the United Kingdom in 2011 with  entry  clearance  as  a
         Tier 4 (General) Student. Although  his  leave  was  extended,  the
         college and which he was studying informed the Home Office that  he
         was no longer attending. His leave was curtailed so as to expire on
         31 July 2014. After several attempts  to  serve  on  the  appellant
         decisions confirming his unlawful status in the UK he was  recorded
         as an absconder. He claimed asylum on 24 June 2016.

      3. The following is a brief summary of the appellant's  asylum  claim.
         He joined the Islamic Chattra  Shibir,  the  student  wing  of  the
         Jamaat-e-Islami political party, in 2003. He was elected  secretary
         locally in 2005 and led the local  party  in  a  challenge  to  the
         Bangladesh caretaker government in 2007/2008.  He  entered  the  UK
         with a view  to  avoiding  the  increasing  political  violence  in
         Bangladesh which led to the execution of senior party  leaders  and
         his own arrest  on  various  occasions.  Although  he  returned  to
         Bangladesh in 2013 to see his sick mother he was attacked by member
         of the Awami League's student wing. There was an attempt to  extort
         money from him by forcing him to sign a cheque. False charges  were
         levelled against him and his family continued  to  face  harassment
         and vandalism of their home.

      4. The respondent did not accept the appellant's account of  political
         activity in Bangladesh. This was based on  several  inconsistencies
         in the appellant's account. The  respondent  took  issue  with  the
         reliability of various letters provided  by  the  appellant.  Given
         that the appellant was able to leave Bangladesh in 2011,  and  able
         to return in 2013, and given that he  had  been  released  whenever
         detained on payments of bribes, the respondent did not accept  that
         the appellant faced a real risk of serious ill-treatment. The  fact
         that the appellant was able to lodge a First Incident Report  (FIR)
         with the police suggested that the  authorities  were  capable  and
         willing of providing a sufficiency of protection. Pursuant  to  s.8
         of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment  of  Claimants,  etc)  Act
         2004 the respondent drew an adverse inference based on the delay of
         5 years in claiming asylum.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      5. The judge did not find that the appellant had been involved at  the
         level  claimed  with  anti-government   political   opposition   in
         Bangladesh. In his summary findings at [16] the  judge  found  that
         the appellant had not been involved in politics and that  he  faced
         no risk  of  harm  for  a  Convention  reason.  Under  the  heading
         'Credibility' the judge found  "all  aspects"  of  the  appellant's
         evidence to be incredible [17]. In this section the judge  attached
         significant weight to the appellants delay in claiming asylum ([17]
         to [22]). At [20] the judge rejected  the  appellant's  explanation
         for  making  a  late  claim  as   "pure   invention   and   frankly
         inconsistent." At [21] the  judge  noted  that  the  appellant  had
         access to legal advisers,  and  at  [22]  the  judge  rejected  the
         appellant's submission that he felt he had no need to claim  asylum
         because he was present as a student.

      6. Under the heading "Political  persecution"  the  judge  noted  that
         documents produced by the appellant were  not  properly  translated
         and that even if taken at face value they were at odds with events.
         By way of example, the appellant relied on an arrest warrant issued
         in late 2016 despite the fact that he initially left Bangladesh  in
         2011 and only returned for a brief period in 2013. The judge  found
         inconsistencies in the appellant's account of a dishonoured  cheque
         and in respect of the amount owed to  the  Awami  league's  student
         wing. At [25] the judge stated,
             "... his account of being able to easily bribe the police from
             arrests on 2 occasions and being simply let go without warrant
             for arrest or charges on an earlier occasion indicates  to  me
             that no one is prepared to view the appellant in Bangladesh as
             a serious political figure. If he were viewed as  anti  regime
             or in opposition to them then he would not  in  my  view  have
             been so lightly treated."

      7. The judge additionally found  inconsistent  the  appellant's  claim
         that the authorities would not protect him given that  an  FIR  had
         been issued against those he claimed were harassing him, and  found
         that relevant documents were not properly certified in translation.

      8. At [32] the judge found there was nothing in the  appellant's  case
         regarding the threat of persecution which was credible. At [35] the
         judge found the appellant's evidence  on  the  core  issues  to  be
         incredible. The judge consequently found that the appellant's claim
         did not engage the Geneva Convention because it was  not  based  on
         his political views or  his  membership  of  a  social  group,  and
         dismissed the protection  claim.  The  article  8  claim  was  also
         dismissed.

The grounds of appeal and the error of law hearing

      9. The grounds contend that the judge gave  paramount  weight  to  the
         timing of the appellant's asylum claim. The grounds note  that  the
         entirety of the judge's assessment under the heading  "Credibility"
         concerned the delay in the asylum claim and that the  judge  failed
         to consider the appellant's evidence that he planned to  return  to
         Bangladesh once the political situation had calmed down.  Moreover,
         in drawing an adverse inference based on the issuance of an  arrest
         warrant  in  2016,  the  judge  failed  to  appreciate   that   the
         appellant's political profile rendered him an  ongoing  target  for
         harassment, which would explain the issuance of the arrest  warrant
         so long after his departure in 2011. There were some aspects of the
         appellant's account that appeared to be accepted (e.g. his arrests,
         considered at [25]), yet elsewhere the judge made wholesale adverse
         credibility findings ([32] and [35]).

     10. The grounds further contend  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider
         corroborating evidence from various sources relating to  the  death
         of his cousin (who, it was  claimed,  was  murdered  for  political
         reasons), that the judge failed to  consider  statements  from  the
         appellant's own  brother  and  sister  confirming  the  authorities
         adverse interest in him, that no reference was made to  photographs
         showing the appellant in  various  political  roles,  and  that  no
         consideration was given to a letter from a lawyer  engaged  by  the
         appellant  in  Bangladesh  to  defend  himself  against   political
         persecution.

     11.  The  grounds  finally  tend  that,  if  the  judge  accepted   the
         appellant's arrests,  the  background  evidence  indicated  that  a
         recurrence  might  very  well  be  attended  by  a  real  risk   of
         persecution, and that the judge  failed  to  have  regard  to  such
         background evidence.

     12. At the hearing Mr Symes adopted and expanded his  grounds.  It  was
         submitted that the judge attached disproportionate  weight  to  the
         timing of the asylum claim and failed to engage in the  explanation
         for  delay  offered  by  the  appellant.  The  letters   from   the
         appellant's brother and sister were independently written and  were
         capable of having at least some weight attached to them despite the
         absence of any opportunity to question the authors. The photographs
         suggested that the appellant had political involvement and were not
         considered by  the  judge,  and  the  letter  from  the  lawyer  in
         Bangladesh was prima facie reliable yet was not considered  at  all
         by the judge. Mr Nath submitted that the judge's  conclusions  were
         open to him for the reasons given and that although  there  was  no
         reference in the decision  to  the  letters  from  the  appellant's
         sibling  and,  in  particular,  the  letter  from  the  lawyer   in
         Bangladesh, even if these documents were considered  it  could  not
         have made any material difference to the ultimate  outcome  of  the
         appeal. I reserved my decision.

Discussion

     13. For the following reasons I  am  satisfied  that  the  decision  is
         vitiated  by  material  errors  of  law  such  as  to  render   its
         conclusions unsafe.

     14. At [16], a summary of the subsequent judicial findings,  the  judge
         rejected the appellant's claim to have been involved  in  politics.
         Yet earlier within the same paragraph  the  judge  found  that  the
         appellant had not established his involvement "... at the level  he
         claims   with   the   anti-government   political   opposition   in
         Bangladesh." It is  not  altogether  clear  whether  the  judge  is
         rejecting  wholesale  the  appellant's   claimed   involvement   in
         politics, or whether the judge is merely rejecting the  nature  and
         extent  of  the  appellant's  claimed  political  involvement   and
         activities. The rejection of the appellant's  claim  to  have  been
         involved in politics  is  also  difficult  to  reconcile  with  the
         judge's  assessment  at  [25]  where  he  appears  to  accept   the
         appellant's account of bribing the police following his arrest on 2
         occasions. Although the judge states that, if viewed as anti-regime
         or in opposition, the appellant would  not  have  been  so  lightly
         treated, it remains unclear whether the judge actually found  as  a
         fact that the appellant had been arrested but  simply  let  go,  or
         whether he rejected this claim entirely.

     15. At [20] the judge rejects the appellant's explanation for making  a
         late claim as "pure invention and frankly inconsistent." The  judge
         does not however identify the explanation provided by the appellant
         for the delay in making an asylum claim  in  paragraph  13  of  his
         statement dated 20 January  2017,  and  no  reference  is  made  to
         paragraph 10 of the appellant's 2016 personal  statement  where  he
         indicated that  he  intended  to  return  to  Bangladesh  when  the
         political situation improved. In the 2017 statement  the  appellant
         maintained that he did not want to claim asylum on arrival  because
         he wanted to go back on completion of his studies as he thought the
         situation in Bangladesh would improve. The  situation  however  got
         worse and, as time  passed  by,  he  realised  that  there  was  no
         realistic chance to return  to  Bangladesh.  The  judge,  at  [22],
         refers to the appellant's claim that there was no need to  make  an
         asylum application as he was still  a  student.  Yet  there  is  no
         reference to  the  appellant's  explanation  that  he  thought  the
         situation in Bangladesh might improve and did not claim asylum  for
         this reason. I am not satisfied that the  judge  engaged  with  the
         full explanation offered by the appellant  for  the  delay  in  his
         asylum claim. I find this  particularly  relevant  given  the  very
         significant weight attached by the  judge  to  the  delayed  claim.
         While it may well have been open to the judge to  reject  the  full
         explanation offered by the appellant I cannot  say  with  certainty
         that such rejection would inevitably have followed.

     16. The judge makes no reference  to  photographs  in  the  appellant's
         bundle that purport to show him engaged  in  political  activities.
         Whilst a  judge  is  not  obliged  to  consider  all  the  evidence
         provided, a failure to consider  material  evidence  may  render  a
         decision unsafe. The photographs, on their face, suggested that the
         appellant may have had some political  involvement.  Nor  does  the
         judge make any  reference  to  the  letters  from  the  appellant's
         siblings in which they assert that he was  politically  active  and
         targeted because of his activities. A letter written  by  a  family
         member is not incapable of bearing weight, although regard must  be
         given to the absence of any  opportunity  to  test  the  assertions
         contained in such a letter and in light of the  totality  of  other
         credibility findings (R (on the application of SS) v  Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department  ("self-serving"  statements)  [2017]
         UKUT 00164 (IAC)). The judge failed to make any reference at all to
         the letter purportedly written by Md. Abu Taleb, Advocate, dated 30
         June 2016. Although written in  brief  and  general  terms  and  in
         relatively poor English, there was  nothing  on  the  face  of  the
         letter to suggest it was not  genuine  (the  letter  contained  the
         contact  details  for  the  advocate).  The  letter  supported  the
         appellant's account of political activities and  his  targeting  at
         the hands of the Awami league. Once again, while the judge may have
         ultimately  been  entitled  to  reject  the   document   as   being
         unreliable, given the nature of the document, he was required to at
         least consider it. His failure to do so amounts to an error of law.

     17. For the reasons given above I am satisfied that the errors  in  the
         judge's assessment of the credibility of  the  appellant's  account
         renders the decision unsafe.

     18. Given that the errors go  the  issue  of  credibility,  and  having
         regard to the representations of the parties, it is appropriate  to
         remit the matter back to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  complete
         fresh hearing before a judge other than  judge  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Telford.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal decision is vitiated by material errors of law.  The
case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh (de  novo)  hearing,
all issues open, to be heard by a judge other than Judge of  the  First-tier
Tribunal Telford.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]

Signed   Date 9 February 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
