
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/00243/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field house                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 4th August 2016                        |On 2nd September 2016             |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                                   N A I L
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Wyn, Legal Representative instructed by Liyon
Legal Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka  whose  appeal  on  asylum  and
    human rights grounds was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Turquet
    in a decision promulgated on 20th  April  2016.   For  various  reasons
    given the judge concluded that the Appellant had  invented  his  asylum
    claim and fabricated events  in  order  to  bring  himself  within  the
    Convention (paragraph 58).

 2. Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal were lodged.  In Ground 1  much
    is made of the manner in which the judge had dealt with the  fact  that
    the original summons x three had gone missing.  It is said  that  these
    summonses were central to the appeal and  had  they  been  accepted  as
    authentic then the Appellant would have fallen within one of  the  risk
    categories in line with GJ and Others (post-civil war:  returnees)  Sri
    Lanka [2013] UKUT 00319.  The second ground was that the judge erred in
    providing opinion on medical matters which she had failed  to  disclose
    any expertise on.  It is said that  she  made  findings  as  a  medical
    expert and concluded that  the  injuries  were  not  inflicted  on  the
    Appellant by the authorities in 2009.  The judge had  unfairly  refused
    the Appellant's application for an adjournment in  order  to  obtain  a
    scarring report.

 3. The third ground is that the judge erred in law in making  findings  on
    her own assumptions.  The judge had made adverse  credibility  findings
    on the basis  that  the  Appellant  had  described  a  house  that  was
    originally owned by his mother and eventually  gifted  to  him  as  his
    mum's house.  Other examples are given.  Rejecting an  account  because
    it did not concur with a  reasonable  expectation  did  not  amount  to
    applying the low standard of proof.  The judge  had  misunderstood  the
    Appellant's employment history.  She had erred in law in  paragraph  53
    in making findings because he had used his own passport. She was  wrong
    to find that he was not of adverse interest to the authorities.

 4. Permission to appeal was initially refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Shimmin but granted on appeal to the Upper Tribunal by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Eshun.

 5. A Rule 24 Notice dated 5th July 2016 was lodged by the Respondent.   It
    was said that copies of the summons were produced  during  the  hearing
    and the judge went on to assess the documents and give adequate reasons
    for not accepting that they  supported  the  Appellant's  account.   In
    terms of the medical evidence the judge merely made observation of  the
    scars and made no findings of fact based on  those  observations.   The
    judge had given adequate reasons for dismissing the claim.

 6. Thus the matter came before me on the above date.

 7. Mr Wyn for the Appellant relied on the Grounds of Appeal and emphasised
    the judge had made a wrongful finding that the summonses had never been
    sent by the agents and received by the Respondent - see  paragraph  52.
    It was said that such a finding was clearly wrong  and  undermined  the
    case generally.  The other points taken in the grounds  had  been  made
    out.  As such the decision should be set aside and  sent  back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 8. For the Home Office Mr Tarlow indicated he  did  not  have  a  file  of
    papers but he relied on the Rule 24 Notice.  He  particularly  objected
    to a suggestion in the grounds of application that the  Respondent  had
    acted in any way that was not consistent in acting with integrity.

 9. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

10. It is the Appellant's  case  that  on  14th  December  2015  his  legal
    representative sent by Recorded Delivery a number of documents  to  the
    Respondent including three original summonses.   The  judge  asked  the
    Appellant's Counsel at the hearing to confirm how the summons was  sent
    and after a telephone call to those instructing him  it  was  confirmed
    that they were indeed  sent  under  cover  of  the  letter  dated  14th
    December 2015.  On this issue the judge made a finding  (paragraph  52)
    "I do not find that the Summonses were received by  the  Respondent  or
    sent".  The Appellant's representatives are  concerned  that  the  only
    implication of the judge's decision is  that  they  have  lied  to  the
    Tribunal and they maintain this is a distinct error in law.

11. Given the clear evidence before the judge that the  Summonses  were  at
    least sent it has to be said that it was a surprising  finding  by  the
    judge to conclude the opposite namely that they were not  sent  in  the
    first place.  It can certainly be said that the judge's  reasoning  for
    finding  that  the  summonses  were  not  sent   by   the   Appellant's
    representatives is not set out.  Whether this is important  or  not  in
    the context of whether this is an error of law is a moot point  but  it
    certainly is an unhappy beginning to an appeal where it  is  said  that
    there are numerous errors of law by the judge.   However  it  is  clear
    enough that this appeal cannot succeed  under  Ground  1  on  its  own.
    Copies of the summonses were said to be available on the file and given
    the missing originals the judge was quite entitled to proceed  to  hear
    the case notwithstanding the submissions that the best course of action
    would have been to adjourn it.  By implication the judge quite  rightly
    took the view that there was no point in adjourning the case -  neither
    party said to  her  that  the  original  documents  were  about  to  be
    produced.  No issue of fairness arose where the original documents were
    never going to be available.

12. The second ground is that it is said that the judge provided opinion on
    matters in which she had failed to disclose any expertise on namely the
    marks on the Appellant's body.  It is said that the judge's approach to
    this evidence is "unfair,  whimsical  and  in  stark  contrast  to  the
    anxious scrutiny an asylum seeker deserves."  In addition  it  is  said
    that the judge unfairly refused  the  Appellant's  application  for  an
    adjournment in order to obtain a scarring report.  In my view there  is
    no merit in this ground.  The judge made it clear that she was  "not  a
    medical expert" (paragraph 42) and in my  view  the  judge  was  simply
    giving anxious scrutiny to this element of the claim and she went on in
    paragraph 43 to refer to RT (medical reports - causation  of  scarring)
    Sri Lanka {2008] UKAIT  0009  pointing  out  that  even  on  the  lower
    standard of proof the Appellant had not satisfied her that the injuries
    were inflicted whilst detained in 2009. In  terms  of  the  adjournment
    request the judge referred to Nwaige (adjournment; fairness) 2014  UKUT
    00418 (IAC) and she plainly applied the correct test.

13. However what is troubling in this case is the  matters  raised  in  the
    third Ground of Appeal briefly referred to above.  As the grounds point
    out I do not see an inconsistency in the employment history set out  by
    the Appellant - see paragraph 38 of  the  decision.   Contrary  to  the
    judge it seems to me quite reasonable to conclude  that  the  Appellant
    might refer to his house as "my mum's house" given  that  he  maintains
    his mother gave it to him.  The judge has found against  the  Appellant
    on this point which may well be unfair.  The judge accepts that a  deed
    of gift has been provided  but  notes  there  were  was  no  supporting
    evidence of how it was received and therefore places little  weight  on
    it that the Appellant was the owner of the property.  Bearing  in  mind
    the low standard of proof in this jurisdiction it is  unclear  why  the
    judge considered that further evidence was appropriate.  When the judge
    says that she did not find it  credible  that  he  did  not  know  that
    Prakash was involved with the LTTE until after his arrest it  might  be
    said that the judge's reasoning on this point (paragraph 40)  could  be
    clearer.  Moving onto paragraph 50 the judge says  that  she  finds  it
    reasonable to expect the authorities to have issued an  arrest  warrant
    and to have made a formal visit to the Appellant's house.  It seems  to
    me that the judge's observation on this may well be unsound; in  coming
    to this conclusion the judge  makes  no  reference  to  any  background
    material of how the authorities might operate.

14. What is equally concerning are the judge's  findings  in  paragraph  53
    when she noted that the Appellant had made  no  mention  of  travelling
    with an agent or being introduced to  an  Immigration  Officer  at  the
    airport.  The  judge  found  it  "reasonable  to  expect  him  to  have
    mentioned this at interview."   However  she  does  not  say  that  the
    Appellant was ever asked about this at interview (I cannot see that  he
    was asked about this) and thus again this finding may be unfair on  the
    Appellant.

15. Importantly - and what is decisive in the outcome of this appeal -  the
    judge also finds the  fact  that  he  travelled  on  his  own  passport
    indicates that he was of no adverse interest to the authorities and did
    not perceive himself to be at risk of apprehension.  As the grounds  of
    appeal point out that these findings are against the objective evidence
    and country guidance contained in GJ.

16. In all these circumstances it seems to me that there are errors of fact
    in the judge's decision which taken together amount to a material error
    of law.  The judgment is not safe and unfortunately there will have  to
    be a fresh hearing.

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is therefore set aside  in  its
    entirety.  No findings of the First-tier Tribunal are to stand.   Under
    Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and of Practice Statement  7.2  the
    nature and extent  of  the  judicial  fact-finding  necessary  for  the
    decision to be remade is such that it is appropriate to remit the  case
    to the First-tier Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

I shall maintain the anonymity direction.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald


