
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00269/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 8 November 2017                    |On 23 November 2017                   |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                    S G i
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In Person
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal  Judge  A  D  Baker  promulgated  on  27  February  2017,
    dismissing his appeal against a decision of the respondent to refuse to
    grant him asylum and humanitarian protection made on 29 December 2016.

 2. In summary, the appellant's case is that he is at  risk  on  return  to
    Iran  as  he  had  become  unwittingly  involved   in   an   adulterous
    relationship.  He had not realised the person he considered to  be  his
    girlfriend SA, was  married  and  they  were  caught  together  by  her
    husband.  Court proceedings have been instigated against  him  in  Iran
    and he fears punishment as a result.

 3.  The  respondent  did  not  accept  the  appellant's  account  of   his
    relationship, or how it had development or his account of being able to
    escape from the room in which he had been detected by  the  husband  of
    SA.

 4. The judge found:

      i) that in the context of strict moral values in  Iranian  society  it
         was not credible that the appellant had on a regular  basis  picked
         up SA from the road in which she lived even were she divorced as he
         believed [21] or that she would have visited and accompanied  by  a
         chaperone;

     ii) that they had  met  when  he  had  offered  her  a  lift  was  also
         undermining of his credibility nor did she  accept  that  SA  would
         have repeatedly have run the risk of  being  seen  getting  into  a
         vehicle near her home in the same street with an  unknown  male  or
         being in a  vehicle  with  him  un-chaperoned  [22];  that  it  was
         implausible that the husband would have arrived at the  appellant's
         house and believed that SA was with him rather than with the friend
         next to whom she was sitting [23];

    iii) that it was implausible that the appellant could have  escaped  the
         physical chastisement  consequent  on  the  husband  having  forced
         himself into the room [24];

     iv) But having had regard to Tanveer Ahmed that she was  not  satisfied
         by the documents produced that the appellant  was  of  any  adverse
         interest to the State, the documents not identifying a reason  that
         he was wanted and did not show that he was wanted for  the  claimed
         adultery [25];

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred:

      i) in failing  to  have  proper  regard  to  the  background  evidence
         supplied highlighting the contradictions in Iranian society between
         the official prohibition on extramarital relationships and  reality
         thus making the appellant's account of  how  the  relationship  had
         begun and had continued to be plausible [3] to [5];

     ii) in failing to provide proper reasoning as to why the account of the
         appellant's escape was not plausible, it being  probable  that  the
         husband of SA knew that it was the appellant not his friend who was
         "involved  with"  SA  [7];  it  being  evident  he  was  acting  on
         previously obtained information [7];

    iii) that the judge's assessment  that  the  appellant  could  not  have
         escaped without injury was undermined by failure  to  consider  the
         appellant's evidence.

     iv) that the judge failed  properly  to  apply  Tanveer  Ahmed  to  the
         documents provided;

 6. On 14 September 2017 Upper Tribunal Judge Blum  granted  permission  on
    all grounds.

 7. When the matter came before me, there was on file  a  letter  from  the
    appellant's previous representatives, Elder Rahimi Solicitors,  stating
    that the appellant had ceased to instruct them and will be representing
    himself.

 8. The appellant attended and was assisted by an interpreter.  I  arranged
    for the grounds of appeal and the grant of permission to be  translated
    for him.

 9. The appellant stated that he  had  contacted  his  solicitors  who  had
    informed him that they did not consider it necessary to have a  meeting
    prior to the hearing.  He had disagreed with that  and  had  told  them
    that he wished to represent himself.  He added that he had changed  his
    mind and had sought to contact them again but without success.  He did,
    however, expressly state to me that he was content to proceed with  the
    hearing.

10. I explained to  the  appellant  the  purpose  of  the  hearing  was  to
    determine whether or  not  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    involved the making of an error of law.  I explained that it was not  a
    rehearing of his appeal and it was for him to identify errors  made  by
    the judge.  The appellant, in his submissions, sought to  give  further
    evidence about what had occurred in that SA had been  sitting  next  to
    his friend Hamed, was only a teenager therefore it was  unlikely  there
    would be a relationship.  He then went over his evidence about  how  he
    was able to escape.

11. Mr Richards, relying on the Rule 24 notice submitted that the judge had
    been entitled in the light of the evidence produced  to  conclude  that
    the appellant had not told the truth about his relationship, either  as
    to how it had developed, how it had continued or as to the  account  of
    how he had been able to escape.  He submitted further that there was no
    error with respect to Tanveer Ahmed.

12. It is evident from the decision at [19] to  [20]  that  the  judge  had
    considered the  background  information  supplied  by  the  appellant's
    representatives.  Whilst there is no express reference to the  material
    showing that, contrary  to  the  law,  people  do  undertake  hazardous
    extramarital relationships, the context of this case must be  borne  in
    mind.  The context is not a relationship between two single people  but
    one of adultery where it is alleged that  SA  was  collected  regularly
    from the road in which she lived.  The appellant picked her up  in  his
    vehicle.  The risks are  obvious  and  the  grounds  fail  properly  to
    identify that the  material  shows  that  this  type  of  behaviour  is
    commonplace.  Further, the article cited in the  ground  identify  that
    there are significant and serious consequences for  people  who  do  go
    against the State mores.

13. Contrary to what is averred in  the  grounds  at  [6]  the  judge  gave
    adequate and sustainable reasons for doubting this aspect of the  case.
    This is, as the respondent submits, simply a disagreement  and  in  the
    context of the reasoning in the decision at [24] it does  not  disclose
    any error in the reasoning.

14. What is averred in the grounds at [7] - that it was probable that  SA's
    husband knew that it was the appellant and not his friend was  involved
    is speculative.  The challenge to the findings at paragraph 24 are also
    lacking in merit.   The  finding  is  not  perverse  nor  could  it  be
    construed that the judge considered  that  injured  during  a  physical
    altercation is not inevitable but it was but that he gave adequate  and
    sustainable reasons for her finding that the account of the altercation
    was not plausible.  The judge relying also on  inconsistencies  in  the
    account to which she was entitled to do.

15. It cannot be said that the  judge  failed  properly  to  apply  Tanveer
    Ahmed.  As the respondent submits, the point is that the documents  did
    not identify why the appellant was wanted nor did it show that  he  was
    wanted for adultery.  The judge clearly applied the principles set  out
    in Tanveer Ahmed and gave adequate  and  sustainable  reasons  for  not
    attaching weight to the documents.  Contrary to what is averred in  the
    grounds at [9] the judge did not find that the documents  were  forged,
    merely that they were not reliable.

16. For these reasons, I am satisfied that the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did not involve the making of an error of law and I uphold it.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS


 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law and I uphold it.

 2. I maintain the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal


Signed                                  Date  22 November 2017
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

