
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00394/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 November 2017                           |On 11 December 2017           |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                Daniel Kidane
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Marwaha, instructed by Bankfield Heath Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Daniel Kidane, was born on 21 March 1992 and  claims  to
    be  a  citizen  of  Eritrea.   His  nationality  is  disputed  by   the
    respondent.  He entered the United Kingdom in December 2015 and claimed
    asylum.  By a decision dated 4 January 2017,  the  Secretary  of  State
    refused the appellant's claim for asylum.  The  appellant  appealed  to
    the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  E  B  Grant)  which,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 6 March 2017, dismissed the appeal.  The  appellant  now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The parties agree that the judge erred in law such  that  her  decision
    falls to be set aside.  Granting permission, Judge Lindsley wrote:

         "[The appellant asserts that] ... the First-tier Tribunal erred  in
         law in finding the appellant not to  be  credible  for  failing  to
         avail himself of a ready check at  the  Ethiopian  High  Commission
         when the respondent had not suggested  he  was  Ethiopian  and  the
         appellant did not believe that he was either.  The appellant is not
         covered by ST (Ethnic Eritrean -  nationality  -  return)  Ethiopia
         [2011] UKUT 00252."

 3. For the reasons indicated by Judge Lindsley, it was plainly  wrong  for
    the judge to invoke the authority of ST.  Accordingly, I set aside  the
    decision.   Helpfully,  the  appellant  and  his  representatives   had
    prepared for a resumed hearing before the Upper Tribunal.  Before  that
    hearing commenced, Ms Marwaha, Counsel for the appellant, asked  me  to
    preserve a discrete finding of Judge Grant  regarding  the  appellant's
    claimed adherence to Pentecostal religion.  After  some  discussion,  I
    decided that I should preserve that finding which appears at [29]:

         "I find as a matter of fact that the  appellant  is  a  Pentecostol
         Christian and an active member of the faith."

 4. Mrs Pettersen, for the respondent, did not seek to persuade me that the
    judge's error in respect of ST had in  any  way  infected  the  finding
    regarding the appellant's religion.  The hearing therefore proceeded on
    the basis that, if the Tribunal were to  find  that  the  appellant  is
    Eritrean, he would be a refugee on account of the fact  that  he  would
    face a real risk of persecution in Eritrea on account of his  religion.



 5. The burden of proof is on the appellant and the standard  of  proof  is
    whether there are substantial grounds for believing there to be a  real
    risk  that  the  appellant  would  face  persecution  or  ill-treatment
    (contrary to Article 3 ECHR) if he were to be returned to Eritrea.  The
    Secretary of State's case is that the appellant is not Eritrean but Mrs
    Pettersen did not ask me to make any  finding  as  to  the  appellant's
    actual nationality in the event that I found  that  he  had  failed  to
    prove that he is of Eritrean nationality.

 6. The appellant gave evidence  in  Amharic  with  the  assistance  of  an
    interpreter.  He adopted his written  statements  as  his  evidence-in-
    chief and he  was  cross-examined  by  Mrs  Pettersen.   I  also  heard
    evidence from the appellant's witness Mr Habton  Hagos  who  also  gave
    evidence in Amharic with the assistance of the interpreter.   Mr  Hagos
    is also a Pentecostal Christian who is a refugee in the United Kingdom.
     I note that he was granted refugee status by the Secretary  of  State;
    he has not engaged with the Tribunal system in the United  Kingdom.   I
    also heard evidence in English from the Reverend Peter Gray.   Reverend
    Gray is a retired pastor of a Pentecostal Church  which  the  appellant
    and Mr Hagos attend.

 7. I reserved my decision.

 8. I have considered the  evidence  as  a  totality  before  reaching  any
    findings in this appeal.  I have sought to concentrate  on  the  "core"
    elements of the appellant's claim.  I  found  the  appellant  to  be  a
    credible witness.  Mrs Pettersen submitted that there was a discrepancy
    between what the appellant said regarding  a  visit  to  the  Ethiopian
    Embassy and the evidence given by Reverend Gray who had accompanied him
    to the embassy.  The discrepancy concerns to whom the appellant may  or
    may not have spoken at the  embassy.   Given  that  the  visit  to  the
    embassy was (in the light of the irrelevance of the decision in  ST  to
    the facts of this appeal) nugatory it is  somewhat  peripheral  to  the
    core of this appellant's account and, in any event, Reverend  Gray  was
    not certain as to whether the appellant did or did not himself speak to
    any of the officers at the embassy.  I find there is no discrepancy and
    in particular no negative impact upon the appellant's credibility as  a
    witness.

 9. Mrs Pettersen also submitted that it was "strange" that  the  appellant
    should have travelled to the United Kingdom with 2,000 US dollars  from
    his wife's family but should have left his wife  and  child  behind  in
    Sudan where they had been living illegally.  The  appellant  said  that
    there was not enough money to send the  entire  family  to  the  United
    Kingdom.  I find that the appellant is reasonably likely to be  telling
    the truth.  There was no suggestion that the appellant's wife and child
    had been left in difficult or dangerous circumstances  in  Sudan.   The
    circumstances may, perhaps, be unusual, but  I  am  aware  that  asylum
    seekers often have to take difficult decisions and I  cannot  say  that
    the circumstances are so strange as to undermine the credibility of the
    appellant as a witness.

10. I agree with Mrs Pettersen that the appellant was a little  vague  when
    asked whether or not he had been arrested in the period leading  up  to
    his departure from Sudan.   However,  the  appellant's  evidence  (that
    others were being arrested and this put him in  fear  and  led  him  to
    leave the country) is consistent with the evidence which he gave at the
    asylum interview (question 129).

11. Other than the matters which I have detailed above, Mrs Pettersen  made
    no serious challenge to the evidence put forward by the appellant.  She
    passed no comment on the evidence of Mr Hagos whom  I  found  to  be  a
    credible witness.  However, I am aware that the weight attaching to his
    evidence (given that his own claim for asylum  has  never  been  tested
    under cross-examination) is limited.  The same  is  also  true  of  the
    Reverend Gray.  The visit to the embassy which is detailed in the  more
    recent supplementary bundle appears to have been carried  out  for  the
    sake of completeness.  The evidence of any of the  witnesses  regarding
    the visit does not, in my opinion, give rise to any credibility issues.
     As regards the appellant's  conversion  to  Pentecostal  Christianity,
    that, as I have noted above, has already been settled.  I  am  reminded
    that the appellant needs to prove his case to  the  lower  standard  of
    proof.  He needs to establish that the evidence which he has  given  is
    reasonably likely to be true.  I have to say that evidence  appears  to
    be consistent as between the oral evidence he gave before  me  and  the
    written evidence which appears  in  the  file,  including  his  written
    statements and his interview with the Secretary  of  State's  officers.
    As for the fact that  the  appellant  speaks  Amharic  rather  than  an
    Eritrean language, Ms Marwaha directed me to objective material in  the
    file which shows that Amharic is spoken in Eritrea and, in  particular,
    in the port of Assab which is clearly somewhere of a  melting  pot  for
    local cultures  and  languages.   Although  the  appellant  moved  from
    Eritrea to Ethiopia when he was only 2 years old, he  claims  that  his
    family originated in Assab.  It is reasonably likely that the appellant
    is Eritrean, notwithstanding the fact that he speaks mainly Amharic.

12. Considering the appellant's evidence as  a  whole,  together  with  the
    remainder of the evidence both oral and written, I have concluded  that
    the appellant has discharged the burden of proving that he is  Eritrean
    and that he was deported at the age of 2 years to Ethiopia.  Given that
    he is an Eritrean rather than an Ethiopian citizen,  any  removal  from
    this country would be to Eritrea where the appellant (as  both  parties
    agree) would face a real  risk  of  persecution  for  ill-treatment  on
    account of his Pentecostal religion.  It follows that  the  appellant's
    appeal should be allowed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on  6  March
2017 is set aside.  None of the findings of fact shall stand  save  for  the
Tribunal's finding at [29] that the appellant is an  active  member  of  the
Pentecostal Christian  faith.   I  have  remade  the  decision  following  a
resumed hearing.   The  appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
Secretary of State dated 4 January 2017 is allowed  on  asylum  grounds  and
human rights grounds (Article 3 ECHR).

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 1 December 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 1 December 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


