
                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: PA/00408/2020 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC   |Decisions & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 2 November 2020                 |On 9 November 2020                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                                     AB

                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



For the appellant:     Mr F Lawson, Cohesion Legal Services Centre

For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Presenting Officer



                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)


This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing  I
reserved my decisions  and  reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.

 1. The appellant, who is an Iranian national of  Kurdish  ethnicity,  with
    date of birth given as 5.1.86, has  appealed  with  permission  to  the
    Upper Tribunal against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Davies) promulgated  3.4.20,  dismissing  on  all  grounds  his  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary  of  State,  dated  26.11.19,  to
    refuse his claim for international protection made on 3.10.17.

 2. In summary, the grounds as drafted argue that the judge failed to  give
    proper reasons for dismissing the appeal.  Central  and  core  findings
    were unsupported by reasoning. It is submitted that the judge failed to
    explain in what way the answers given by the appellant in his screening
    interview undermined the credibility of his claim. It is asserted  that
    no or no sufficient reasoning was provided to support the finding  that
    the claim is a complete fabrication and the appellant is no  more  than
    an economic migrant. In particular, although  the  respondent  accepted
    that the appellant was an Iranian  Kurd  who  had  engaged  in  illegal
    smuggling activity, the judge  found  this  claim  also  to  have  been
    fabricated, going behind the respondent's concession.

 3. Permission was granted on all grounds by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge
    Adio) on 5.5.20, on  the  basis  that  going  behind  the  respondent's
    concession arguably amounted to an error of  law  and  that  all  other
    grounds were also arguable,  although  the  judge  granting  permission
    committed the same error alleged against the judge deciding the appeal,
    by failing to provide any reasons to support the grant of permission in
    relation to the other grounds.

 4. By directions issued on 9.7.20, the Upper Tribunal  proposed  that  the
    error of law issue should be determined in a remote hearing,  providing
    the opportunity for written  submissions  on  the  proposed  course  of
    action.

 5. Subsequent to those directions, on 16.7.20 the appellant objected to  a
    remote hearing and sought a face to face hearing, on the basis that the
    appellant was "not comfortable with  the  technology"  and,  therefore,
    unlikely to be able to  participate  in  the  hearing  effectively.  In
    consequence, on 7.8.20 the Upper Tribunal issued further directions for
    a face to face hearing.

 6. In due course, the appeal was listed for a face to face hearing  before
    me on 2.11.20.  However,  by  letter  dated  28.10.20,  the  respondent
    indicated that the appeal was not opposed, in the following terms:

         "The respondent does not oppose  the  appellant's  application  for
         permission to appeal and invites the Tribunal to remit the  matter
         to the First Tier Tribunal for a 'de novo' hearing.

         "The SSHD accepts that the FTTJ has materially erred in not  giving
         adequate  reasons  for  concluding  the  Appellant's  evidence  was
         'vague' (Para 31-33) absent  any  examples  of  what  evidence  was
         considered 'vague'. Given this goes to the Appellant's  credibility
         it is conceded that no findings are sustainable in the round.

         "For the sake of completeness the SSHD rejects any suggestion  that
         the FTTJ went behind the SSHD's concession at Para 31. The FTTJ was
         not disputing that the Appellant was a 'smuggler' (see Para  29),
         but was making a finding (albeit inadequately reasoned) that he did
         not smuggle 'Komala Party' materials."

7. In light of its concession, the respondent invited the Upper Tribunal  to
   convert the face-to-face hearing to a remote video or  telephone  hearing
   in order to discuss "disposal" of the appeal, if deemed  necessary.   The
   appellant responded to the concession, submitting  that  the  appropriate
   course was to remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a  de  novo
   hearing.  Following consultation with myself and the  parties,  I  agreed
   for the face to face hearing to be relisted as a remote hearing to enable
   me to consider the error of law concession and decide on the  appropriate
   course of action for disposal of the appeal. I advised that the appellant
   need not attend and that no parties should attend in person.

         8. At the remote hearing before me, the  respondent  confirmed  the
         concession that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal disclosed a
         clear error of law in the failure to provide any  or  any  adequate
         reasons for finding the appellant's evidence 'vague'  and  for  his
         credibility to be thereby undermined. The respondent  also  accepts
         that in light of this error of law none  of  the  factual  findings
         made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge are sustainable."

8. After carefully considering the impugned decision, I entirely agree  that
   the respondent's concession is properly made. It is clear that whilst the
   judge found the appellant's  account  to  have  been  fabricated,  little
   substantiation is provided for the findings made and conclusions reached.
   For example, at [31] the judge suggested that the  appellant  could  give
   only vague details about his claimed smuggling activities  on  behalf  of
   the Komala Party but not a single example is cited. Similarly, at [32] of
   the decision the judge found the appellant's account of how  he  came  to
   the attention of the Iranian authorities to be vague and incredible,  but
   without explaining why or in what way the account was vague and  what  in
   particular was incredible about his account. The findings  call  out  for
   cogent reasoning but such reasoning is absent.

9. However, I agree with the respondent that the judge  did  not  go  behind
   the respondent's concession that the appellant was a smuggler.  What  the
   judge did not accept was the claim to have smuggled items  on  behalf  of
   the Komala Party. The judge did not dispute  that  the  appellant  was  a
   smuggler by occupation. It follows that the grounds in this respect  have
   no merit and disclose no error of law.

10. Nevertheless, the errors of law made by the absence of cogent  reasoning
   to support findings made are so fundamental that no findings of fact  can
   survive. The errors of law are material and require the  decision  to  be
   set aside and remade de novo.

11. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set  aside,  section
   12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007  requires  either
   that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal with directions,  or
   it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal.  The  scheme  of  the  Tribunals
   Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the  function  of  primary
   fact finding to the Upper Tribunal. The errors of the First-tier Tribunal
   Judge vitiates all other findings of fact and the conclusions from  those
   facts so that there has not been a valid determination of the  issues  in
   the appeal.

12. In all the circumstances, at the invitation and request of both  parties
   to relist this appeal for a fresh hearing in the First-tier  Tribunal,  I
   do so on the basis that this is a case which falls  squarely  within  the
   Senior President's Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2.

Decision

    The appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

    The remaking of the decision in the appeal is remitted  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal sitting at Manchester to be made de novo with no findings
    preserved. An interpreter in Kurdish Sorani will be required.

    I make no order for costs.


Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       2 November 2020




Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

    "Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant
    is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly  or
    indirectly identify him or any member of  his  family.  This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, both  the  appellant  and  the  respondent.
    Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of  court
    proceedings."


Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       2 November 2020

