
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00195/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 September 2018                          |On 16 October 2018            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                                 farhan [a]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Gajjar, Counsel, Wilsons Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, HOPO


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW


1.   The appellant has been granted permission to  appeal  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge N M Paul dismissing his  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision to refuse him asylum in the United Kingdom.
2.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan  born  on  6  March  1993.   The
    basis of his asylum claim is that he  is  gay,  and  that  he  will  be
    persecuted, resulting in probably his  murder  if  he  is  returned  to
    Pakistan.

3.   The appellant was issued with a student visa valid from 30 August  2012
    to 31 July 2014.  He entered the UK on 17 September 2012.  He  did  not
    regularise his stay after his visa expired on 31 July  2014.   He  then
    made an application for leave to remain based  on  family  and  private
    life on 14 June 2017.  He was then  issued  with  an  IS96,  which  was
    served on him at Croydon on 31 August 2017.  He claimed asylum  on  the
    same day.

4.   The appellant said that he was gay at about the age of 15/16.   He  did
    not experience attraction to girls.  He became friends with another boy
    called [S] and gradually  they  realised  that  they  shared  the  same
    feelings and that they were both gay.  They would meet secretly at each
    other's houses when nobody was at home.

5.   When he came to the UK he felt he could develop himself here as the  UK
    is an open society.  He was regularly in contact with his  parents  and
    was under pressure to return  to  Pakistan  to  marry  a  girl  of  his
    parents' choice.  In January 2013 he informed his parents by  telephone
    that he was gay.  His parents were furious and threatened to kill  him.
    They have disowned him.  His last contact with them was on  6  December
    2014.  He produced a newspaper called the Daily Whadat.  In  it  was  a
    short public notice with what was a "disowned deed" by his father.

6.   In his asylum interview the appellant said he was  a  regular  attender
    of gay clubs and  submitted  many  photographs  to  show  that  he  was
    involved  with  either  gay  demonstrations  or  what  were   obviously
    nightclubs, mixing  with  other  people  in  what  appeared  to  be  an
    environment for gay men.

7.   I was not persuaded by the first ground which  argued  that  the  judge
    erred in finding at paragraph 29 that  the  delay  in  claiming  asylum
    damaged the appellant's credibility is not one that can  be  sustained.
    I was not persuaded by Mr Gajjar's argument that an  oblique  reference
    to his sexuality in a previous human rights application  based  on  his
    ten-year residence in the United Kingdom can be taken as the same basis
    upon which he claimed asylum.  The human rights claim was based on a 10-
    year route, whilst the asylum claim was based on  his  sexuality.   The
    two are not the same.

8.   However, I find that the judge made errors in law.   Mr  Gajjar  relied
    on ground 2 which submitted that from pages 95 to 108,  were  documents
    of screenshots and conversations the appellant has had with  men  on  a
    gay dating app.  It was not apparent  in  the  determination  that  the
    judge considered this material.

9.   The appellant called three witnesses who gave evidence  in  support  of
    his claim.  The judge recorded the evidence of the three  witnesses  at
    paragraphs 14, 15 and 16.  The judge at paragraphs 21 and  22  recorded
    the respondent's submissions in respect of the witnesses.  The  judge's
    finding at paragraph 32 in respect of the witnesses was that he did not
    find them to be compelling  witnesses  in  terms  of  establishing  his
    homosexuality but were witnesses who were clearly seeking to  help  him
    in his claim for asylum.  I find that the judge failed to give  reasons
    for his conclusion.

10.  It appears from the determination that the judge was responding to  the
    reasons given by the respondent in her  refusal  letter  and  supported
    those reasons or  criticisms  without  engaging  with  the  appellant's
    evidence at interview and at the oral hearing.

11.  For these reasons I find that the judge's decision cannot  stand.   The
    judge's decision is set aside in order to be remade.

12.  The appellant's appeal is remitted to Taylor House for rehearing  by  a
    First-tier Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Paul.

13.  No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                                  Date: 10 October 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

