
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00169/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th September 2018                        |On 10th October 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                         MR Arkan Abdulaziz Abdullah
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Wood, Solicitor, I A S (Manchester)
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a  citizen  of  Iraq  born  on  1st  July  1996.   The
    Appellant claims to  have  left  Iraq  in  October  2015  and  to  have
    travelled across Europe prior to entering the UK  on  26th  June  2016.
    The Appellant claimed asylum reportedly on  arrival.   The  Appellant's
    claim for asylum is based on the fact that he is Kurdish and has had  a
    relationship with a girl whose father and brother  have  threatened  to
    kill him.  The Appellant's claim for asylum was refused  by  Notice  of
    Refusal dated 17th December 2017.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Devlin at Manchester on 6th February 2018.  In a decision
    and reasons promulgated on 14th March 2018 the Appellant's  appeal  was
    dismissed on all grounds.

 3. On 28th March 2018 Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper Tribunal.
     Those grounds contended that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had made  a
    material misdirection in law and allowed  a  procedural  unfairness  to
    operate in that the judge had materially misdirected himself as to  his
    appraisal of the Appellant's credibility.

 4. On 27th April 2018 Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Osborne  granted
    permission to appeal.  Judge Osborne noted that at paragraph 33 of  the
    Respondent's refusal letter  it  stated  that  the  Appellant  had  the
    opportunity to submit amendments to the  screening  interview  but  had
    failed to do so.  However, he noted that within the Appellant's  bundle
    there was a letter from  the  Immigration  Advice  Service  dated  27th
    October 2017 setting out amendments  to  the  screening  interview  and
    recording explicitly problems in Iraq from the family of the girl  with
    whom he was in a sexual relationship.   Judge  Osborne  noted  that  at
    paragraph 69 of the decision Judge Devlin found the omission  from  the
    Appellant's initial screening interview of any mention of problems with
    the  girl  known  as  Suzan's  family  damaging  to   the   Appellant's
    credibility.  He  noted  that  this  was  not  a  point  taken  by  the
    Respondent  who  confined  her  criticism  of  the  Appellant  to   the
    misapprehension that  he  had  not  submitted  any  amendments  to  the
    screening interview.  This was  an  issue  that  the  judge  took  upon
    himself and it was arguably procedurally unfair to do so without giving
    the Appellant and opportunity to  respond.   Judge  Osborne  considered
    that the remainder of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision -  which
    is lengthy  -  was  careful  and  focused  but  that  it  was  arguable
    nonetheless that the judge had made a material finding at paragraph  69
    which contradicted the Appellant's evidence and that it  was  at  least
    arguable that the error was material to the judge's assessment  of  the
    Appellant's credibility.

 5. On 20th June 2018 the Secretary of State responded to  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  The relevant paragraphs therein are paragraphs 3
    and 4 where it was noted that the Appellant had  made  late  amendments
    referred to at paragraph 64 to 68 of the decisions and that the  judge,
    it was contended  had  given  cogent  reasons  for  rejecting  them  at
    paragraph 69.

 6. It is on this basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  his  instructed
    solicitor Mr Wood.  The Secretary of State appears by her  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer Mr Whitwell.

Submissions/Discussions

 7. Mr Wood starts by directing me to paragraph 33 of the Notice of Refusal
    where  the  Secretary  of  States  notes  the  Appellant  had  had   an
    opportunity to submit amendments to the  screening  interview  and  had
    failed to provide anything about having a girlfriend  and  fearing  her
    family and to paragraph 21 of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's  decision
    where he refers to this.  In addition, I am referred to the IAS  letter
    of 27th October 2007 providing corrections to the Appellant's screening
    interview record and that consequently it was surprising that the  Home
    Office Presenting Officer  attending  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    contends that there was no attempt made to bring  the  problem  of  the
    Appellant's girlfriend to the Secretary of State.  It was, he contends,
    the Secretary of State's case that there had been a failure to  provide
    amendments to the screening interview when quite clearly he states that
    there was.  Thereafter he submits that the Immigration Judge  developed
    a new argument against the Appellant in  that  whilst  considering  the
    same part of the Appellant's account the  judge  rejects  his  evidence
    that he had instructed  his  original  representatives  Lawrence  Lupin
    about the problems with Suzan's family because  there  was  a  lack  of
    notes or letters from that firm.  Mr Wood points out that this was  not
    a point take by the Respondent who had confined her  criticism  of  the
    Appellant seemingly on the misapprehension that he  had  not  submitted
    any amendments to his initial screening interview and was an issue that
    Judge Devlin took upon himself.  Mr Wood submits  it  was  procedurally
    unfair to resolve that aspect of the Appellant's  account  against  him
    without the opportunity to respond.  He  contends  that  the  Appellant
    meets the case that is set out against him and then the judge takes  it
    upon himself to  set  out  a  different  case  and  that  this  creates
    procedural unfairness.  He further contends that the judge  has  failed
    to  look  at  the  evidence  in  the  round.   Overall   he   considers
    consequently the decision  is  unsafe  and  should  be  set  aside  and
    remitted for complete rehearing before another Tribunal.

 8. Mr Whitwell in response accepts that the Notice of Refusal  raises  the
    issue of the additional evidence and amendments but contends  that  the
    judge at paragraph 21 in response is only talking generally  about  the
    screening interview.  He takes me further into the lengthy decision  of
    Judge Devlin pointing out that at paragraph 53 the judge has noted that
    the Appellant  had  failed  to  mention  the  threat  from  his  former
    partner's family in his initial contact and asylum interview  and  that
    there was nothing that prevented the Appellant  from  adducing  further
    evidence.   Further,  he  comments  that  the  judge  has   purportedly
    contended that he has looked at everything in the round and  that  even
    if there has been an error submits that it is not material, due to  the
    manner in which the judge has structured his findings.  He takes me  to
    the findings to be found at paragraph 122 of the  decision  which  sets
    out a very lengthy set of findings made by the judge and that the judge
    concludes at paragraph 123 with the words, "I do not believe a word  he
    says."  He submits that the judge has done more than  enough  and  that
    looking at the whole matter in the round there is no material error  of
    law and the decision of the judge is one that he was entitled to reach.



The Law

 9.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

10. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

11. Mr Wood raises the contention that the judge  has  failed  to  consider
    amendments  to  the  Appellant's  screening   interview   relating   to
    difficulties  he  experienced  following  his  relationship  with   his
    girlfriend.  I take the view that that is not an issue that  should  be
    considered in isolation.  The  judge  has  considered  this  matter  in
    considerable detail and at paragraph 122 looks  at  everything  in  the
    round.  He makes findings that he cannot be satisfied even to the lower
    standard  of  proof  of  seven  factors  including  reference  to   the
    relationship that the Appellant had with  the  girl  Suzan.   He  makes
    conclusions at paragraph 123 and at 124 to the effect that he does  not
    believe anything the Appellant says or that  return  is  not  feasible.
    The judge has followed the  proper  approach  to  credibility  i.e.  to
    assess the evidence and the claim generally.   He  has  looked  at  the
    relevant  factors  i.e.  the   internal   consistency,   the   inherent
    plausibility and the consistency of the claim with external factors  of
    the sort typically found in country  guidance.   He  has  made  overall
    findings of fact that he was entitled to.

12. It is important in  this  case  to  look  at  how  the  case  has  been
    developed.  Even if the judge had failed to give consideration to these
    amendments he has considered the incidents fully and has given reasoned
    findings  including  detailed  findings  relating  to  his  conclusions
    relating on the Appellant's relationship with the girl Suzan.

13. I acknowledge that  the  common  law  principle  of  fairness  requires
    careful consideration of the extent to which reliance can  properly  be
    placed  on  answers  purportedly  given  by  Claimant's  in   screening
    interviews and, as has previously been set out by the Court of  Appeal,
    the fact that some reasons do not bear analysis is not of itself enough
    to justify an Appellate Court setting aside a decision.   Consequently,
    I am of the view that there is no material error of law in this matter.
     The judge has looked at this matter in the round and has made  overall
    findings which he was entitled to.  I do not consider that any omission
    - even if one had taken place and I do not necessarily accept  that  it
    has - would create  such  procedural  unfairness  as  to  constitute  a
    material error of law.   This  is  a  well-reasoned  and  well-set  out
    decision which discloses no material error of law and consequently  the
    appeal is dismissed and the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    is maintained.

Notice of Decision

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  discloses  no  material
    error of law and the appeal is dismissed and the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

15. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 4th October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date: 4th October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

