
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00626/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Remotely by Skype for Business       |On 6 November 2020                   |
|On 29 October 2020                   |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    k j n
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms M Kelleher of B H D Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or  indirectly  identify  the  respondent  (KJN).   This
    direction applies to both the appellant and to  the  respondent  and  a
    failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of  court
    proceedings.

 2. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, for convenience I
    will refer to the  parties  as  they  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal: appellant (KJN); and respondent (Secretary of State).

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who comes from Kirkuk City.

 4. The  appellant  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  7  January  2016
    illegally.  On that day, he  claimed  asylum.   On  1  July  2016,  the
    Secretary of State refused the appellant's claim for asylum.

 5.  The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and,   in   a
    determination  sent  on  19  May  2017,  Judge  Ghani   dismissed   the
    appellant's appeal on all grounds.  The appellant successfully appealed
    to the Upper Tribunal on the basis that Judge Ghani,  although  finding
    the appellant not to be credible and disbelieving his account  and  the
    basis for his asylum claim, had not properly considered  the  issue  of
    internal relocation.  That issue was  also  important  because  of  the
    appellant's claim for humanitarian protection  under  Art  15(c).   The
    Upper Tribunal remitted the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal in  order
    to remake the decision, in particular to internal relocation.

 6. That appeal was heard by Judge Parkes on 20 August 2018.   In  addition
    to the issue of internal relocation, upon which Judge  Parkes  made  an
    adverse finding, namely that the appellant could reasonably and without
    undue harshness relocate to the IKR, Judge Parkes also  considered  the
    issue of whether the appellant would be at risk on  return  because  he
    lacked a necessary ID document, namely a Civil Status Identity Document
    ("CSID").  On that  issue,  Judge  Parkes  did  not  accept  that  "the
    appellant either does not have access to his CSID  or  the  ability  to
    obtain  a  new  one"  (see  para  22).   As  a  consequence,   in   his
    determination sent on 3 September  2018,  Judge  Parkes  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal on all grounds.

 7. On 16 October 2019, the appellant  made  further  submissions.   On  20
    December 2019, the Secretary of State  again  refused  the  appellant's
    claims for asylum, humanitarian protection and under the ECHR.

 8. The  appellant  again  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   In  a
    determination sent on  6  June  2020,  Judge  J  McIntosh  allowed  the
    appellant's appeal under Art 3 of the ECHR.

 9. The Secretary of State was granted permission to appeal by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge L S Bulpitt) on 19 June 2020.

The Appeal

10. Due to the COVID-19 crisis, the appeal was listed for a remote  hearing
    by Skype for Business on 29 October 2020.  I was based in  the  Cardiff
    Civil Justice Centre and Mr Howells, who represented the  Secretary  of
    State and Ms Kelleher who represented the appellant joined the  hearing
    by Skype for Business.

The Judge's Decision

11. The appellant's asylum claim was based on his account that he worked in
    a prison and that  in,  or  around,  May  2015,  while  transporting  a
    prisoner  to  hospital,  the  appellant  shot  the  prisoner  who   was
    attempting to escape from the transport vehicle  after  it  had  broken
    down.  The prisoner was, the appellant claimed,  of  Kurdish  ethnicity
    but was a member of ISIL.  As a result of the  shooting,  the  prisoner
    lost both his legs.  Subsequently, the appellant received threats  from
    associates of the prisoner and the appellant  was  forced  to  move  to
    Chamchamal in the IKR to live and work.

12. Before Judge McIntosh there were a number of matters in  issue.   Chief
    amongst these was whether the appellant had contact with his family  in
    Iraq and whether or not he had,  or  could  obtain,  a  CSID  or  other
    relevant ID document to safely travel and live  within  Iraq.   In  his
    earlier appeal, Judge Parkes appears to have reached  findings  adverse
    to the appellant on both of these issues.  In para 21 of Judge  Parkes'
    decision, he said that:

         "It is difficult to see on what basis it could be accepted that the
         Appellant is not in contact with family members or friends in Iraq,
         does not actually have his CSID or is otherwise unable to obtain it
         or obtain a new one."

13. Then at paragraph 22, Judge Parkes said:

         "I do not accept that the appellant either does not have access  to
         a CSID or the ability to obtain a new one."

14. Judge McIntosh correctly identified that his starting point  should  be
    the findings in the earlier appeal following  Devaseelan  [2002]  UKIAT
    00702 (see para 30 of his determination).  However, it appears that the
    previous decision which he referred to is  that  of  Judge  Ghani.   He
    refers to it at para 27 as the "previous decision"  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and then at para 31 sets out some of Judge  Ghani's  findings.
    It does not appear, therefore,  at  that  point  or  elsewhere  in  his
    determination that Judge McIntosh referred to Judge Parkes' later  (and
    more current) decision and its findings.

15. Nevertheless, Judge McIntosh went on to consider the  evidence  in  the
    appeal before him, including  evidence  concerning  approaches  by  the
    appellant to the Red Cross in order to contact his family members  (see
    para 32 of his determination).  At paragraph 35,  Judge  McIntosh  said
    this:

         "The appellant's chronology of events is that he travelled with his
         friends to  Turkey  and  at  that  point  engaged  an  agent.   The
         appellant at  this  stage  gave  his  passport  to  the  agent  and
         apparently retained  his  prison  guard  identification,  which  he
         submitted to the Home Office.  It is reasonable to assume  that  if
         the appellant was serious about obtaining  the  CSID/Passport  from
         the Iraqi Embassy in the United Kingdom, he would write to the Home
         Office to obtain the documentation for presentation to the Embassy.
          I find the appellant has been less  than  proactive  in  obtaining
         replacement documentation.  I also find  it  unrealistic  that  the
         appellant would surrender his passport but retain his prison  guard
         identification documents."

16. On the basis of the reasoning in  that  paragraph,  in  particular  the
    final sentence, it might be thought that the judge would find that  the
    appellant, since he  had  his  prison  guard  identification,  had  not
    established that he had surrendered his passport or his CSID  and  that
    therefore he had access to  it.   In  fact,  the  judge  said  no  more
    concerning that issue until paragraph 42 of his determination where  he
    said this:

         "The basis for the appellant leaving Iraq and traveling to  Turkey,
         is not accepted as credible.  I do not accept that prior to leaving
         Iraq the appellant was either targeted by member of ISIL or  indeed
         family members or associates of [the prisoner].  The appellant left
         Iraq with his personal identification documents, his  CSID/passport
         and prison guard identification documents.  The  appellant  asserts
         that his CSID/passport was taken by the agent assisting him in  his
         travel to the  United  Kingdom,  his  prison  guard  identification
         submitted to the Home Office.  The appellant maintains that  he  is
         unable to obtain replacement CSID/passport."

17. Again, the judge, whilst setting out the appellant's case  in  relation
    to the documentation, and whether the appellant surrendered it, made no
    finding.

18. Then at para 43, the judge set out the relevant parts of  the  judicial
    headnote in SMO and others (Art  15(c);  identity  documents)  Iraq  CG
    [2019] UKUT 00400  (IAC)  at  paras  11  -  16  dealing  with  identity
    documents and their importance to individuals, in Iraq, in  particular,
    that in order to safely travel and live in  Iraq  an  individual  would
    need a CSID or a new Biometric Iraqi National Identity  Card  ("INID").
    Without one of those documents, the UT in SMO and others accepted  that
    it was likely that an individual would  be  at  risk  of  serious  ill-
    treatment contrary to Art 3 of the  ECHR  in  seeking  to  travel,  for
    example from Baghdad (as would the appellant) to their home area  (such
    as Kirkuk City in the case of the appellant).

19. At paras 44-45, the judge reached his  conclusions  on  the  appeal  as
    follows:

         "44. I have to have regard to whether the appellant is eligible for
             a  grant  of  Humanitarian  Protection  in   accordance   with
             paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules. I have considered the
             appellant's claim under Article 3 of the ECHR with a real risk
             of ill-treatment due to his lack of identification  documents.
             In relation to  Article  2,  I  find  the  appellant  has  not
             established that upon return to Iraq, there  is  a  real  risk
             that he would be targeted due to his previous employment as  a
             prison officer or  his  knowledge  of  the  prisoner  [].   In
             relation to the appellant's lack of  identification  documents
             however I find there is a real risk of ill-treatment which are
             (sic) contrary to Article 3 ECHR.  In evidence  the  appellant
             asserts that he does not have means  of  obtaining  documents,
             with which to relocate internally in Iraq.   The  evidence  is
             finely  balanced.    The   regime   of   the   allocation   of
             documentation has changed and there is no clear mechanism upon
             which it can be asserted with certainty that the appellant can
             obtain INID without adverse interest being drawn  and  placing
             him at risk of serious ill-treatment.

         45.  In respect of a claim under Art 3 of  the  ECHR,  due  to  the
             nature of his claim, I find the appellant  has  established  a
             risk of serious harm contrary to Article  3  and  I  therefore
             allow his appeal on those grounds."

Discussion

20. On  reading  Judge  McIntosh's  determination,  it  is  clear  that  he
    dismissed the appellant's appeal on  all  bases  other  than  that  the
    appellant was at risk on return to Iraq contrary to Art 3 of  the  ECHR
    because he would lack a relevant identification document  in  order  to
    safely travel to his home area and/or live in Kirkuk City.

21. It is plain, and both representatives accepted this, that  in  para  44
    Judge McIntosh by dismissing the appellant's claim under Art 2  of  the
    ECHR based upon his account of  being  at  risk  as  a  result  of  his
    shooting a prisoner also, in effect, rejected the basis  of  his  claim
    for  asylum  and  humanitarian  protection  under  Art  15(b)  of   the
    Qualification Directive (Council Directive 2004/83/EC).

22. It may be that the judge  also  intended  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal under Art 15(c) when he stated in paras 40-41 that following SMO
    and others, the circumstances in Kirkuk did not engage Art  15(c).   It
    may be that the judge intended  to  do  that  because  in  para  41  he
    referred to the appellant's case that, even if there is no general risk
    to all civilians in Kirkuk City, applying the 'sliding-scale'  required
    by  SMO  and  others  the  appellant   argued   that   his   particular
    characteristics, including his ethnicity and that he was a prison guard
    and therefore associated with local  or  national  governments  or  the
    security apparatus, nevertheless put him at risk.  In fact,  the  judge
    did not, thereafter, make any finding on  this  issue  although  it  is
    plain from paras 44-46 that he did not allow the appeal on this  basis.



23. Mr Howells submitted that the judge had erred in law  in  allowing  the
    appellant's appeal under Art 3 on the basis  of  his  claimed  lack  of
    documentation.

24. First, Mr Howells submitted that the judge had failed to make a finding
    as to whether or not the appellant had, in fact, retained his CSID.  He
    relied upon what the  judge  had  said  at  paras  35  and  44  of  his
    determination.  Ms Kelleher, despite  her  spirited  defence  of  Judge
    McIntosh's reasoning, did not persuade  me  that  this  submission  was
    wrong.

25. On reading para 35, it might be thought that the judge was setting  out
    the reasons for reaching a finding that in fact he did not accept  that
    the appellant had surrendered his other travel documents (such  as  his
    passport and  CSID)  given  that  he  had  retained  his  prison  guard
    identification document.  However, Judge McIntosh did not make  such  a
    finding and in para 44, he only considered whether the appellant  could
    obtain a new identification document.  The premise of that must be,  of
    course, that the appellant did not have his  existing  CSID.   However,
    the judge did not make that finding and  the  only  reasoning  that  he
    offers in para 35 of his determination would, on the  face  of  it,  be
    more consistent with  a  finding  that  the  appellant  still  had  his
    existing CSID.

26. For these reasons, I accept Mr Howells' submission that the judge erred
    in law by failing to make an adequate (or any) finding  in  respect  to
    whether the appellant still had his existing CSID.  The judge failed to
    give adequate reasons, if he is to be taken implicitly to have  made  a
    finding in the appellant's favour in para 44 as  the  premise  for  his
    consideration of whether the appellant could obtain a new CSID.

27. Secondly, Mr Howells submitted  that,  assuming  the  judge  needed  to
    consider whether the appellant could obtain  a  replacement  CSID,  his
    reasoning in para 44  was  inadequate  to  justify  a  finding  in  the
    appellant's favour that he would not be able to obtain a CSID.

28. The judge  set  out  the  relevant  country  guidance  on  obtaining  a
    replacement CSID in paragraph 43 of his  determination.   The  relevant
    parts of the headnote in SMO and others is at  paras  (11)  -  (16)  as
    follows:

         "C.  CIVIL STATUS IDENTITY DOCUMENTATION

         11. The CSID is being replaced with a new biometric Iraqi National
             Identity Card  -  the  INID.   As  a  general  matter,  it  is
             necessary for an individual to have one of these two documents
             in order to live and travel within Iraq  without  encountering
             treatment or conditions which are contrary to Article 3  ECHR.
              Many of the checkpoints in the country  are  manned  by  Shia
             militia who are not controlled by the GOI and are unlikely  to
             permit an individual without a CSID or an  INID  to  pass.   A
             valid Iraqi passport is not recognised as acceptable proof  of
             identity for internal travel.

         12. A Laissez Passer will be of no assistance in the absence of  a
             CSID or an INID; it is confiscated upon arrival and is not, in
             any  event,  a  recognised  identity   document.    There   is
             insufficient evidence to show that returnees are issued with a
             'certification letter' at Baghdad Airport, or to show that any
             such document would be  recognised  internally  as  acceptable
             proof of identity.

         13. Notwithstanding the phased transition to the INID within Iraq,
             replacement CSIDs  remain  available  through  Iraqi  Consular
             facilities.  Whether an individual will be able  to  obtain  a
             replacement CSID whilst in the UK  depends  on  the  documents
             available and, critically, the availability of the volume  and
             page reference of the entry in the Family Book in Iraq,  which
             system  continues  to  underpin  the  Civil  Status   Identity
             process.  Given the importance of that information, most Iraqi
             citizens will recall it. That information may also be obtained
             from family members, although  it  is  necessary  to  consider
             whether such relatives are on the  father's  or  the  mother's
             side because the registration system is patrilineal.

         14. Once in Iraq, it  remains  the  case  that  an  individual  is
             expected to attend their local CSA office in order to obtain a
             replacement document.  All CSA  offices  have  now  re-opened,
             although the extent to which records have  been  destroyed  by
             the conflict with ISIL is  unclear,  and  is  likely  to  vary
             significantly depending on the extent  and  intensity  of  the
             conflict in the area in question.

         15. An individual returnee who is not from Baghdad is  not  likely
             to be  able  to  obtain  a  replacement  document  there,  and
             certainly not within a reasonable time.  Neither  the  Central
             Archive nor the assistance facilities for IDPs are  likely  to
             render documentation assistance to an undocumented returnee.

         16. The likelihood of obtaining a replacement identity document by
             the use of a proxy, whether from the UK or on return to  Iraq,
             has reduced due to the introduction of the  INID  system.   In
             order to obtain an INID, an individual must attend their local
             CSA office in person  to  enrol  their  biometrics,  including
             fingerprints and iris scans.  The CSA offices  in  which  INID
             terminals have been installed are unlikely - as  a  result  of
             the phased replacement of the CSID system - to issue  a  CSID,
             whether to an individual  in  person  or  to  a  proxy.    The
             reducing number of CSA offices in which  INID  terminals  have
             not been installed will continue to issue CSIDs to individuals
             and  their  proxies   upon   production   of   the   necessary
             information."

29. Mr Howells accepted that the appellant  was  unlikely  to  be  able  to
    obtain an INID from the Iraqi Embassy in the UK and, in order to obtain
    one in Iraq, he would have to attend in person since it is a  biometric
    document.  However,  Mr  Howells  submitted  that,  following  SMO  and
    others, in order to determine whether the appellant would  be  able  to
    obtain a replacement CSID through a proxy (such as a family member)  in
    Iraq,  required  a  consideration  of  whether  he  had  the   relevant
    documentation to present to the Iraqi Embassy and whether he  knew,  or
    could contact relatives who knew, the details of the page and volume of
    his family entry held in the relevant civil registry.   The  judge  had
    not grappled with  these  issues  and  his  reasons  in  para  44  were
    inadequate.

30. Ms Kelleher submitted that the appellant would need to provide a number
    of documents in order to obtain a CSID  and  she  referred  me  to  AAH
    (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 212 (IAC) which
    had been approved and adopted by the UT in SMO and others.  As  regards
    the appellant's knowledge of the details of his  family  entry  in  the
    civil register, Ms Kelleher pointed out that in his  witness  statement
    at para 7, the appellant  said  that  he  did  not  know  those  family
    details.  She submitted that that was the  evidence  despite  what  was
    said in SMO and others at [391]-[392] that this information was  likely
    to be known by individuals.

31. If the appellant does not have his existing CSID,  then  the  issue  of
    whether he could obtain a replacement CSID (or  an  INID  but  that  is
    unlikely) was a matter which required the judge, on the  basis  of  SMO
    and others, to consider a  number  of  issues,  including  whether  the
    appellant had the necessary documentation and knowledge  in  particular
    of his family entry in the civil register.  Linked to that latter issue
    is that, if he did not have that knowledge,  could  he  contact  family
    members in Iraq who could provide that information.

32. In SMO and others, the UT (at  [390])  outlined  the  requirements  for
    obtaining a replacement CSID in Iraq:

         "The process for obtaining a replacement CSID by the use of a proxy
         (or a power of attorney) has been considered in previous cases  and
         there is no reason to depart  from  the  guidance  given  in  those
         cases.  As explained at [25] of AAH (Iraq), a number  of  documents
         are ordinarily required and, if those documents are available,  and
         a suitable proxy can present them to the  relevant  CSA  office,  a
         CSID should be issued within three days: [27].  In the  event  that
         some of  the  documents  are  missing,  it  might  nevertheless  be
         possible to  obtain  a  replacement  CSID  and  the  key  piece  of
         information which is required  is  the  family's  volume  and  page
         reference in the civil register: [28]."

33. Crucial to the appellant obtaining a CSID from Iraq would be  knowledge
    of the relevant page and volume for the appellant's family entry in the
    civil register held at the CSA Office  in  Kirkuk  City.   At  [391]  -
    [392], the UT dealt with whether individuals were likely  to  know  the
    relevant page and volume of their family entry in the civil register:

         "390. We consider the number of individuals who  do  not  know  and
         could not ascertain their volume and page reference would be  quite
         small, however.  It is impossible to overstate the importance of an
         individual's volume and  page  reference  in  the  civil  register.
         These details appear on numerous official documents,  including  an
         Iraqi passport, wedding certificate and birth certificate, as  well
         as the CSID.    It was suggested  in  a  report  from  the  British
         Embassy in Baghdad, quoted at 6.1.9 of the Internal Relocation CPIN
         of February 2019, that "[a]ll Iraqi nationals will know or be  able
         to easily obtain this information".  We find the  former  assertion
         entirely unsurprising.  The volume and page reference in the  civil
         register is a piece of information which is of significance to  the
         individual and their family from the moment of their birth.  It  is
         entered on various documents and is ever present in  that  person's
         life.  We do not lose  sight  of  the  fact  that  there  remain  a
         significant number of people in Iraq who are undocumented.   We  do
         not consider that problem to be attributable to a  difficulty  with
         recalling the relevant information.  It is instead attributable  to
         the closure - until comparatively  recently  -  of  the  local  CSA
         offices  at  which  people  were  required  to  obtain  replacement
         documents and to their reluctance to return to those areas  from  a
         place of relocation.

         391. There will of course be those who can plausibly claim  not  to
         know these details.  Those who left Iraq at  a  particularly  young
         age, those who are mentally unwell and those who have  issues  with
         literacy or numeracy may all be able to make such a claim plausibly
         but we consider that it will be very much  the  exception  that  an
         individual would be unaware of a matter so fundamental to their own
         identity and that of their family.  The  letter  from  the  Embassy
         also suggested that most  Iraqis  would  be  able  to  obtain  this
         information easily.  Again, that  assertion  is  unsurprising  when
         viewed in its proper context.  As is clear from AAH(Iraq), Iraq  is
         a collectivist society in which the family is all important.  It is
         also a country with a high prevalence  of  mobile  telephone  usage
         amongst the adult population.  Even when we bear in mind the  years
         of conflict and displacement in Iraq, we would expect there  to  be
         only a small number of cases in which an individual could plausibly
         claim to have no means of contacting a family member from whom  the
         relevant volume and page reference  could  be  obtained  or  traced
         back."

34. In para 44, Judge McIntosh did not adequately grapple with the issue of
    re-documentation, in particular whether the appellant had the  relevant
    documentation  and  knowledge  of  his  family's  entry  in  the  civil
    register, and whether the CSA Office in Kirkuk City continues to  issue
    CSIDs.

35. Although the judge set out the relevant part of the headnote in SMO and
    others, his only finding in para 44 was that the  "evidence  is  finely
    balanced" and that there was "no clear mechanism upon which it  can  be
    asserted with certainty  the  appellant  can  obtain  an  INID  without
    adverse interest being drawn and placing him at risk  of  serious  ill-
    treatment".  In this  appeal,  the  live  issue  was  not  whether  the
    appellant could obtain an INID.  He could not obtain  an  INID  without
    personally attending the CSA Office which he could not do if  he  could
    not safely travel to his home area.  The  live  issue  was  whether  he
    could obtain a replacement CSID if he had  not  retained  his  existing
    one.  The judge's reasons in para 44 are not adequate  to  sustain  his
    conclusion that the appellant would not be able to obtain a  new  CSID.
    That also amounts to an error of law.

36. For these reasons, therefore, I am satisfied that the  judge  erred  in
    law in allowing the appellant's appeal under Art 3 of the ECHR.

Decision

37. For the above reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's decision to allow  the
    appellant's appeal under Art 3 involved the making of an error of  law.
    That decision cannot stand and is set aside.

38. Both representatives invited me, if that was my decision, to remit  the
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a further hearing.

39. It was agreed that Judge McIntosh had determined the appellant's appeal
    (and international protection claim) adversely to him on the  basis  of
    any risk to him as a result of his being a prison guard  who  had  shot
    and seriously injured an ISIL prisoner and so was now at risk of  being
    targeted by ISIL.  That decision (and the findings made in relation  to
    it) were not challenged and stand.  It was further agreed that none  of
    Judge McIntosh's findings relating to the appellant's remaining  claims
    should be preserved.

40. In the circumstances, the appropriate disposal of  this  appeal  is  to
    remit it to the First-tier Tribunal for the decision to be remade:

      1) Judge McIntosh's decision and findings that the appellant  has  not
         established  an  international  protection  claim  based  upon  his
         account that he would be targeted due to his previous employment as
         a  prison  officer  stand  and  his  findings  on  that  issue  are
         preserved.

      2) The decision will be remade in  respect  of  Art  3/Art  15(b)  and
         whether the appellant would be at risk on return to Iraq because of
         a lack of identification documents.

      3) Although this matter was not raised  at  the  end  of  the  hearing
         before me, reading Judge McIntosh's determination as  a  whole,  he
         did not reach any findings in relation to Art 15(c) (see my para 22
         above).  Given that, the appellant is also entitled  to  rely  upon
         Art 15(c) if he wishes at the remitted hearing  before  the  First-
         tier Tribunal.

41. Consequently, the appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for the
    decision to be remade in accordance with the above; the  appeal  to  be
    heard by a judge other  than  Judge  McIntosh  and,  because  of  their
    earlier involvement in the appellant's appeals, Judge Ghani  and  Judge
    Parkes.

                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                             2 November 2020
