
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00751/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House, London      Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On the 22nd January 2019     On 15th February 2019

                                   Before:
                           DISTRICT JUDGE MCGINTY
                  SITTING AS A DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE

                                  Between:
                                    MR BN
                         (Anonymity Direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Harvey (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Rodger promulgated on the 30th July 2018.  Within  that
      decision, First-tier Tribunal Judge Rodger  found  that  she  did  not
      accept the Appellant's core account about his involvement with  Ginbot
      7 or his alleged detention or mistreatment in  Ethiopia  and  did  not
      accept his account of the Appellant's  or  his  family  members  being
      targeted by the police authorities.  The Judge further stated that she
      did not  believe  the  Appellant's  account  about  the  circumstances
      surrounding the Appellant leaving Ethiopia or relating to his  alleged
      forced labour/trafficking on the way to the UK.   The  Judge  did  not
      accept that the Appellant had any real risk upon returning to Ethiopia
      and did not accept he had any connections with Ginbot 7 or that he had
      been previously arrested, detained or mistreated by  the  authorities.
      The Appellant's asylum claim was therefore rejected.

   2. It was further found for  the  same  reasons  the  Appellant  was  not
      entitled to either humanitarian protection or protection under Article
      3 and it was found that the Appellant  did  not  have  any  family  or
      private life in the UK for the purposes of Article 8.

      Grounds of appeal

   3. The Appellant has now sought to appeal against that decision  for  the
      reasons set out within the Grounds of  Appeal.   That  is  a  detailed
      document that I have fully taken account of, but is a matter of record
      and is therefore not  repeated  in  its  entirety  here.  However,  in
      summary, it is argued  in  ground  1  that  the  Judge  erred  in  his
      assessment of the medical evidence.  It is argued  that  Dr  Cohen  is
      very well known to the Tribunal and to the Courts and  the  Judge  was
      satisfied     about     her     expertise     on     physical      and
      psychiatric/psychological injuries.  It is said that  it  was  a  text
      book report.  However, it is argued that the Judge reached conclusions
      based on the Appellant's account before considering the reports of  Dr
      Cohen.

   4. It is argued that the Court of Appeal in the cases of  Mibanga  [2005]
      EWCA Civ 367 and R  (AM)  v  The  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2012] EWCA Civ 512 stated that  a  fact  finder  must  not
      reach his or her conclusion  before  surveying  all  of  the  evidence
      relevant thereto and must consider the evidence in the round.  It  was
      argued that the Judge had failed to have proper regard to  the  expert
      evidence of Dr Cohen which it is said was the only material before him
      giving expert evidence on the state of the Appellant's mental  health.



   5. It is further argued that between paragraph 46 and 54 of the decision,
      the Judge went on to contest Dr Cohen's  clinical  findings  and  that
      contrary to what the Judge stated, Dr Cohen had considered alternative
      and accidental causes for the scarring suffered by the Appellant.

   6. It is further argued that the Judge failed to note that  the  scarring
      to the Appellant's face was said to be "typical" of baton  blows,  and
      that typical denoted a greater  degree  of  consistency  than  "highly
      consistent"  and  the  Judge  had  said  "the  only  scarring   highly
      consistent with the Appellant's attribution relates to the scar on his
      abdomen".  It was further argued  that  the  Judge  speculated  as  to
      whether or not the scar to the thigh could have an  alternative  cause
      such as the Appellant falling out of a vehicle.

   7. It is further argued  that  although  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      indicated she had found that there was no basis for Dr  Cohen  stating
      that medical treatment in respect of one scar had been delayed and was
      more likely to have been given in Ethiopia than Libya,  it  is  argued
      that there was nothing untoward in  Dr  Cohen's  conclusion  that  the
      Appellant was less likely to receive medical  treatment  whilst  taken
      across the Sahara by smugglers than when held in a police  station  in
      Addis Ababa.

   8. It was further argued that the Judge discounted Dr Cohen's evidence on
      the Appellant's problems of recall of events, on the  basis  that  the
      Appellant was not suffering from a high level of frequency or severity
      of symptoms of PTSD when the only evidence before the Judge  was  that
      of Dr Cohen.

   9. It is argued that Dr Cohen found that a large number  of  scars  given
      his age, the asymmetric distribution and location on some parts of the
      body not usually injured accidentally provided strong corroboration of
      the account of torture given.  It is argued that the Judge  has  erred
      in pitting her opinion on medical matters against that of the expert.

  10. In the second ground of appeal it is argued that the  Judge  erred  in
      his understanding as to the assessment of  the  evidence  relating  to
      risk upon return and that the Judge departed from the country guidance
      in the case of MB (OLF and MTA - Risk)  Ethiopia  [2007]  UKIAT  00030
      regarding how someone from within Ginbot 7 would be  treated,  on  the
      basis simply that a news report that Andargachew Tsige  together  with
      500 people had been released from prison which  the  Judge  had  found
      indicated a change of attitude towards the treatment of Ginbot 7.   It
      is argued that Mr Tsige, the General Secretary of Ginbot 7 was also  a
      UK citizen who had been visited by UK consulate officials in detention
      who were calling for his release and was a citizen of dual nationality
      and that there was no evidence  to  say  that  the  other  500  people
      released were linked with Ginbot 7 and  that  there  was  insufficient
      evidence for a Judge to depart from the country guidance case.

  11. In the third ground of appeal it is argued that the treatment  in  the
      reports of both experts was evidence of a failure to apply the correct
      standard of proof in asylum cases namely that of reasonable degree  of
      likelihood.

      Oral submissions

  12. In her oral submissions before the Upper Tribunal, Ms Harvey indicated
      that Dr Cohen had prepared a further letter for the Tribunal dated the
      21st January 2019, further commenting upon the clinical issues  raised
      within her report.  However, Ms Harvey correctly  indicated  that  the
      letter was not relevant for the purposes of the error of  law  hearing
      and only relevant if a material error was found.  I have therefore not
      placed any weight upon that letter in respect of my  consideration  of
      the error of law issue.

  13. Ms Harvey further argued that  there  were  in  fact  two  grounds  of
      appeal, one relating to the medical evidence and the other relating to
      the treatment of the evidence regarding the risk upon return  from  Mr
      Seddon.  She conceded that the second ground alone regarding risk upon
      return would not be sufficient in isolation for the appeal to succeed.

  14. Ms Harvey argued that Dr Cohen is a leading expert providing  training
      on expert reports and scarring cases including two First-tier Tribunal
      Judges and that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  in  this  case  was
      satisfied of her expertise, but argued that the  way  that  the  Judge
      dealt with the expert evidence was  arguably  incorrect.   She  argued
      that the Judge had made findings regarding the Appellant's credibility
      before then going on  to  say  that  she  had  taken  account  of  the
      Appellant's mental health and age.  However, Ms Harvey  conceded  that
      the First-tier Tribunal Judge had to start somewhere in respect of her
      analysis of the evidence provided that the evidence was considered "in
      the round".  She drew my attention to the fact that Dr Cohen had  said
      that the facial scarring was typical of injury caused by being  beaten
      with a baton which is a  higher  level  of  likelihood  classification
      beyond "highly consistent".  She argued  that  therefore  the  Judge's
      statement that the only scar highly consistent  with  the  Appellant's
      attribution related to the scar on his abdomen when  he  said  he  had
      been beaten with a stick in Libya was wrong.

  15.  Ms Harvey further challenged the Judge's finding at paragraph 52 that
      she had not been persuaded by Dr Cohen's evidence that  the  delay  in
      medical care for the Appellant's leg seemed more likely to be possible
      in Ethiopia than the conditions described in Libya, on the basis  that
      the Judge had stated that it was not clear Dr Cohen had come  to  this
      conclusion save that he relied upon the Appellant's  account  relating
      to the injury. She argued that it was more likely that  if  the  wound
      had been sutured it was resulting from hospital treatment of  a  minor
      child in Addis Ababa rather than occurring when  crossing  the  Libyan
      desert in a caravan in a sandy area.  However, she conceded  that  all
      in reality that Dr Cohen could say  was  that  it  had  been  sutured,
      rather than going on to give  expert  evidence  regarding  where  such
      treatment took place.

  16. Ms Harvey further argued that although the  Judge  accepted  that  the
      Appellant may well be suffering from PTSD, that the  Judge  in  saying
      that need not accept that it affected his recall on memory  was  wrong
      to find at paragraph 54 that he had low level mental health  symptoms,
      and all that was stated by Dr Cohen was the fact  that  the  Appellant
      was not now suffering from a high level of frequency  or  severity  of
      symptoms, but it was still affecting his ability to study and to  take
      part in activities.  She said  that  the  Judge's  findings  that  the
      symptoms were of a low level only was not borne out  by  the  evidence
      and that Judge Cohen's evidence was that considering the large  number
      of scars, given the Appellant's age, their asymmetric distribution and
      the location of  some  on  parts  of  the  body  not  usually  injured
      accidentally was corroborative evidence  of  the  account  of  torture
      given for the purposes of the Istanbul Protocol.

  17. In respect of the report of Mr Seddon,  Ms  Harvey  further  explained
      upon her Grounds of Appeal by indicating that a newspaper report  when
      talking about the release of Mr Tsige was there dealing  with  someone
      who was a  dual  national  for  whom  the  UK  Consulate  were  making
      diplomatic interventions to have him released and that  the  newspaper
      article did not refer to  the  500  people  also  released  as  having
      anything to do with Ginbot 7 and that therefore the Judge was wrong to
      place weight upon the newspaper article as a reason for departing from
      country guidance.

  18. Ms Harvey said that the third ground of appeal  simply  drew  together
      the other two grounds of appeal and did not  seek  to  argue  that  it
      added anything to this appeal.

  19. In his submissions on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State,  Mr  Tarlow
      argued that the  Appellant  was  simply  disagreeing  with  the  valid
      reasoned findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.   He  argued  that
      the Judge had given a carefully worded account  of  the  case  of  the
      Appellant regarding what he said had happened in Ethiopia and for  the
      Appellant's brother working for Ginbot 7.  He argued  that  the  Judge
      had properly taken account of the expert evidence of Dr Cohen  and  Mr
      Seddon and come to conclusions that were open  to  the  Judge  on  the
      evidence  and  was  not  satisfied  that  the  expert   evidence   was
      corroborative of the Appellant's account.  He argued  that  the  Judge
      simply considered the Appellant not to be credible  and  the  decision
      was sustainable.   Mr  Tarlow  further  argued  that  the  Judge  made
      findings open to him regarding PTSD.

  20. In respect of the evidence given by Mr Seddon, Mr Tarlow conceded that
      the newspaper article in itself was  insufficient  for  the  Judge  to
      depart from country guidance but argued that in light of  the  Judge's
      analysis of the expert medical evidence, there was no material error.

  21. Both parties conceded that if there was a material error  of  law  the
      case should be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing
      before a differently constituted Tribunal.







   My Findings on Error of Law and Materiality

  22. Although it was argued  by  Ms  Harvey  that  the  Learned  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge has  made  adverse  credibility  findings  against  the
      Appellant before considering the expert evidence, it is in fact  clear
      from the Judge's findings at paragraph 33 that as she stated  she  had
      looked carefully at all the evidence  both  individually  and  in  the
      round having regard to the background material provided  both  by  the
      Appellant and the Respondent before making his findings of fact.  When
      the Judge goes on to consider the evidence, the Judge clearly  has  to
      start from somewhere, as accepted by Ms Harvey.  I do not accept given
      the way the Judge directed herself that she has in fact  made  adverse
      credibility findings before going on to consider the expert  evidence.
      The fact that she has made findings between paragraph 36 and 45 before
      going on to set out and make findings about the expert evidence of  Dr
      Cohen, was simply the order in which the Judge dealt with the evidence
      in the decision, rather than  the  Judge  making  adverse  credibility
      findings and then considering those in light of the  expert  evidence.
      I am satisfied that the Judge did exactly as he said she had done  and
      considered all of the evidence in the round before making findings.

  23. At paragraph 50, First-tier Tribunal Judge Rodger stated "having  read
      Dr  Cohen's  report  and  noting  that  the  Appellant  has  not  been
      consistent  about  treatment  that  he  received  or  made  any  prior
      reference to being injured  whilst  jumping  out  of  a  vehicle  when
      crossing the Sahara, I am not satisfied that I am able to rely upon on
      the opinion of Dr Cohen that the injuries suffered  by  the  Appellant
      were suffered as a result of the various stages of  adverse  treatment
      that he  alleges  to  have  been  subjected  to.   Dr  Cohen  has  not
      specifically addressed whether any of the other injuries, such as  the
      back or knee scars, could have been caused by falling out of a vehicle
      or address the inconsistency in his account about who  mistreated  him
      and where and about whether he had suffered a loss  of  consciousness.
      Whilst it is correct that he has not attributed all of  his  scars  to
      torture, I am not overall satisfied that he  has  not  fabricated  the
      attribution of the remaining scars and I  am  not  persuaded  that  Dr
      Cohen has fully considered whether any of these  injuries  could  have
      been caused by the accidental injury of  falling  out  of  a  vehicle.
      Whilst she states that the injury on the back scar injury is not usual
      for an accidental injury, there is no proper allowances of how and  in
      what circumstances the Appellant fell from a vehicle and whether  this
      could have caused the scarring to his back.  Overall, in circumstances
      where the Appellant has revealed that he was injured when jumping  out
      of a truck across a desert, I am not able to find that he  has  proved
      to the lower standard of proof, that any of his  other  injuries  were
      not suffered as a result of such accident or that they  were  suffered
      by  beatings  from  the  Ethiopian  authorities  or  from  trafficking
      experiences".

  24. However, the point made by Dr Cohen at paragraph 40 of her  report  on
      page 10 regarding the facial injuries was that these were "typical  of
      the beating described with repeated blows by a baton".  Dr Cohen noted
      that the Appellant also described a fall  when  he  was  arrested  and
      being beaten whilst in Libya with a stick, punches and kicks and  that
      whilst other forms of blunt trauma  injury  could  be  other  possible
      causes for these scars and  it  was  difficult  to  distinguish  their
      relatively likely cause on examination  findings,  such  that  it  was
      possible some were due to accidental causes  the  overall  number  and
      distribution in her opinion was extremely high for all of them  to  be
      due to an accidental cause - such that as the number of such  injuries
      increases, so the chances of  them  all  being  due  to  a  series  of
      accidents correspondingly decreased.

  25.  Indeed, it is noteworthy  that  Dr  Cohen  did  describe  the  facial
      scarring as being "typical" of being of injuries caused by a  repeated
      blow with a baton, which is one of the higher attributions  under  the
      Istanbul  protocol  and  higher  than   "highly   consistent".    When
      considering this evidence, the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  does  not
      appear to have taken account  of  the  fact  that  'typical'  is  more
      consistent than "highly consistent" and indeed in paragraph 52  states
      "the only scar highly  consistent  with  the  Appellant's  attribution
      relates to a scar on his abdomen when he says he  was  beaten  with  a
      stick in Libya".  The Judge has not seemingly fully taken  account  of
      the  fact  that  the  facial  scarring  was  said  to  be  typical  of
      attribution of baton blows, meant it  was  more  likely  than  "highly
      consistent".   It  appears  that  the  Judge  has  misinterpreted  the
      relevance of that attribution.

  26. Further, at paragraph 60, Dr  Cohen  has  stated  that  "however,  the
      injuries to his face would not have been sustained from forced  labour
      alone" whilst the Appellant was in Libya and at paragraph  62  of  her
      report went on to say that "my overall evaluation,  as  per  paragraph
      188 of the Istanbul Protocol, considering the large  number  of  scars
      given his age, their asymmetric distribution and the location of  some
      on parts of the body not usually injured accidentally,  is  that  they
      provide strong corroboration of the account of  torture  given".   She
      went on to state  that  there  was  no  evidence  of  exaggeration  or
      embellishment and that the  Appellant  had  readily  identified  those
      scars not attributed to torture or those for which he was not  certain
      or could not recall the  cause  and  that  the  history,  examination,
      findings and timings were all clinically congruent.  Dr Cohen had said
      that 8 scars on the face were typical  of  the  attribution  given  of
      baton blows, one scar was highly consistent with being beaten  with  a
      stick and 12 scars consistent with the attributions given and that she
      had considered other possible causes and had given her opinion  as  to
      where they were relatively likely or where relevant and possible to do
      so, as stated at paragraph 58 of her report.

  27. In such circumstances, given that Dr Cohen had clearly considered  the
      question of possible accidental injury causing  the  relevant  various
      scars, I do not consider that the Learned  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      has  adequately  explained  the  reason  for  rejecting   Dr   Cohen's
      attribution of the injuries as being caused by  beating,  rather  than
      accidental injury, in terms of falling off from the lorry,  as  stated
      by the First-tier Tribunal Judge at paragraph 50 of the decision.

  28. Further, in respect  of  the  Appellant's  PTSD,  although  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Rodger accepted and found that the Appellant  may  well
      be suffering from PTSD at paragraph 53 of the decision,  and  accepted
      that  traumatic  experiences  often  do  affect  recall,  memory   and
      concentration and can result in delayed or coherent reporting  of  any
      difficulties or experiences, the Judge went on to  state  that  having
      considered the "low level of  his  symptoms  and  on  considering  his
      account both individually and in the round, I am not  able  to  accept
      for the many inconsistencies in his account are  due  to  his  alleged
      experiences or mental health symptoms or age.  He has low level mental
      health symptoms and having considered this  and  his  account  in  the
      round, I do not accept that the discrepancy as  to  the  treatment  he
      received from the various agents on  his  journey  where  he  received
      injuries or beatings that this is explicable by any alleged trauma  he
      suffered or mental health problems or age".

  29.  However, as stated by Ms Harvey, the evidence from Dr  Cohen  was  in
      fact that "although his symptoms are not currently at  high  level  of
      frequency or severity, they do affect his ability to study and to take
      part in activities.  His coping strategy is to try to keep busy and to
      be with other people in order to avoid the intrusive memories  of  his
      past experiences as far as possible" and at paragraph 66 of her report
      and at paragraph 67 that "he shows the expected  response  to  extreme
      trauma within his social and  cultural  context  and  identifies  some
      fluctuation over time, with the improvement in the past  year.   There
      is no exaggeration of his symptoms.  I therefore find no indication of
      fabrication of the psychological condition".

  30.  Dr Cohen has not referred to his symptoms as being "low  level",  but
      simply at the time of her report  they  were  not  at  high  level  of
      frequency and severity, but had improved over the previous year.  Post-
      traumatic stress  disorder  is  often  characterised  as  being  mild,
      moderate or severe, and simply Dr Cohen indicating that they were  not
      at a high level when examined by her does not mean that  he  only  had
      low level mental health  symptoms,  as  indicated  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge, when the effects of them are still  said  to  be  that
      they affect his ability to study and to take part  in  activities  and
      that he was employing coping strategies to avoid intrusive memories of
      past experiences. This was despite the symptomatology having  improved
      over the previous year.

  31.  I  therefore  do  find  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge   has
      misinterpreted the evidence  regarding  the  level  of  symptomatology
      suffered by the Appellant in  respect  of  his  post-traumatic  stress
      disorder and the effect  that  it  was  having  on  him,  when  making
      findings regarding the inconsistencies  found  by  the  Judge  in  the
      Appellant's account.

  32. In respect of the second ground of appeal, conceded by Mr Tarlow,  the
      newspaper article supplied by the Secretary of State at the First-tier
      Tribunal hearing from the website African News confirmed  the  release
      of Mr Tsige together with 500 other prisoners was insufficient for the
      Judge to depart from the report of Mr Seddon,  regarding  the  adverse
      treatment of the Ethiopian authorities for those perceived to be  part
      of a terrorist organisation, of which Ginbot 7  is  classed  as  being
      one.  Mr Tsige as indicated by Ms Harvey was a dual national  citizen,
      for whom the British UK authorities had been actively campaigning  for
      his release.

  33. Further, although there was reference within that newspaper article to
      500 other people being released, there  is  no  evidence  within  that
      newspaper article to suggest that they were  in  fact  also  Ginbot  7
      members, as found by the Judge, which  led  her  to  depart  from  the
      report of Mr Seddon and the country guidance.

  34. In summary, the Judge's errors in her consideration and  treatment  of
      the expert report of Dr  Cohen,  as  stated  above,  linked  with  the
      Judge's error in relying upon the newspaper report to depart from  the
      evidence given by Mr Seddon and the country guidance in the case of MB
      (OLF and MTA - Risk) Ethiopia  UKIAT  00030  in  that  it  relates  to
      members or perceived members of a terrorist organisation, do amount to
      material errors of law. It cannot be said that if those had  not  been
      made, that the Judge might not have reached  a  different  conclusion.
      The conclusion would not necessarily have been the  same  irrespective
      of those errors. I therefore find  that  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Rodger should be set aside  in  its  entirety  with  no
      preserved findings of fact and the matter remitted back to the  First-
      tier  Tribunal  for  re-hearing  before  a   differently   constituted
      Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Rodger  does  contain  material
errors of law and is set aside.

The Appellant is granted anonymity, the  previous  Tribunal  having  granted
anonymity to him, and it being appropriate given the nature  of  his  asylum
claim.  Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  Court  directs  otherwise,  the
Appellant is granted  anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him or  any  member  of  his  family.   This
direction applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of Court proceedings.

Signed

[pic]
District Judge McGinty
Sitting as a Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge     Dated 22nd January 2019
