
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00351/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice,    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|London                               |                                     |
|On 13 January 2020                   |On 21 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                     M I
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  As  this  is  an
appeal on protection grounds, it is  appropriate  to  continue  that  order.
Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify  him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This  direction
applies, amongst others, to  both  parties.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND

The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
Shanahan promulgated on 24 July 2019 ("the Decision") dismissing his appeal
against the Respondent's decision dated 9 January 2019, refusing the
Appellant's protection and human rights claims.

The Appellant is a national of Iran.   He arrived in the UK on 10 November
2008 as an unaccompanied minor aged sixteen years.  His asylum claim was
refused but he was granted discretionary leave due to his age.  He then
made an application for further leave on 23 January 2010 which was again
refused.  His appeal was dismissed.  Permission to appeal was granted but
on re-making his appeal was once again dismissed including on protection
grounds.

The Appellant made further submissions in January 2013, September 2014 and
February 2018.  He was convicted on 23 March 2018 of offences involving the
supply of Class A and Class B drugs.  He was sentenced to 42 months in
prison.  The Respondent then made a deportation order against the Appellant
which led to the decisions to refuse his protection and human rights claims
which decisions are under appeal on this occasion.  The Respondent has also
served a certificate under Section 72 Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
Act 2002 ("the Section 72 certificate").

Judge Shanahan began by considering the Section 72 certificate as she was
obliged to do.  She upheld the certificate for reasons given at [18] to
[39] of the Decision.  Having done so, she was bound to dismiss the asylum
claim.  Nonetheless, she went on to consider it.  It remained relevant
whether the Appellant would be at risk on return because, even if excluded
from the Refugee Convention, he could still claim protection against
removal under Articles 2 and 3 ECHR if he made out his case as to risk.  In
that regard, the Judge took as her starting point the previous Tribunal
findings as she was obliged to do.  Having considered those findings and
the further evidence at [30] to [35] of the Decision, the Judge rejected
the protection claim.

The Appellant also claims to be in a relationship with [SM] who is a
British citizen and is said to suffer from various medical conditions.  The
Judge accepted that the Appellant was in a relationship with [SM] ([48]).
I observe that [SM] did not attend the hearing in support of the Appellant.
 Although the Judge considered that it would be unduly harsh for [SM] to
relocate to Iran with the Appellant for reasons given at [51] of the
Decision, she concluded that it would not be unduly harsh for [SM] to
remain in the UK without the Appellant ([53] of the Decision).

The Judge therefore dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

The Appellant was represented in his appeal up to the time when permission
to appeal was granted by Turpin & Miller LLP.  The grounds seeking
permission to appeal were drafted by a barrister.  Those grounds appear in
a skeleton argument of Mr Jonathan Holt dated 6 August 2019.  The grounds
are confined to a challenge to the Article 8 findings.  The first ground is
that the Judge failed to make a finding whether [SM] suffered from the
medical conditions claimed.  The Second takes issue with the finding at
[53] of the Decision that "there is no sufficient medical evidence about
her" in the absence of any challenge by the Respondent to the genuineness
of those health conditions and where there was a witness statement from
[SM] herself.  It is also said that the Judge has failed to provide reasons
for finding an insufficiency of evidence. The finding at [53] of the
Decision is also the basis for the third ground, that the Judge acted
unfairly by raising the adequacy of the evidence on this matter of his own
volition, in circumstances where the Respondent did not dispute the
evidence.   There was no challenge to the Judge's dismissal of the
protection claim.

Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Swaney on 15
August 2019 in the following terms so far as relevant:

         "... 2.  The grounds assert that the Judge erred in failing to make
         a finding as to whether or not the appellant's partner suffers from
         specific medical conditions as claimed.  The grounds also assert
         that the judge erred by failing to put a lack of evidence about his
         partner's conditions to the appellant at the hearing which amounts
         to unfairness, particularly because the respondent did not dispute
         the conditions.  It is asserted that these errors materially
         affected the judge's findings in relation to whether the effect of
         the decision to deport the appellant would be unduly harsh on the
         appellant's partner.

         3.   The judge concludes that it would not be unduly harsh for the
         appellant's partner to remain in the United Kingdom with her
         parents despite finding that there was insufficient medical
         evidence and no evidence from her parents.  It does not appear from
         the record of proceedings that this was put to the appellant during
         the hearing.  This is material to the question of whether it would
         be unduly harsh for the appellant's partner to remain in the United
         Kingdom without him."

The Respondent filed a Rule 24 response on 6 September 2019 which reads as
follows (so far as relevant):

         "... 3.  This is an appeal against a deport decision, there has
         been no challenge against the dismissal of asylum, HP, Article 2
         and 3.  The grounds focus on the appellant's claimed relationship.
         It is clear from the refusal letter that the relationship is not
         accepted.  Also, under the consideration of the medical conditions
         in the refusal letter the focus is on the appellant and not his
         claimed partner.  The grounds are misconceived and the Judge made
         findings open to be made."

The matter comes before me to assess whether the Decision does disclose an
error of law and to re-make the Decision or remit to the First-tier
Tribunal for re-hearing.

ADJOURNMENTS

The error of law hearing was originally listed on 7 October 2019.  On 26
September 2019, the Tribunal received an e mail from a Ms Sally Powell at
HMP Huntercombe.  She indicated that the Appellant wished to seek an
adjournment.  He did so because he had been informed by Turpin & Miller on
24 September 2019 that they could no longer act for him.   There is also a
handwritten letter from the Appellant dated 26 September 2019 requesting an
adjournment on the basis that Turpin & Miller had told him that they could
not act because of "Legal Aid issue".

I granted that adjournment request in the following terms:

         "In light of the circumstances set out in the e mail from Sally
         Powell (that the Appellant's current legal representatives have
         stated that they are unable to continue to represent him) the
         application to adjourn the hearing listed on 7 October 2019 is
         granted.  I accept that there is little time available for the
         Appellant to seek alternative legal representation.  The e mail
         does not specify the length of adjournment sought and I am not
         prepared to allow an open-ended extension so I am adjourning for a
         period of 6 weeks.  The hearing will be relisted on the first
         available date after Monday 11 November 2019."

As it did not appear from the file that the Tribunal had been notified by
Turpin & Miller that they had ceased to act, I directed the office to send
this decision also to Turpin & Miller seeking that confirmation.  By e mail
dated 27 September 2019, Mr Tom Giles, a solicitor with Turpin & Miller LLP
who had been representing the Appellant confirmed that the firm was no
longer able to act for the Appellant.  He indicated that the firm had
already written to the Tribunal to provide the necessary confirmation.
Having checked the file, there is an e mail to that effect from Mr Giles
also dated 20 September 2019.

At the hearing before me, the Appellant appeared in person.  An interpreter
was present to assist him as he had not instructed any other representative
and so, according to the Tribunal's records, he was representing himself.
I ascertained that the Appellant and the interpreter were able to
understand each other.

The Appellant at that point said that he was not ready to proceed.  He had
expected solicitors/a barrister to be there to represent him.  He had been
told that they would be.  He was unable to name the firm of solicitors, but
his solicitor's name was "Tom".  He then said it was the same solicitor as
previously ie Turpin & Miller LLP.  He said he had sent them notice of the
hearing on 13 January and he had been told that they would attend.  He did
not have any letter to that effect.  He had tried to speak to "Tom" but was
told that he was working at home on the day he phoned.  He spoke to a lady
on reception who said that the Appellant might not need to attend the
hearing.

As a result of that submission, I caused enquiries to be made of Turpin &
Miller.  The court usher was able to speak directly to Tom Giles.  He
confirmed that he had previously represented the Appellant but also
confirmed that the firm was no longer able to represent him. He confirmed
that the Appellant had sent him a copy of the notice of hearing but that he
had told the Appellant that he could not assist and would not attend.

The Appellant suggested that I should treat Mr Giles' evidence with
circumspection.  He went so far as to say that "Tom" was lying.  I decline
to do so.  As a solicitor and an officer of the court, Mr Giles would be
well aware that he must not mislead the Tribunal.  I am satisfied that he
was telling the truth about the information he gave to the Appellant.  I am
satisfied that he told the Appellant he could not assist further and would
not be attending.  It may be that the Appellant misunderstood.  However, he
could produce no evidence that he had been told by Turpin & Miller that
they would be representing him at the hearing and no other firm had been
instructed.

The Appellant did not formally apply for an adjournment, but I considered
whether to proceed on the basis that he was asking for one.  Mr Kotas
indicated the Respondent's objection to a further adjournment.  The
Appellant had three months since the previous adjournment to find
alternative representation and had not done so.  I note also that the
notice of hearing on this occasion was sent on 10 December 2019 and the
Appellant had not made an application to adjourn.  As Mr Kotas also pointed
out, the obtaining of continued representation or alternative
representation for any further hearing rested on the obtaining of public
funding.  The lack of such funding was the reason given by the Appellant
for Turpin & Miller's discontinuance of representation.  As such, it was
highly speculative that any different situation would be in place for any
later hearing if I had been minded to adjourn.  It would not therefore be
in the interests of justice to adjourn and it would be disproportionate to
adjourn for a second time, particularly since the hearing at this stage
concerned whether there was an error of law in the Decision and did not
require evidence.

Having considered what was said by Mr Kotas and Mr Giles, I indicated that
I intended to proceed and that I was satisfied that it was in the interests
of justice to do so.  This would have been the second adjournment.  There
was no evidence that the Appellant had made any attempt to secure
alternative representation nor that there was any prospect of him obtaining
it if I were to adjourn.  The matter could not be allowed to drag on
indefinitely.  Accordingly, I confirmed that I intended to proceed.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

As the Appellant was in person, I allowed Mr Kotas to make submissions
first so that the Appellant was aware of the Respondent's position and
could reply to it.  The Appellant did not confine himself in reply to the
submissions made by Mr Kotas or the grounds as pleaded, but I allowed him
to say what he wished to say.  In effect, he repeated the substance of his
case on all grounds.  However, since the grounds and permission grant are
confined to the Article 8 claim, I similarly consider only that aspect when
determining whether there is an error of law in the Decision.  Although the
Appellant was in person at the hearing before me, the grounds were pleaded
by a barrister on instruction by a firm of experienced immigration
practitioners and I am satisfied that, if they considered there were any
arguable grounds of challenge to the Judge's findings in relation to the
Section 72 certificate or the protection claim more generally, they would
have raised them.

I deal first with [SM]'s medical conditions.  The Appellant said that she
has nine different medical conditions.  Her circumstances are set out in
her witness statement dated 21 June 2019.  As I have already noted, she did
not attend the hearing and therefore the Judge's consideration of her
evidence was confined to what is said in the statement ([47] of the
Decision).   As to her medical conditions and reliance on the Appellant,
she says this:

         "... 6.  At the hospital I was diagnosed with a bipolar disorder,
         an emotional personality disorder, body dysmorphia, depression and
         anxiety.  I still deal with all this issues to this day.

         7.   Because of my mental health issues I was only able to finish
         school and I was never able to work.  I am currently on universal
         credit.  I lived with my parents until I meet [MI] and moved in
         with him.

         8.   I met [MI] through my sister almost 3 years ago, and we have
         been together ever since.  We developed a relationship very fast
         and shortly after we met, I moved in with him.

         9.   I relied on [MI] a lot, as he was able to take care of me.
         [MI] would make sure that I was taking my medication and he would
         help me to deal with things when I was struggling.  After being
         together for a while I found out that I was pregnant.

         10.  [MI]'s arrest was very difficult for me.  I was not able to
         live by myself, so I moved back with my parents.  I was also very
         scared about having to go through the pregnancy and having the baby
         alone so I decided to have an abortion.

         11.  Even though [MI] is in prison, our relationship is stronger
         than ever.  We talk to each other every day over the phone and I
         send a lot of letters to him.  Because of my mental health issues I
         was only able to visit [MI] in prison twice, as it is very hard for
         me to travel, due to my mental issues.

         12.  [MI] knows that he made a mistake and he learned his lesson.
         I know that he will never make a mistake like that again and now he
         only wants to be able to continue with his life and to be able to
         build a better future for us.

         13.  I am already making plans for when [MI] is released.  We are
         planning to move together and we plan to build a family together.

         14.  I will not be able to cope if [MI] is deported from the UK.
         It will be better to kill myself than having to live here without
         him.  [MI] is my whole life and I ask you to please let him stay."

The Judge dealt with [SM]'s evidence at [43] to [46] of the Decision as
follows:

         "43. I have therefore considered his relationship with [SM].  [SM]
         is a British citizen, as evidenced by her passport, born on 10th
         July 1993 and is now therefore 26 years old.  She and the Appellant
         met in 2017, a relationship developed and they moved in together.

         44.  [SM] in her witness statement explains that she has struggled
         with mental health problems from a young age.  She was diagnosed
         with autism when she was 15 years old.  At the age of 20 she became
         pregnant but did not find out until she was 6 months into the
         pregnancy.  She decided to have the child and then realising that
         she could not care for him alone she gave him up for adoption.  She
         made this decision because of her mental health issues and although
         it was very hard for her she believed it was the best option for
         the child.  This led to a bout of depression and an attempt at
         suicide.  She was hospitalised and diagnosed with bipolar disorder,
         emotional personality disorder, body dysmorphia, depression and
         anxiety.

         45.  [SM] explains that she has relied on the Appellant to take
         care of her.  He would make sure she took her medication and he
         would help her deal with things when she was struggling.  His
         arrest was difficult for her because she was not able to live alone
         so she moved back in with her parents.  She had already discovered
         that she was pregnant and was fearful of having to go through the
         pregnancy and have the baby alone.  She decided therefore to have
         an abortion.

         46.  She states that even though the Appellant is in prison their
         relationship is stronger than ever.  They talk to each other every
         day by telephone and she sends him lots of letters.  She explains
         that she has only visited him twice because of her mental health
         and difficulties travelling.  She states that he knows he has made
         a mistake and he has learned his lesson.  He will never make a
         mistake like this again and wants to be with her and build a future
         together.  She states that she will not be able to cope if he is
         deported and it would be better to kill herself than have a life
         without him."

Having considered that evidence and the letters sent by [SM] to the
Appellant whilst he was detained, the Judge accepted that they are in a
relationship ([48]).  However, she also noted that, on [SM]'s own evidence,
they had seen each other only twice in the period of sixteen months before
the hearing.  The Appellant was remanded on 23 March 2018 and from that
point, the relationship had been conducted at a distance.

The Judge did not dispute the medical evidence.  Although she noted at [51]
of the Decision that there was "no specific medical evidence" about [SM]'s
conditions, nonetheless it was a factor which the Judge there took into
account when finding it would be unduly harsh for [SM] to go to Iran with
the Appellant.

That was however not the end of the matter.  The Judge had to consider not
only whether it was unduly harsh for [SM] to go to Iran with the Appellant
but whether it would be unduly harsh for her to stay in the UK whilst he
returned to his home country.  Having properly directed herself in
accordance with relevant case-law, the Judge made her findings about this
at [53] of the Decision as follows:

         "In this regard I take into account that she lived with her parents
         before she lived with the Appellant and has now returned to live
         with them.  As I have said there is no sufficient medical evidence
         about her conditions and there is no sufficient evidence from her
         parents but given she lived with them before and chose to return to
         live with them when the Appellant was imprisoned I conclude that
         they are able to care for her and she is safe and secure at home.
         [SM] will continue to benefit from any medical treatment and
         involvement with mental health professionals to monitor and manage
         her conditions as occurred before she entered into the relationship
         with the Appellant.  I also take into account that the contact they
         have had with each other is almost entirely by telephone and
         letters which they could continue whether or not the Appellant is
         deported."

I accept that the Judge does there point to the insufficiency of evidence
about [SM]'s medical conditions, care and support.  As a matter of fact,
the Judge was right to point to the lack of evidence about those issues.
The only evidence was from [SM] herself.  There was no medical report or
other independent evidence.  I also repeat the point I made earlier that
the Appellant was at this stage of the appeal represented by experienced
immigration practitioners who were evidently responsible for the
preparation of [SM]'s statement.  I have no doubt that if they considered
there was further evidence available which could be adduced, they would
have presented it.  In any event, however, it is clear from what follows at
[53] that the Judge proceeded on the basis that everything which [SM] said
about her medical conditions and circumstances was true.  The finding that
it would not be unduly harsh for her to remain in the UK is premised on her
having alternative support and medical care which has kept her safe from a
young age (she refers in her statement to having mental health problems
since she was very young).

The Appellant told me in his reply that [SM] does not have a father and
does not have a good relationship with her mother and brother with whom she
lives.  None of that emerges from her statement which was made barely six
months ago.  She speaks of parents in the plural and indeed siblings in the
plural.  She says nothing about any difficulties with her family
relationships.  It appears from her statement that her family has supported
her during difficult times in the past.  The Judge could only consider the
case put to her on the evidence as presented.

Mr Kotas made two further points about the Article 8 claim.  First, he said
that, strictly speaking, [SM] did not fall within the definition of
"partner" within Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules.  I assume that is
because she had not cohabited with the Appellant for two years.  She says
that they had been together for three years when she made her statement in
June 2019 which would date the relationship back to June 2016.  The
Appellant has been in custody since March 2018.  Technically, therefore Mr
Kotas is right to say that the Judge should not have gone on to consider
whether the effect of the Appellant's deportation would be unduly harsh for
[SM].  However, any error in that regard is in the Appellant's favour and
it is not necessary for me to deal with it.

Mr Kotas also very fairly submitted that there might be an error in the
Judge's failure to go on to consider the relationship as part of the
Article 8 claim on a wider basis. However, he submitted, and I accept that
if the Judge had done so, it could not have made any difference.  Nor do I
accept in any event that there is any error in that regard.  The Judge has
dealt with the cumulative effect of the Article 8 claim at [58] to [74] of
the Decision.  She there considers the Appellant's private life and his
mental health issues when considering whether there are very compelling
circumstances outside the two exceptions in Section 117C of the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.    It is implicit in what is
said at the start of that section (at [58]) that the Judge is there
encompassing the finding which she has already made that the impact on [SM]
would not be unduly harsh.  There was no need for her to go further.   The
grounds do not challenge that part of the Decision.

CONCLUSION

For the foregoing reasons, I am satisfied that the grounds do not disclose
any material error of law in the Decision.  I therefore uphold the Decision
with the consequence that the Appellant's appeal remains dismissed.

Notice of Decision

I am satisfied that there is no material error of law in the decision of
First-tier Tribunal Judge Shanahan promulgated on 24 July 2019.  I
therefore uphold that decision with the consequence that the Appellant's
appeal remains dismissed.


Signed   [pic]             Date: 16 January 2020

 Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
