
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00092/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 October 2019                   |On 31 October 2019                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     M S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Blake, counsel instructed by York Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Abebrese, promulgated on 16  August  2019.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford on 18 September 2019.



Anonymity

 2. No direction was made previously,  however  as  this  is  a  protection
    matter involving a potentially vulnerable appellant, such  a  direction
    is set out below.

Background

 3. On 21 June 2018, the appellant arrived in the United Kingdom by air and
    applied for asylum.  That claim was based on his fear of persecution in
    Sri Lanka as a person suspected of assisting the Liberation  Tigers  of
    Tamil Eelam (LTTE). In a letter dated 20 December 2018,  the  Secretary
    of State refused that claim on credibility grounds, concluding that the
    appellant would be at risk on return  to  Sri  Lanka.  The  appellant's
    health issues were considered however, it was  not  accepted  that  his
    removal from the UK reached the high threshold of  severity  to  breach
    Article 3 ECHR.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The judge found that the appellant had not provided a credible  account
    of assisting the LTTE or of coming to the adverse attention of the  Sri
    Lankan authorities. His claims under Articles 2,  3  and  8  ECHR  were
    similarly dismissed.

The grounds of appeal

 5. The  grounds  of  appeal  included  the  following  criticisms  of  the
    decision:-

    -    there had  been  a  failure  to  consider  whether  to  treat  the
    appellant as a vulnerable  witness  on  mental  health  grounds  or  to
    consider whether his mental state had an impact on his ability to  give
    a coherent, consistent account. There was no reference in the  decision
    to the medical evidence submitted or the Article 3 arguments made;

    -    the credibility assessment was based upon an error of  fact,  that
    being the judge's finding that the appellant had been convicted of  two
    offences and had travelled through six checkpoints, which was  a  claim
    the appellant had not made;

    -    there was reliance on an out of date Country Guidance case;

    -    the judge erred in requiring corroboration;

    -    there had been a failure  to  consider  the  documentary  evidence
    provided by the appellant;

    -    there was a failure to give reasons for rejecting the  appellant's
    account;

    -    there had been a misunderstanding of the basis of the  appellant's
    case;

    -    the judge reached inconsistent conclusions regarding  whether  the
    appellant was arrested;

    -    the judge erred  in  failing  to  consider  the  medical  evidence
    relating to scarring;

 6. Permission to appeal was granted on all grounds, albeit the  vulnerable
    witness issue was described as not arguable.

 7. The respondent did not file a Rule 24 response.

The hearing

 8. Mr Tarlow immediately stated that the errors of law were made  out  and
    his view was that the matter had  to  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. I indicated that this was also my initial view. Mr Blake said
    it was  difficult  to  know  where  to  begin  but  given  Mr  Tarlow's
    concession he only wished to emphasise  one  matter.   The  psychiatric
    report set out how vulnerable the appellant was  and  the  effect  that
    giving evidence would have on him, however the judge had  relied  on  a
    clear typographical error indicating that the  appellant  was  able  to
    give evidence, which should have  read  that  he  was  unable  to  give
    evidence.

 9. At the end of the hearing, I announced that I agreed with  the  parties
    that the First-tier Tribunal judge made the series of errors  described
    in the grounds and that the decision was set aside in its entirety.

Decision on error of law

10. There was a plethora of errors within the judge's decision and  I  will
    therefore highlight just a few areas.

11. The psychiatric report of Dr Zapata gave  a  detailed  account  of  the
    appellant's mental state and the effect of this  upon  his  ability  to
    give evidence. In particular, it was said that the appellant was likely
    to find the hearing and being cross-examined upsetting. Furthermore, Dr
    Zapata was of the view that the appellant  would  have  been  suffering
    from PTSD at the time of his screening and asylum interviews  and  that
    this had an impact upon the information he provided. Neither  of  these
    aspects were taken into consideration by the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    nor was the appellant treated as a vulnerable  witness.  Indeed,  there
    was no reference to this report at all in the decision and reasons.

12. The appellant relied upon a medical report  by  Dr  Izqierdo-Martin  in
    which it was said that some areas of scarring were "highly  consistent"
    with his account of being tortured and that the scars were unlikely  to
    have been self-inflicted or have an  alternative  cause.  At  [21]  the
    judge summarises those findings  in  the  following  way,  "the  report
    states the injuries could have been caused in the manner stated by  the
    appellant but also claims that the  injuries  could  have  occurred  in
    alternative manner." The judge's consideration of  the  medical  report
    does not reflect the medical opinion expressed and nor does  the  judge
    indicate what weight he attached to the report.

13. The judge made a serious mistake of fact at [27], where he  found  that
    the appellant had been convicted of two offences. This  was  never  the
    appellant's claim. This error was  particularly  material  because  the
    judge went onto make a negative credibility finding in relation to  the
    appellant's  ability  to  leave  Sri  Lanka  as  a  person   with   two
    convictions.

14. At [30], the judge erred in that he relied  upon  the  decision  in  PT
    (Risk of bribery-release) Sri Lanka [2002]  UKIAT  03444  in  order  to
    conclude that the appellant was released from detention on payment of a
    bribe because he was no longer of interest rather than considering  the
    Country Guidance on this issue, in GJ.

15. The judge found at [32] that the appellant did not provide evidence  in
    support of his claimed activities in Sri Lanka or sur place  activities
    in the United Kingdom and immediately concludes, "I  do  not  find  the
    appellant to be credible in relation  to  the  above  activities.".  To
    require corroboration amounted to a clear misdirection. In  any  event,
    the appellant provided 30-pages of  supporting  evidence  in  his  main
    appeal bundle regarding these aspects of his case, to which  the  judge
    made no reference. This amounts to a further material error of law.

16. In view of the above-mentioned errors, the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is unsafe and is set aside in its entirety. While  mindful  of
    statement 7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statements  of  10
    February 2010, it is the case that the appellant has yet to have a fair
    or adequate consideration  of  his  asylum  appeal  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and it would be unfair to deprive him of such consideration. I
    therefore remit the appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
    hearing, with no findings preserved.



Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Hatton Cross, with a time estimate of 3 hours by any judge except  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Abebrese



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him  or
any member of their family.  This direction applies both  to  the  appellant
and to the respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
