
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00809/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 July 2019                      |On 7 August 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

                                Mr Numan [C]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Franco of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1.       The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on  8  May  1982
       and appealed against the decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  to
       refuse his claim for  asylum  and  humanitarian  protection  in  his
       decision dated 14 January 2019.  Judge V C Dean  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal dismissed the appellant's appeal in a decision dated 20 May
       2019.


    2.       Permission to appeal was granted to the  appellant  by  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchison on 19 June 2019 stating that  it
       is arguable that the judge erred in  law  whilst  finding  that  the
       appellant's cousin, Mr [A], was a credible  witness  by  failing  to
       take into account his  confirmation  of  the  appellant's  political
       activities  and  failing  to   give   adequate   reasons   for   why
       documentation which was lodged to show that the appellant was  given
       a four year prison sentence which was accepted by the judge was  not
       politically motivated.

    3.       At the hearing, after  Mr  Franco  made  his  submissions,  Mr
       Bramble  very  fairly  accepted  that  the  appeal   needs   to   be
       reconsidered given some of the issues in the decision and  I  agree.
       The judge found that the appellant was a low-level member of the BNP
       and had been arrested by the Awami League authorities, prosecuted in
       absentia and  sentenced  to  four  years'  imprisonment.  The  judge
       accepted the documents provided by the appellant that  he  had  been
       sentenced to four years' imprisonment.

    4.       At paragraph 28 the judge found  the  documents  were  genuine
       because the respondent had not  suggested  that  the  documents  are
       forgeries or fakes.  It is trite law documents are to be  considered
       in line with the principles set out in Tanveer Ahmed.


Notice of Decision

I therefore find that there is a material error of law and I set  aside  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal and remit it to the First-tier  Tribunal
for hearing de novo and to be placed before any  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
other than Judge V C Dean.

No findings are preserved and all matters must be considered afresh.

I allow the appeal to that limited extent.
No anonymity direction is made


Signed                                  Date 29th day of July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana



