
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00822/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 1st August 2016                        |On 15th August 2016              |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between

                                    [I S]
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs N Kham, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. Before the Upper Tribunal the Secretary of State becomes the appellant.
     However, for the avoidance of confusion and to be consistent, I  shall
    refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

Background

 2. On 23 May 2016 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Lever  gave  permission
    to the respondent to appeal against the decision of Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Majid in which he allowed the appeal against the decision
    of the respondent to  refuse  asylum,  humanitarian  and  human  rights
    protection to the appellant, a female citizen of Pakistan.

Error on a Point of Law

 3. Judge Lever gave permission to the respondent stating that the  grounds
    asserted that the Judge erred in imposing his own views  in  the  case,
    failed to consider country material, did not engage  with  the  refusal
    letter and failed to properly scrutinise  the  evidence.  It  was  also
    unclear whether the appeal was allowed on asylum grounds or  under  the
    Immigration Rules.

 4. Permission was granted because the grounds had merely indicated "a part
    of the problems  and  error  that  affect  this  decision  which  makes
    uncomfortable reading".

 5. At the hearing before me both representatives agreed that the  decision
    of Judge Majid was wholly inadequate as contended in  the  grounds  and
    summarised in the permission.  After considering the matter for  a  few
    moments I announced that I was satisfied that  the  decision  contained
    significant errors of points of law and said  that  it  should  be  set
    aside and submitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh.

 6. Apart from a summary  of  some  of  the  evidence  in  the  appellant's
    statement of 22 April 2016, the Judge fails  to  engage  properly  with
    either the claim made or the respondent's reasons for rejecting it.  No
    cogent reasons are given for accepting the appellant's claims  and  the
    conclusions are based, at least in  part,  on  the  Judge's  own  views
    without  reference  to  objective  material.   Conflicts  of   evidence
    highlighted in the refusal have not been considered at all leaving  the
    respondent in ignorance of the actual reason for allowing the appeal.

 7. The appeal must be heard afresh by the First-tier Tribunal.  This fully
    accords with the Practice Statement of the Senior President of Tribunal
    of 25 September 2012 at Paragraph 7.2.

DIRECTIONS

 8. The appeal is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  (IAC)  sitting  at
    Taylor House.

 9. The remitted hearing should not  be  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Majid.

10. The hearing shall take place on a date to be specified by the  Resident
    Judge and in accordance with any further directions that may  be  given
    by the First-tier Tribunal for the hearing of the appeal.

11. An Urdu interpreter will be required for the hearing.

Anonymity

12. Anonymity was not requested  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  nor  was  an
    anonymity direction made by the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed                              Date
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt
