
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00348/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 November 2018                            |On 28 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Mr K N M S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Dickson


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent, to whom I shall refer as the Claimant, is a national of
    Iran born on 30 April 1984.  He  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    claimed asylum on 3 December 2015.  The basis of his claim  essentially
    was that he was born in the Kurdish area of  Iran,  his  father  was  a
    supporter of the Democratic Party and once this was discovered  by  the
    authorities the family left Iran and went to live in Iraq in 2001.  His
    parents never returned to Iran and have both  subsequently  died.   The
    Claimant, shortly before coming to the United Kingdom, volunteered  and
    fought with the PUK Peshmerga against ISIS for six months  but  decided
    after that time that he did not wish to do so anymore and thus he  left
    Iraq.  The basis of his claim however was that he would be at  risk  on
    return  due  to  his  father's  former  involvement  with  the  Kurdish
    Democratic Party as a result  of  which  he  would  be  questioned  and
    arrested on return.  This application was refused in a  decision  dated
    18 December 2017.

 2. The Claimant appealed against this decision and his appeal came  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Thomas for hearing on 6 February 2018.  In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated on 20 March 2018 Judge Thomas  allowed
    the appeal, not on the basis that the Claimant would be at  risk  based
    on  his  father's  work  for  the  KDPI,  but  because  of  his  former
    involvement as a fighter with the PUK Peshmerga in Iraq.

 3. Permission to appeal was sought, in time, by the Secretary of State  on
    the basis that the judge had erred materially in law  in  allowing  the
    appeal on the basis of the Claimant's Kurdish political  activity  when
    this was activity in Iraq and it was  not  explained  why  this  should
    attract the adverse attention of the  Iranian  authorities  or  how  it
    would come to their attention.  The grounds submitted:

         "1.  The judge finds that the Appellant is likely to be asked about
             his whereabouts during his absence from Iran and at  paragraph
             23 that he would disclose his involvement with  the  Peshmerga
             in Iraq.  It is not explained why the  Appellant  should  feel
             the need to make such disclosure.  This is not  an  HJ  (Iran)
             situation where  the  Appellant  should  not  be  expected  to
             conceal his faith.

         2.   It is noted that the Appellant himself did  not  rely  on  his
             involvement with the Peshmerga as the  basis  for  his  asylum
             claim (paragraph 10).  He relied on other matters  related  to
             his father which the judge rejects".

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Birrell
    in a decision dated 9 April 2018 on the basis that:

         "it is arguable that the judge has failed to adequately explain why
         fighting for the Peshmerga would put the Appellant  at  risk  given
         this was not the basis of the claim and the judge has not  referred
         to any background material that supports this view".

    Hearing

 5. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Mr  Mills  did  not  seek  to
    place great weight on the submission as to how the Iranian  authorities
    would become aware of  the  Claimant's  activities  fighting  with  the
    Peshmerga in light of  HJ  (Iran)  and  the  subsequent  jurisprudence.
    However, he  sought  to  focus  on  the  question  that,  even  if  the
    authorities in Iran were aware  of  the  Claimant's  former  activities
    fighting for the Peshmerga against ISIS in Iraq, why this  would  cause
    him to be at risk of persecution or Article 3 mistreatment on return to
    Iran.  Mr Mills submitted that this was not the basis of the  claim  as
    put forward by the  Claimant,  which  was  that  his  father  had  been
    involved with the KDPI and as a consequence the family had left Iran to
    live in Iraq in 2001.  Mr Mills submitted the Claimant in  his  witness
    statement had not focused on his former  fighting  for  the  Peshmerga.
    Whilst  he  accepted  that  this  did  not  preclude  the  judge   from
    considering the point if the background evidence supported it and  good
    reasons were given, he submitted that this was not the case.

 6. The judge held as follows at [16]:

         "The Respondent acknowledged there could be a tacit fear because he
         had fought with the  Peshmerga.   If  apprehended  the  authorities
         would be able to find his identity and that would put him at  risk.
         He has been out of the country  for  seventeen  years  which  is  a
         further risk factor".

    Mr Mills objected to this on the basis that this was not a fair summary
    of the Respondent's position, however [16] is in fact simply  a  record
    of the submission made on behalf of the Claimant by his representative.
    At [22] Mr Mills acknowledged that the judge had found  the  Claimant's
    evidence that he had fought with  the  PUK  Peshmerga  in  Iraq  to  be
    plausible and credible but took issue with the judge's  conclusions  at
    [23].  He submitted that the crux of the Secretary of State's challenge
    is that the judge  was  comparing  apples  with  oranges.   Whilst  the
    Claimant is a Kurd and has been involved with the Peshmerga in Iraq, it
    does not follow he will be perceived in the same way as  a  politically
    active Iranian Kurd.  This  is  because  the  Iranian  state  had  been
    fighting ISIS themselves so they shared a common enemy.   Consequently,
    there is no reason why he will be deemed to be an enemy of the  Iranian
    regime.  He submitted that  the  judge  had  failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons for why six months' fighting with the Peshmerga would  put  him
    at risk on return and in so doing made a material error of law.

 7. Mr Dickson on behalf of the Claimant  sought  to  rely  on  a  Rule  24
    response which I will summarise as follows: the judge had not erred  in
    law in that the judge's reasoning as to the risk  to  the  Claimant  on
    return is amply supported by the sources cited at [17] of the decision,
    in particular the country guidance case of SSH and  HR  (illegal  exit:
    failed asylum seeker) Iran CG [2016] UKUT 0308 at 23  where  the  Upper
    Tribunal found:

         "If there are any particular concerns arising from  their  previous
         activities either in Iran or in the  United  Kingdom  or  whichever
         country they are returned from, then  there  would  be  a  risk  of
         further questioning, detention  and  potential  ill-treatment.   In
         this regard it is relevant to return to Dr Kakhki's evidence in re-
         examination where he said the treatment they  would  receive  would
         depend on their individual case".

    The  Tribunal  also  found  at  [34]  that  Kurdish  ethnicity  is  "an
    exacerbating factor for a returnee otherwise of interest".

 8. Reference was also made to the  Home  Office  Country  Information  and
    Guidance Note concerning Iran: Kurds and Kurdish political groups  July
    2016 at 3.1.2 which describes that those involved in Kurdish  political
    groups are  at  risk  of  arbitrary  arrest,  prolonged  detention  and
    physical abuse.

 9. It was submitted that the Peshmerga are a Kurdish  fighting  force  and
    involvement with them would not be tolerated.  It was submitted that it
    is clear from SSH and HR (op cit)  at  [7]  that  a  person  cannot  be
    expected to lie in order to avoid a former status being  likely  to  be
    revealed and that this is consistent with the approach set  out  in  HJ
    (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31 at 82 and RT (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC 38 at 42.

10. In relation to the second ground of appeal, it was submitted  that  the
    Claimant's case was put on the basis of his Kurdish ethnicity and  fear
    of arrest on return and that given that evidence as to  being  part  of
    the Peshmerga was before the judge, it was incumbent upon the judge  to
    evaluate on the basis of this evidence whether the  claimant  fell  for
    consideration within the Refugee Convention and Article 3 of the  ECHR.



11. The Upper Tribunal were urged to  uphold  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Thomas.

12. Mr Dickson in addition sought to rely on paragraph  2.3.3  of  the  CIG
    which was also cited in the case referred to by the judge at  paragraph
    17 viz MA v SSHD [2017] CSOH 134.  He submitted that  clearly,  on  the
    facts accepted by the judge,  the  Claimant  has  been  involved  in  a
    Kurdish organisation and thus would fall within a category of either  a
    real or  perceived  political  opponent  of  the  Iranian  regime.   He
    submitted that Kurdish groups are perceived by the Iranian  authorities
    as threatening the Iranian state and the fact that ISIS may be a common
    enemy is not the fundamental point.  The material issue is whether  the
    Claimant will be regarded as having been actively involved in a Kurdish
    group and whether this would be enough to put him at risk.  Mr  Dickson
    drew attention to the bundle of background evidence before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, in particular a report at page 52 dated 4 May 2017  from
    the US Military Academy entitled Iranian Kurdish  Militias:  Terrorist-
    Insurgents,  Ethno  Freedom  Fighters,  or  Knights  on  the   Regional
    Chessboard? where the author, Franc Milburn, noted that earlier in  the
    year, i.e. 2017, Iran announced it had greatly  increased  surveillance
    activities in the KRI due to increasing concerns over the threat  posed
    by Kurdish Iranian militant groups operating  inside  Iraqi  territory.
    Mr Dickson submitted that this reinforced the point made in the CIG  as
    to the sensitivity  of  the  Iranian  regime  to  Kurdish  groups.   He
    submitted there was a real risk that the Claimant would  be  questioned
    as to his Peshmerga activity, there was no doubt he would have to  tell
    the truth about that and  it  would  not  be  reasonable,  applying  HJ
    (Iran), for him to conceal the truth of his former activities.   Whilst
    Mr Dickson accepted that the judge had not made  express  reference  to
    this document or the specifics of the background  material,  the  judge
    had at  [23]  clearly  absorbed  and  summarised  the  effect  of  that
    background information where she found "it is well documented that  the
    Iranian authorities have no tolerance of Kurdish political activity and
    that the treatment despatched to anyone engaged  in  such  activity  is
    persecutory".  Mr Dickson submitted the  judge  had  given  sustainable
    reasons and it was clear that if one  considered  both  the  Claimant's
    activity for the Kurdish Peshmerga in Iraq and his  very  long  absence
    from Iran of seventeen years, then together this clearly gave rise to a
    potent risk to him which was bound to cause concern from the  point  of
    view of the Iranian authorities.

13. In reply, Mr  Mills  expressly  accepted  that  activity  with  Kurdish
    separatists or pro-Kurdish political groups fighting for the  interests
    of Kurds within Iran was on  the  lower  standard  likely  to  lead  to
    persecution.  However, he submitted that was not the case here  as  the
    Claimant had been involved with a  non-Iranian  group  in  a  different
    country fighting not against the Iranian regime, but against  a  common
    enemy.  He submitted that the judge had failed to grapple with the fact
    that the activity did not take place in Iran.   He  acknowledged  there
    may be evidence to support a claim in this respect  but  this  had  not
    been referred to by the judge who  had  applied  simply  a  broad-brush
    approach.

14. I reserved my decision, which I now give with my reasons.

     Decision and reasons

15. I have concluded that there is no material error of law in the decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Thomas.  Mr Mills helpfully  narrowed  the
    focus of the grounds of appeal essentially to make the point  that  the
    Claimant would not be at risk even if the Iranian authorities  knew  of
    his former activity with the Iraqi pro-Kurdish Peshmerga,  because  the
    enemy that he faced was a common enemy and this activity did  not  take
    place within Iran.  This, however, fails also to take  account  of  the
    Claimant's extensive absence from Iran of  more  than  seventeen  years
    which was considered  by  the  judge  and  a  material  factor  in  her
    decision.  The judge held as follows:

         "22. I find the Appellant's evidence on this issue to be  plausible
             and credible and I find to the lower standard of proof that he
             fought as stated with the PUK Peshmerga in Iraq.

         23.  It is well documented that the  Iranian  authorities  have  no
             tolerance  for  Kurdish  political  activity  and   that   the
             treatment despatched to anyone engaged  in  such  activity  is
             persecutory.  This Appellant has been  absent  from  Iran  for
             seventeen years.  He is Kurdish and will be returning to  Iran
             from the United Kingdom without a passport  and  as  a  failed
             asylum seeker.  Whilst these factors in themselves  would  not
             expose  him  to  a  risk  of  persecution   or   harm,   taken
             cumulatively,  they  make  it  reasonably  likely   that   the
             Appellant will be questioned on return.  Such  questioning  is
             reasonably likely to include his whereabouts for the seventeen
             past years and his activities.  It is to be presumed that  the
             Appellant will tell the truth  and  disclose  his  involvement
             with the Peshmerga in Iraq.  This in itself  would  result  in
             him being of adverse  interest  to  the  Iranian  authorities.
             Further if it is the case that his  father's  activities  with
             the KDPI were known or if the  Appellant  disclosed  them  and
             even if  considered  low-level  this  would  heighten  adverse
             interest in the Appellant. In these circumstances  I  find  to
             the lower standard of proof that there is a reasonable  degree
             of likelihood that the Appellant will be  suspected  of  anti-
             regime behaviour and will be perceived to be involved  in  the
             Kurdish political cause.   This  would  result  in  him  being
             considered a threat to the Iran government  and  would  expose
             him to a real risk of detention, persecution or  serious  harm
             on return to Iran now".

16. I find that the judge's conclusions at [23] also have  to  be  read  in
    light of her her acknowledgement of the context in which  her  findings
    needed to be made at [17] where she states:

         "I have had regard to the conditions set out in paragraph  339L  of
         the Immigration Rules to assess credibility.  In assessing risk  on
         return I have considered the Country Information and Guidance Iran:
         Kurds and Kurdish political groups July 2016, the case  law  of  SB
         (risk on return; illegal exit) Iran CG [2009] UKIAT 00053; SSH  and
         HR (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker) CG [2016]  UKUT  308  (IAC)
         and MA v SSHD  [2017]  CSOH  134  and  the  background  information
         indexed".

17. I find that, contrary to the assertion in the grounds  of  appeal,  the
    judge has provided sufficient reasons for  finding  that  the  Claimant
    would be at risk on return in Iran in light of  the  jurisprudence  and
    the background evidence.

     Notice of Decision

18. I find no material error of law in  the  decision  of  the  First  tier
    Tribunal Judge, which is upheld.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman                         Date 22 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

