
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00504/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via Teams                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 June 2021                               |On 13 July 2021               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                     BM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Rogers, Immigration Advice Centre Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                             (Given ex tempore)



The appellant has appealed against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal
('FtT') promulgated on 29 December 2020, in which it dismissed his appeal
on international protection and human rights grounds.

Background

The appellant is a citizen of Iran who claimed asylum in 2015.  This was
based upon his claim involving smuggling of goods between Iran and Iraq,
which included Kurdish materials.  His appeal against was dismissed on
international protection grounds, following a hearing on 16 May 2017.

In 2019 the appellant made further submissions based upon his claimed
conversion to Christianity.  The respondent interviewed him about this and
accepted his claim to be a fresh claim, albeit refused his claim on the
basis that he was not a genuine convert to Christianity.  The matter then
came before FtT Judge Fisher on 10 December 2020.

FtT decision

In a detailed decision that was for the most part carefully drafted the FtT
comprehensively recorded the evidence before it.  This included the bundles
from the appellant and the respondent, as well as witness statements from
the appellant and two witnesses.  One was his friend, a Mr Gohari, and
another was a colleague from the church that he attended, St Cuthbert's
Church in Darlington, a Ms Forth.  The FtT set out the evidence of the
witnesses in considerable detail at paragraphs 5 to 21.  Having considered
all of the evidence, the FtT said this at paragraph 34:

"Furthermore, having considered the evidence in the round, I am not
persuaded that the appellant has shown even to the lower standard that he
is now a genuine Christian.  I base that on the fact that he was not honest
with the Tribunal in relying on his previous discounted account as true,
his assertion that he was not aware of the fact that conversion might
provide the foundation for a fresh claim until a late stage, the lack of
evidence that he conducts himself as a Christian throughout his life rather
than merely attending church on a Sunday and his lack of knowledge of the
faith.  I have found that his knowledge was so limited that he would not
have been able to make an informed decision to follow it.  I have no doubt
that he finds the congregation at St Cuthbert's to be warm and welcoming.
That in itself would be attractive but it cannot be equated with a genuine
conversion."

That paragraph came after the FtT's more detailed consideration of the
evidence available and its assessment of various issues that were said to
either detract from the appellant's credibility or which the FtT regarded
to not undermine the appellant's credibility.  I turn to those paragraphs
now.

At paragraph 26 the FtT correctly directed itself to the Devaseelan
principles and said specifically: "I accept the point made by Ms Rogers
that even if the appellant has shown to have lied in his original asylum
claim and appeal that does not necessarily indicate that he is not now
telling the truth".  At paragraph 27 the FtT summarised the previous asylum
claim and the findings made by the previous FtT but was concerned that in
maintaining that his previous account was true after it had been dismissed
by the previous judge and notwithstanding his representative's confirmation
at the start of the hearing and in earlier case management hearings that no
reliance was being placed on that previous claim the appellant's continued
reliance upon it detracted from his overall credibility.  The FtT also
expressed concern as to the timing of the appellant's alleged conversion,
saying he could not disregard that it came sometime after his original
appeal was dismissed.  At paragraph 28 the FtT indicated its satisfaction
that the appellant was not being candid regarding his knowledge as to the
likely prospective risk that conversion to Christianity might lead to in
Iran.

At paragraph 29 the FtT rejected a submission made on behalf of the
respondent that there should be adverse inferences drawn from the
appellant's reliance upon a very brief appeal witness statement.  At
paragraph 30 the FtT noted that although much of cross-examination was
directed to the extent of the appellant's knowledge of Christian faith and
whilst that was relevant, the real issue was whether the appellant believed
in the faith and perhaps more importantly whether he conducted himself as a
Christian in day-to-day life.  The FtT also made it clear that it was not
prepared to make an adverse finding on the submission that the appellant
had not attended every one of the Tuesday preparation sessions for his
baptism.  Similarly, the FtT made no adverse finding on the basis that the
appellant may have missed some Sunday morning services.

The FtT then returned to matters undermining the credibility of the
genuineness of the appellant's claimed conversion.  At paragraph 31 the FtT
found that the appellant's knowledge of the Christian faith was "extremely
limited".  At paragraph 32 the FtT undertook a careful examination of the
evidence on the part of colleagues who attended the appellant's church.
The FtT noted that there was some written support from two individuals but
they did not attend the hearing and in any event offered no explanation in
their letters for their belief that the appellant's conversion was genuine.
 The FtT considered Ms Forth to be a very sincere witness who was mindful
of the possibility of being 'used' when giving her evidence.  However, the
FtT found that for reasons outside of Ms Forth's control she had not been
able to meet with the appellant since March 2020 and had in any event no
real conversations with him, given the language barrier.  The FtT observed,
and this is not disputed, that she was not involved in the appellant's
baptism preparation.

The FtT also observed that the Reverend who had led the congregation had
left the parish but provided a carefully worded letter dated 29 June 2019,
in which he did not assert that the appellant was a genuine Christian.  The
FtT concluded that it had no satisfactory evidence as to how the appellant
persuaded Reverend Firth that he was ready for baptism.  The FtT also found
that there was no satisfactory evidence as to how the appellant conducted
himself away from the short periods when he could be observed on a Sunday
morning and no evidence was adduced by Ms Rogers or from the witness Mr
Gohari to explain why he believed the appellant to be a genuine Christian.

The FtT then at paragraph 33 took the appellant's account that he was a
member of the Kaka'i faith at its highest and observed that there was no
evidence to show that conversion to Christianity from the Kaka'i faith
would lead to a real risk of persecution, before then reaching his
conclusion on the credibility of the appellant's conversion at paragraph
34, which I have already read out in full above.  At paragraph 35 the FtT
indicated that it had considered the Facebook posts submitted but very few
of them were translated and some of them were duplicated.  The FtT did not
consider that these posts would lead to a real risk of persecution for a
number of reasons including he was not a genuine convert, the post could be
deleted, he gave information he was from Middlesbrough and that he would
not be linked to the posts.  The FtT concluded that the appellant therefore
had no profile which would render him of any real interest to the
authorities.

Appeal to the Upper Tribunal ('UT')

The appellant appealed against the FtT's decision relying upon three
grounds of appeal.

                   1) The FtT failed to apply the principles set out in the
                      decision of TF and MA v SSHD [2018] CSIH 58.

                   2) The FtT was wrong to accept that the appellant was of
                      the Kaka'i faith, when the previous Tribunal had
                      found that he was not.

                   3) The FtT failed to apply the country guidance in PS
                      (Christianity - risk) Iran CG [2020] UKUT 46 (IAC)
                      when assessing his risk as a person who had not been
                      accepted to be a genuine Christian.

Permission to appeal was granted by UT Judge Kamara in a decision dated 15
March 2021.  She observed that it is at least arguable that the judge's
finding that the appellant was of the Kaka'i faith was inadequately
reasoned and was further inconsistent with the findings of the previous
judge who had determined that the appellant did not follow the said faith.

In a Rule 24 notice dated 15 April 2021 the respondent opposed the
appellant's appeal and invited the UT to uphold the decision of the FtT.

At the hearing before me Ms Rogers relied upon the three grounds of appeal
and made short submissions expanding on each of those.  Mr Tan responded to
each of the grounds and I now turn to the submissions that were made in
relation to each ground.

Ground 1

Ground 1 asserts that the FtT failed to apply the principles set out in TF
and MA (supra) but regrettably failed to outline what those principles are
said to be.  During the course of her oral submissions, Ms Rogers did not
take me to TF and MA and did not outline the principles the FtT was said to
have failed to take into account.

TF and MA is a decision of the Court of Session in which each of the
appellants had led evidence from individuals in positions of responsibility
within the church as part of their evidence before the FtT.  The Court of
Session allowed the appellants' appeal, concluding that both the UT and the
FtT had erred in law by failing properly to take account of the independent
evidence relating to the genuineness of the appellants' conversions to
Christianity and failing to give adequate reasons for effectively
disregarding it.

The Court of Session said that the proper approach was to consider all the
evidence in the round.  However, in that case the FtT had taken into
account material which allegedly demonstrated that the appellant was not a
truthful witness and it carried that finding through in the discussion of
the other evidence adduced.  The Court of Session observed that the FtT
ought to have looked at all the evidence on its own merits before forming a
concluded view as to the appellant's veracity.

Ground 1 makes three specific points, which I deal with in turn.  The first
point is that the FtT is said to have disregarded the appellant's evidence
of conversion by reference to previous adverse findings.  I am not entirely
sure what is meant by that, however, the submission seems to be that the
FtT was wrong to take into account that the appellant had been regarded to
be incredible by a previous FtT.  As Mr Tan pointed out during the course
of his submissions, the FtT expressly reminded itself at paragraph 26 that
merely because the appellant may have been shown to have lied in his
original asylum claim, that did not necessarily indicate that he was not
telling the truth.

I note that the Court of Session made it clear at [50] that it is wrong in
principle to form a concluded view of the probable veracity of particular
items of evidence and then, from that fixed point, to allow that view to
govern the assessment of other evidence in the case.  The proper approach
is to adopt what is sometimes called an holistic approach, considering all
the evidence in the round before arriving at any concluded view on the
facts.   When the FtT's decision is read as a whole, it seems to me that it
reached no concluded view of the appellant's evidence until after it had
considered all the relevant evidence and that concluded view is based upon
having considered the evidence in the round as expressly stated at
paragraph 34.  Indeed, over the course of paragraphs 26 to 35 (as
summarised above), the FtT considered that certain matters detracted from
the appellant's credibility and other matters could not be taken against
the appellant.  It was only after considering all the evidence in the round
that the FtT reached the conclusion it did on the genuineness of conversion
and for that reason, the FtT has not erred in law in structuring the
decision in the manner that it has.

The second limb to ground 1 is that the FtT preferred its own assessment of
the genuineness of the appellant's conversion to that of a person from the
church who knew him well, Ms Forth.  During the course of her submissions,
Ms Rogers submitted that Miss Forth's evidence was rejected solely because
she was not a pastor.  I do not accept that criticism of the FtT's
decision.  As Mr Tan submitted, the FtT reminded itself that an important
part of assessing the genuineness of conversion was to look at how a person
conducts himself in day-to-day life (see paragraph 30).  The FtT was
clearly concerned that there was an absence of cogent evidence from anyone
regarding this aspect.  The FtT was also entitled to be concerned that Ms
Forth may have been a very sincere witness but she was not in a position to
cogently assess the genuineness of the appellant's conversion given the
language barrier and the limited time together.

In TF and MA the Court of Session drew attention to the caution to be
applied when deciding that a person in effect lived a lie by attending
church services.  Here, however, the FtT did not simply reject the
appellant's genuineness of conversion by reference to the witnesses or his
own evidence but also by reference to his own extremely limited knowledge
of the Christian faith and all the matters considered in the round.

I now turn to the third limb of ground 1, in which it was submitted that
the lack of evidence from a minister from the church was irrelevant in the
light of the witness evidence from other church members.  As Mr Tan
submitted, the FtT was fully aware that there was evidence from other
church members in the form of written letters of support, the evidence of
Ms Forth and the evidence of Mr Gohari.  The FtT addressed each of those
pieces of evidence and gave that evidence the weight it considered
appropriate.  As to the absence of a minister, there is nothing to indicate
that the FtT did not accept the church witnesses merely because they were
not ministers or pastors.  Rather, the FtT made the point that the evidence
that it did have from Reverend Firth was of limited assistance, bearing in
mind the careful way in which he worded his letter and the paucity of
evidence as to what persuaded Reverend Firth that the appellant was ready
for baptism.

I am therefore satisfied that although the FtT may not have referred to TF
and MA specifically during the course of its decision, the findings of fact
that were reached were entirely open to it and do not betray any of the
principles set out therein.

Ground 2

Ground 2 submits that the FtT was not entitled to make a finding of fact
that the appellant was of the Kaka'i faith when a previous FtT had already
determined that he was not.  I explained to Ms Rogers that it seemed to me
that a proper reading of paragraph 33 indicated that the FtT was merely
taking the appellant's original account vis-�-vis his religion at its
highest and assumed that there was a reasonable likelihood that he was a
follower of the Kaka'i faith when assessing prospective risk.   Ms Rogers
merely disagreed without offering an alternative explanation for paragraph
33.

When paragraph 33 is read together with the rest of the decision it seems
clear to me that the FtT was merely dealing with prospective risk and not
the credibility of the appellant's conversion to Christianity.  Indeed, if
paragraph 33 was put after paragraph 34 and before paragraph 35, Ms Rogers
would have no basis to complain.  In my judgment paragraph 33 has merely
been put in the wrong place and ground 2 contains no material error of law.

I invited Ms Rogers to take me to a part of paragraph 33 in which the FtT
made a clear finding that this appellant was of the Kaka'i faith.  She
invited me to find that when paragraph 33 is read as a whole that must be
the case.  I disagree.  As I have already indicated, paragraph 33 took the
appellant's account of his past religion 'at its highest' vis a vis
prospective risk only.  This played no material role in the FtT's overall
assessment of the credibility of the claimed conversion to Christianity.

Ground 3

I now turn to the final ground of appeal, which submits that the FtT failed
to apply the country guidance in PS regarding the appellant's Facebook
posts.  Ground 3 submits that the FtT failed to take into account what
would happen to the appellant as a disingenuous Christian convert, see in
particular [116] of PS.  Headnote 4 of PS  says this:

"In cases where the claimant is found to be insincere in his or her claimed
conversion there is not a real risk of persecution in country.  There being
no reason for such an individual to associate himself with Christians,
there is not a real risk that he would come to the adverse attention of the
Iranian authorities.  Decision-makers must nonetheless consider the
possible risks arising at the pinch point of arrival:

(i)  All returning failed asylum seekers are subject to questioning on
arrival, and this will include questions about why they claimed asylum.

(ii) A returnee who divulges that he claimed to be a Christian is
reasonably likely to be transferred for further questioning.

(iii)    The returnee can be expected to sign an undertaking renouncing his
claimed Christianity.  The questioning will therefore in general be short
and will not entail a real risk of ill-treatment.

(iv) If there are any reasons why the detention becomes prolonged the risk
of ill-treatment will correspondingly rise.  Factors that could result in
prolonged detention must be determined on a case-by-case basis.  They could
include but are not limited to:

(a)  Previous adverse contact with the Iranian security services;

(b)  Connection to persons of interest to the Iranian authorities;

(c)  Attendance at a church with perceived connection to Iranian house
churches;

(d)  Overt social media content indicating that the individual concerned
has actively promoted Christianity."

I accept that headnote 4 taken together with [116] of PS demanded that the
FtT addressed the prospective risk to this appellant at the pinch point of
arrival on the basis that he was not a genuine Christian.  I invited Ms
Rogers to deal with the materiality of any error of law insofar as it was
asserted that the FtT failed to undertake the analysis that headnote 4
requires.  She accepted that the factors set out at (iv)(a) to (c) were not
applicable in this case but that (d) was and the FtT failed to consider
whether there was a risk of prolonged detention based upon the Facebook
posts that the appellant relied upon.  Mr Tan invited me to note that the
FtT made clear findings on these Facebook posts.  It found that very few of
the Facebook posts were translated, some of them were duplicated and that
they could in any event be deleted.

I invited Ms Rogers to take me to the Facebook post that were said to give
rise to an indication that this was an appellant who may be actively
promoting Christianity.  She told me that the Facebook posts that were in
the appellant's bundle were numerous and could be found at pages 22 to 140.
 She accepted, however, that the text said to include religious statements
had not been translated.  She also accepted that the appellant's witness
statement omitted to refer to or explain what was said in Facebook posts.
She submitted that it was obvious from merely observing the Facebook posts
that the religious imagery promoted Christianity.

I am of the view that if the appellant sought to place clear reliance upon
overt social media content indicating that he actively promoted
Christianity, that needed to be made clear in some way.  The mere
submission of untranslated and unexplained, duplicated Facebook posts with
Christian imagery does little to advance any meaningful case.  It cannot be
inferred that merely because the appellant's name appears next to Christian
imagery that he was actively promoting Christianity.  He may have been
denouncing aspects of Christianity - we simply cannot tell.

Whilst I accept it would have been preferable for the FtT to have gone
through the steps that are set out within PS, I am satisfied that had the
FtT considered the untranslated and unexplained evidence in this manner, it
would have inevitably reached the same conclusion.  Although the standard
of proof is low the burden remained upon the appellant.

Final points

I note in this regard that the UT has recently heard an appeal dealing with
Facebook posts in the context of Iran and this may be something that the
appellant and his representatives may wish to reflect upon should if
considering any future application.  I need say no more about that at this
stage.

It follows that the grounds have not been made out and I dismiss the
appellant's appeal.

Notice of decision

The appeal is dismissed.

Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of his  family.   This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed UTJ Melanie Plimmer                            Date 1 July 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer

