
 [pic]


Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)



                                                 AppealNumber: PA/00960/2015

                                                               PA/02759/2015




|At  North Shields                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgation    |
|                                   |on 15th July 2016                  |
|on 11th July  2016                 |                                   |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   |                                   |


                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                           MR J.S.K and MR G.S.K.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


               THE  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent



    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mrs. L.Brauas of Iris Law Firm.
For the Respondent: Mr Diwacz, Home Office Presenting Officer.




Introduction

1. The appellants claimed asylum on 21 May 2015, stating that they had
   arrived in the United Kingdom that day. They are brothers, born
   respectively on 1 January 1987 and 1 January 1998. I will refer
   hereinafter to the elder brother as the first appellant. He was
   accompanied by his wife and their daughter, born on 1 July 2013.

2. They claimed they were Sikhs from Jalalabad, Afghanistan and faced
   religious persecution. They said they left Afghanistan with their parents
   on 27 March 2015. However, en route the agent separated them into two
   cars and they did not know the whereabouts of their parents.

3. Whilst both claims overlapped they were separate: a distinguishing
   feature was that the first appellant's child had significant health
   issues. She had been born prematurely and suffered oxygen deprivation
   resulting in cerebral palsy affecting all four limbs.

4. Their claims were refused on 1 November 2015. The respondent accepted
   they were Sikhs and nationals of Afghanistan. The appellants were not
   claiming a specific significant event affected them. The country guidance
   decision of TG and others( Afghan Sikhs persecuted) Afghanistan CG 2015
   UKUT confirmed the difficulties Sikhs faced. The respondent concluded
   there was sufficiency of protection and any localised difficulties could
   reasonably be avoided by their relocation, for instance, to Kabul.

The First-tier Tribunal

5. Their appeals were heard by First-tier Judge Holmes on 1 February
   2016.In a decision promulgated on 8 February 2016 both appeals were
   dismissed.

6. The appellants were represented by Counsel. A presenting officer
   attended. Both appellants gave evidence and were cross-examined. First-
   tier Judge Holmes concluded that their evidence was extremely unreliable.
   He did not accept they were living in the parlous circumstances claimed.
   They said they lived all their lives in a single room provided by the
   Gurdwara.Within that room lived their parents and latterly the elder
   appellant's wife and child. They said they rarely ventured out because of
   how they were treated. They said they had no education; had never worked
   and spoke only Punjabi.

7. Immigration Judge Holmes was critical of their claim of not knowing the
   whereabouts of their parents. He found they had not been forthcoming
   about the presence in Afghanistan of the parents of the first appellant's
   wife. The judge referred to their father working as a pharmacist,
   indicating he must have been educated. He did not find it credible they
   only spoke Punjabi. At paragraph 50 of the decision he said that either
   they were lying about this or else they had lived outside Afghanistan.

8.  He dismissed their claims of penury: referring to the funding required
   for their travel and the medical treatment the first appellant's wife
   received; with her daughter being delivered by caesarean section. The
   country expert report obtained for the appellants referred to the lack of
   medical treatment in Afghanistan. The judge concluded at paragraph 72
   that it was highly unlikely he had been told the truth about where the
   child was born.

The Upper Tribunal

9. Leave to appeal was granted on the basis it was arguable the judge had
   engaged in speculation. It was also arguable the judge did not give
   adequate consideration to TG and others (Afghan Sikhs persecuted)
   Afghanistan CG 2015 UKUT .Finally, it was arguable internal relocation
   was flawed given the appellants only spoke Punjabi.

10. The respondent replied under rule 24, submitting that the judge had
   directed himself appropriately and made reasoned and sustainable
   credibility findings based on evidence. The judge dealt adequately with
   the expert report provided. It was submitted that the grounds amounted to
   no more than an attempt to re-argue the case.

11. At hearing Mrs Brauas pointed out her firm had not acted at first
   instance. However she submitted that the credibility findings were
   inadequate. For instance she challenged the evidential basis for the
   judge concluding the appellant's father was a pharmacist. She pointed out
   that at interview the first appellant at question is 10 and 11 said that
   his father worked in a shop the equivalent to a chemist shop and referred
   to herbal medication. He did not say he was a pharmacist.

12. She also submitted that in drawing an adverse credibility inference
   from the claim the appellants were separated from their parents and had
   no contact the judge made assumptions about what they ought to have done.
   She said the first appellant set out at question 43 how they came to be
   separated. Regarding the appellants only speaking Punjabi she pointed out
   that the background information indicated many Sikhs did not have the
   opportunity of going to school and referred to the age of the second
   appellant. She said that in the United Kingdom within some communities
   little English is spoken. She said the first appellant had explained at
   question 38 to 39 how he believed his father raised the money for their
   travel.

13. Mrs Brauas argued that the judge was wrong at paragraphs 60 to 66
   conclude that family life did not exist between the first and second
   appellant's in the circumstance.

14. She also submitted that the judge was wrong at paragraph 76 to suggest
   that first appellant's daughter would spend her life within the family
   home. She submitted that if the child remained here she could benefit
   from all the medical treatment available in the United Kingdom.

15. In response, Mr Diwacz relied upon the Rule 24 response. He pointed out
   what the first appellant had said about his father's employment.

16. Both parties were in agreement that if an error of law were found then
   the matter should be remitted for rehearing to the First-tier Tribunal.

Discussion

17. Sikhs in Afghanistan are in a diminishing minority. The decision of TG
   and others (Afghan Sikhs persecuted) Afghanistan CG 2015 UKUT refers to
   them suffering harassment. They are not per se at risk and the cumulative
   effect does not in general reach the threshold for persecution. An
   assessment must be made on the individual circumstances .The person's
   financial circumstances would be very relevant. The country evidence
   indicated some Sikhs have viable businesses and are property owners.
   Historically Sikhs have been subjected to persecution by State and non-
   State actors but the number of such incidents has reduced, possibly due
   to the reduction in the Sikh population. The current evidence did not
   support official State-sponsored persecution. Instead, there is ongoing
   harassment and discrimination. The government of Afghanistan sought to
   provide protection but the problem was at local level.

18. The question of relocation is a fact sensitive assessment which
   includes consideration of an individual's financial circumstances. A
   Muslim is unlikely to employ a Sikh over a fellow Muslim. Accommodation
   and education require funding. The reduction in the Sikh population meant
   that there is less access to an extended community for support.
   Consequently, the need for an independent income is all the more
   important.

19. Judge Holmes astutely noted that the expert report of Dr Giusozzi
   failed to mention he gave evidence in TG and others (Afghan Sikhs
   persecuted) Afghanistan CG 2015 UKUT. The judge notes that the report's
   conclusions are at odds with the country guidance decision and refers to
   the absence of evidence of any change in country conditions since the
   guidance. However, the judge does not dismiss the expert report and
   acknowledges that it should be given some weight.

20. The first credibility point taken relates to the journey and the
   separation and lack of knowledge of the whereabouts of their parents. At
   paragraph 27 Judge Holmes expressed scepticism about the appellants claim
   they had little knowledge of the travel plans made by their father. The
   account given was that they were transferred into two cars because they
   all could not fit in one. The judge makes the observation that the
   sensible thing to do in such circumstance would be to have some
   arrangement for contact in an emergency. Furthermore, they could have
   asked the driver of the vehicle what country they were in at the point of
   separation. If they believed their parents had been detained en route
   they could have contacted the Red Cross or an NGO. If they believe their
   parents were still in transit they could contacted either the original
   agent or the various Gurdwaras.Their failure to do so was highlighted.
   These are all legitimate observations and do not amount to speculation.

21. At paragraph 34 the judge points out that the first appellant initially
   denied knowledge of the whereabouts of his wife's parents. He then
   indicated they were in Jalalabad but had made no attempt to contact them
   directly or indirectly since.

22. At paragraph 35 the judge points out there was no trigger incident for
   the departure. He does link their travel to the birth of the first
   appellant's daughter and the realisation she had medical issues. It is
   legitimate to consider factors which may have prompted the move. The
   family had been in the country all their lives and had not identified any
   past persecution.

23. The judge then considers the important issue of the appellant's only
   speaking Punjabi. The judge at para 37 expressed difficulties in
   accepting they did not have some exposure Dari and Pashtu. Their father
   could speak these languages and the Sikh community in interacting with
   the wider community must learn these languages. Their father was
   educated. The country information indicated there was a school in
   Jalalabad for Sikh children. The judge concluded that they must either be
   lying about only speaking Punjabi or alternatively, they grew up outside
   Afghanistan (para 50). The judge's observations are legitimate and are
   matters of common sense.

24. The judge did not find it credible that the appellants had never
   worked. Given the portrayal of dire financial circumstances this was a
   valid comment.

25. The judge sees a contradiction between the abject poverty described and
   their ability to borrow without security money to pay an agent to
   transport five people. Reference is also made to the report of Dr
   Giustozzi that the Gurdwara could not support them indefinitely. The
   judge commented on the prenatal hospital care; the caesarean section and
   after-care provided. Such medical care is not available freely. At
   paragraphs 47 to 55 the judge and enunciates his findings in line with
   this .These are all legitimate factors in evaluating the truth of the
   claim and do not amount to speculation.

26. In light of his conclusion relocation did not arise. The possibility of
   relocation was raised as a choice. The viability of this, for instance to
   Kabul, must be viewed in the context of the judge's rejection of the
   claimed poverty and lack of support available.

27. The respondent accepted the appellants were from Afghanistan. They were
   not asked detailed questions about Afghanistan. Their nationality was
   apparently accepted based upon the identity books produced. Documentation
   is not always reliable. A simple explanation for their inability to speak
   Dari or Pashtu but speaking Punjabi is that they are in fact from India
   or Pakistan. This would also explain how the first appellant's wife was
   able to receive medical treatment. The judge is conscious of this. At
   paragraph 45 the judge indicates the expert evidence was that such
   treatment is not available in Jalalabad. If the expert was correct then
   the evidence points to the birth-taking place outside Afghanistan. At
   paragraph 50 the judge also commented that their inability to speak any
   language other than Punjabi was only consistent with their having grown
   up outside Afghanistan. The judge decided not to question the
   respondent's concession on nationality. This was a matter for him and he
   made it clear at paragraphs 21 and 47 that he was not going behind the
   concession.

The first appellant's daughter.

28. From birth the first appellant's daughter has been left with major
   disabilities. The judge had been provided with medical evidence as to her
   condition. There is a letter from the family GP who states that a recent
   MRI scan indicated she suffered irreversible brain damage at birth. The
   doctor refers to the input of a multidisciplinary team. The doctor refers
   to her complex needs and felt she would continue to have developmental
   delay for the rest of her life and would need ongoing care and support
   not only to her childhood but when she was older. The paediatric report
   states that while the brain-damaged is non-progressive it is not
   something which will heal and she is likely to have significant needs as
   she grows. However, this did not mean he could not make improvement and
   it was impossible to say how she would progress.

29. The judge considered her best interests and squarely addressed the fact
   that her quality of life and her ability to develop might be improved by
   access to the multidisciplinary specialist paediatric support available
   in the United Kingdom. He accepted the same level of support and
   intervention would probably not be available in Afghanistan whatever the
   financial means of her family. He makes the point that the United Kingdom
   has not assumed responsibility for the child by granting any period of
   leave. His conclusion was that the family were not refugees but came here
   illegally for the purposes of obtaining free medical treatment for their
   daughter in the hope she might improve. At paragraph 93 the judge refers
   to the resources that would be engaged and the consequent knock on effect
   for other children who would be entitled to treatment as of right. Whilst
   his rather negative view of the benefit of treatment is debatable the
   outcome accords with the jurisprudence, as recently enunciated in GS
   (India); EO (Ghana); GM (India); PL (Jamaica); BA (Ghana) and KK (DRC) -v-
    SSHD [2015]EWCA Civ 40.



Summary

30. It is clear from reading the decision of Judge Holmes that key issues
   have been identified and carefully analysed and determined. It is
   apparent that the judge concluded the appellants were not telling the
   truth on key aspects of the claim and that their credibility was fatally
   damaged. The judge gave various instances where this occurred. I find the
   judge's reasoning perfectly rational and justified. The judge had the
   benefit of hearing from the appellants and of evaluating their evidence,
   particularly in response to cross-examination. The decision clearly
   indicates the judge has had regard to the totality of the evidence
   including detailed consideration of their substantive asylum interview
   and the expert evidence. Whilst Sikhs faced a difficult situation
   generally in Afghanistan the risk of persecution is fact sensitive and
   the judge was entitled to find  their circumstances were no as claimed.

Decision

No material error of law has been established in the decision of First-tier
judge Holmes. Consequently, his decision dismissing the appeals shall
stand.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly

14th July 2016
