
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00442/2020 (R)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Remote Hearing by Skype              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6th April 2021                    |On 20th April 2021                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                   S M H I
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Razzaq-Siddiq, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (R)

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008


An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal ("the FtT").  As
this appeal concerns a claim for international protection, it is
appropriate for me continue that anonymity direction. Unless and until a
Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.
No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or
any member of his family.  This direction applies both to the appellant and
to the respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could lead to
contempt of court proceedings.


    1. The hearing before me on 6th April 2021 took the form of a remote
       hearing using skype for business. Neither party objected.  The
       appellant did not join the hearing remotely.  I was assured by Mr
       Razzaq-Siddiq that the appellant is aware of the hearing and has
       chosen not to attend remotely and is happy for the matter to be dealt
       with in his absence.  I sat at the Birmingham Civil Justice Centre. I
       was addressed by the representatives in the same way as I would have
       been if the parties had attended the hearing together.  I was
       satisfied: that no party has been prejudiced; and that, insofar as
       there has been any restriction on a right or interest, it is
       justified as necessary and proportionate.  I was satisfied that it
       was in the interests of justice and in accordance with the overriding
       objective to proceed with a remote hearing because of the present
       need to take precautions against the spread of Covid-19, and to avoid
       delay.  I was satisfied that a remote hearing would ensure the matter
       is dealt with fairly and justly in a way that is proportionate to the
       importance of the case, the complexity of the issues that arise, and
       the anticipated costs and resources of the parties.  Neither party
       appeared to have any technical issues during the course of the
       hearing and at the end of the hearing I was satisfied that both
       parties had been able to participate fully in the proceedings.


The Background


    2. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh. He arrived in  the  UK  in
       September 2010 with leave to enter as  a  student  valid  until  30th
       November 2012.  In February 2013, he was  granted  further  leave  to
       remain as a student until 24th January 2016.  That  leave  to  remain
       was curtailed on 26th March 2013 such that it  expired  on  25th  May
       2015 because the appellant  failed  to  attend  his  course  and  his
       sponsorship was withdrawn.  In October 2016 the appellant applied for
       leave to remain on private life grounds. That application was refused
       for reasons set out in a decision dated 30th August 2017. In November
       2017 the appellant claimed asylum. His claim was refused for  reasons
       set out in a decision dated 14th May 2018. His  appeal  against  that
       decision was dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Knowles  for
       reasons set out in a decision promulgated on  16th  August  2018.  In
       February  2019,  the  appellant  made  further  submissions  to   the
       respondent in support of his claim for international protection.  His
       claim was refused by the respondent for reasons set out in a decision
       dated 3 December 2019.


    3. The appellants appeal was  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Herwald  ("Judge  Herwald")  for  reasons  set  out  in  a   decision
       promulgated on 9th  October  2020.   The  appellant  now  claims  the
       decision of Judge Herwal is vitiated by material errors of law.   The
       appellant advances three grounds  of  appeal.  First,  the  appellant
       claims that  when  considering  the  documents  relied  upon  by  the
       appellant, Judge Herwald erroneously found that the appellant has not
       provided translations of the documents "by a  recognised  interpreter
       in the United Kingdom", when  there  is  no  such  requirement.   The
       appellant refers to the Practice Directions of  the  Immigration  and
       Asylum Chambers of the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal (as
       amended) that sets out the  best  practice  for  the  preparation  of
       bundles and what is required when a document is not  in  the  English
       language.  Second, the  appellant  claims  Judge  Herwald  failed  to
       consider the background material, and in particular, what is said  in
       the 'Report of a Home Office Fact-Finding Mission  (Bangladesh)  that
       was published in September 2017, which states, at [4.6.1], that  "One
       anonymous source noted that forged  or  fraudulent  police  or  court
       documents are not easily obtainable,  because  of  counter  signature
       processes and the fact that all documents can be checked against  the
       database".  Third, and linked to the second  ground  of  appeal,  the
       appellant claims Judge  Herwald  failed  to  adequately  address  the
       conflicting background material regarding the  prevalence  of  forged
       documents in Bangladesh.


    4. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Blundell  on
       30th November 2020.  The three grounds of appeal are all  linked  and
       concern the judge's consideration of the documents that  were  relied
       upon by the appellant.  I shall address the first  ground  of  appeal
       and then address the second and third grounds of appeal together.  In
       readiness for the hearing of the appeal, Mr Razzaq-Siddiq provided  a
       skeleton argument dated 5th April 2021 that he adopted at the hearing
       before me. I have read and considered the matters  set  out  in  that
       skeleton argument in reaching my decision.


    5. Mr Razzaq-Siddiq accepts, quite properly,  that  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Knowles had previously considered the appellant's claim  to  be
       at risk upon return to Bangladesh on account of his political opinion
       in the decision promulgated on 16th August  2018.  He  accepts  Judge
       Knowles found that the appellant is not a credible  witness  and  the
       account he has given as to the core of his claim, is  not  reasonably
       likely to be true.  Mr Razzaq-Siddiq submits that in support  of  the
       further submissions made to the  respondent  in  February  2019,  the
       appellant had relied upon a number of documents that are  crucial  to
       his  claim  for  international  protection,  and  were   capable   of
       undermining the findings previously  made,  and  establish  that  the
       appellant will be at risk upon return.


Ground 1; The translation of the documents relied upon by the appellant


    6. Mr Razzaq-Siddiq refers to various paragraphs of his decision (11(l),
       12(c), 16(a), 16(f) and 16(g)) in which Judge Herwald refers  to  the
       documents but notes that the translation has not been produced  by  a
       translator recognised in Britain or considers the translation  to  be
       unreliable.  Mr Razzaq-Siddiq submits there is no requirement for the
       documents to be translated in the UK, either in primary or  secondary
       legislation and  the  best  practice  is  set  out  in  the  Practice
       Directions of the Immigration and Asylum Chambers of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal, as  most  recently  amended  by  Sir
       Ernest Ryder, Senior President of Tribunals on  18th  December  2018.
       The Practice Direction states:


          "8.2     The best practice for the preparation of  bundles  is  as
       follows:


              ..


                  (b) where the document is not in the English language,  a
             typed translation of the document signed  by  the  translator,
             and certifying that  the  translation  is  accurate,  must  be
             inserted in the bundle  next  to  the  copy  of  the  original
             document,  together  with  details   of   the   identity   and
             qualifications of the translator;


             ..."


       Mr  Razzaq-Siddiq  submits  the  other  relevant  guidance  regarding
       translation of documents is set out  in  an  instruction  by  the  UK
       Border Agency  regarding  Foreign  Language  documents  submitted  in
       support  of  asylum  applications  (Version  2.0  GL  5/11/08)  which
       indicates that any foreign language document on  which  an  applicant
       wishes to rely, must be accompanied  by  an  English  translation  of
       reliable quality.


    7. Mr Razzaq-Siddiq referred to the documents that were before the First-
       tier Tribunal at pages 48 to  72  of  the  appellant's  bundle.   The
       documents comprise of a 'First Information Report' ("FIR") (pages  48
       to 51), a Complaint (pages  52  to  55),  a  'Court  Record'  of  the
       proceedings against the appellant (pages 56 to 61),  a  Charge  Sheet
       (pages 62 to 67),  an Arrest Warrant (pages 68 to 69)  and  a  letter
       from A K M Rezaul Karim, an Advocate in Bangladesh (pages 70 to  71).
       Each of the documents written  in  Bengali,  was  accompanied  by  an
       English translation, in which  the  identity  of  the  translator  is
       disclosed and each of the copies has been attested by an Advocate and
       Notary Public.  Mr Razzaq-Siddiq submits there were several documents
       in the appellant's bundle, but Judge Herwald only refers to  the  FIR
       and the letter from the Advocate, Mr Rezaul Karim.   He  submits  the
       documents are all interconnected, support each other  and  cannot  be
       looked at in isolation.  He submits  Judge  Herwald  failed  to  give
       anxious scrutiny to the claim made  by  the  appellant  and  to  have
       proper regard to  the  documents  that  were  at  the  heart  of  the
       appellant's claim.


    8. Mr Razzaq-Siddiq accepts that the translations are not  certified  by
       the translator as  being  accurate  and  although  the  name  of  the
       translator is provided, the qualifications of the translator are  not
       set out either in the translations, or in  any  other  document.   He
       submits that although the translations are not entirely in accordance
       with the best  practice  set  out  in  the  Practice  Direction,  the
       translations substantially comply with the  Practice  Direction,  and
       the translations are of reliable quality.  Mr  Razzaq-Siddiq  submits
       Judge Herwald rejected the documents simply  because  they  were  not
       translated in the UK.  If the Judge had not considered an  irrelevant
       factor, it is likely that the documents establish that a  false  case
       has been instigated by the authorities  against  the  appellant,  and
       that he is at risk  upon  return  as  he  claims.   Mr  Razzaq-Siddiq
       submits that even  if  it  was  open  to  the  Judge  to  reject  the
       appellant's account of events in relation to other  matters,  if  the
       appellant can establish that that there is false case against him  in
       Bangladesh that was filed in March 2018 and in respect  of  which  an
       arrest warrant was  issued  in  November  2018,  after  the  previous
       decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Knowles  in  August  2018,  the
       present appeal could still succeed.  Mr Razzaq-Siddiq referred me  to
       the background material that was before the First-tier Tribunal  that
       confirms that  "..student  activists,  particularly  members  of  the
       opposition  were  most  likely  to  be  the  targets  of  politically
       motivated violence and legal charges.." and ".. Numerous  cases  have
       come to light which accuse people that are either dead, were  abroad,
       or hospitalised at the time the alleged offence took place..." (CPIN,
       Bangladesh: Opposition to the government (paragraph 6.1.11)  and  the
       Human  Rights  Watch  report  "Creating  Panic,  Bangladesh  Election
       Crackdown  on  Political  Opponents  and  Critics).   The  background
       material supports  the  appellant's  claim  that  false  charges  are
       instigated by the authorities  against  members  of  the  opposition.
       That however is not to say that the Judge was bound  to  accept  that
       false charges had been instigated against the appellant.  Whether  or
       not the appellant  has  established  that  false  charges  have  been
       instigated against him, depended upon the assessment of the documents
       relied upon by the appellant.


    9. The first ground of appeal  does  not  in  my  judgement  disclose  a
       material error of law in the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Herwald. I  accept  the  submission  made  by  Mr  Whitwell  that  at
       paragraph [9]  of  the  decision,  Judge  Herwald  properly  directed
       himself that it is for the  appellant  to  show  that  the  documents
       relied upon, are reliable. In Tanveer Ahmed v SSHD [2002] UKIAT 00439
       Mr Justice Collins confirmed that in asylum and human rights cases it
       is for an individual claimant to show that a document on which he  or
       she seeks to rely can be relied on, and  the  decision  maker  should
       consider whether a document is one on which reliance should  properly
       be placed after looking at all the evidence in the round.


   10. At paragraphs [11(k)]  to  [11(m)]  of  his  decision  Judge  Herwald
       referred to the appellant's case that a  politically  motivated  case
       had been filed against him  in  March  2018,  leading  to  an  arrest
       warrant being issued on 6th November 2018.  It  is  in  my  judgement
       clear from what is said in paragraph [11(l)] that Judge  Herwald  was
       aware of the various  documents  relied  upon  by  the  appellant  in
       support of his  claim.  He  noted  the  appellant  has  now  produced
       translations of a FIR and  importantly  "..supporting  documentation,
       and certified  translations  of  court  appearances,  and  an  arrest
       warrant in his name..".  In setting out his  findings,  at  paragraph
       [16(d)], Judge Herwald refers to the submissions made  on  behalf  on
       the appellant that related primarily to  the  FIR  "..and  supporting
       documents..",  that  were  in  the  appellant's  bundle  before   the
       Tribunal.  At paragraph [16(f)] Judge Herwald concluded that  he  was
       not persuaded that he could place reliance on the "...lawyers letter,
       nor the information purporting to come from the police and courts  in
       Bangladesh".  In considering the documents it  is  clear  that  Judge
       Herwald had in mind all the documents, relied upon by  the  appellant
       and I reject the submission  made  by  Mr  Razzaq-Siddiq  that  Judge
       Herwald failed to have regard to all the documents and failed to give
       anxious scrutiny to the documents.


   11. Mr Whitwell properly accepts that  a  UK  based  translation  of  the
       relevant documents is not required.   Although  it  is  correct  that
       there are various references in the decision  to  the  documents  not
       having been translated in the UK, I reject the submission made by  Mr
       Razzaq-Siddiq  that  Judge  Herwald  rejected  the  documents  simply
       because they had  not  been  translated  in  the  UK.   At  paragraph
       [11(l)], Judge Herwald  noted  the  appellant  now  relies  upon  the
       translation of various documents.  He noted that the translations had
       not been produced by a recognised translator  in  Britain,  but  also
       noted that there were uncertified translations of  court  appearances
       and an arrest warrant in the appellant's name.  At paragraph [12(c)],
       he noted the respondent's claim in the refusal letter that  documents
       can be procured by  corruption  and  fraud  in  Bangladesh,  and  the
       respondent's  conclusion  that  the  documents  relied  upon  by  the
       appellant  are unreliable and are  not  the  product  of  a  reliable
       translation.  I accept that at paragraph  [16(a)]  of  his  decision,
       Judge Herwald noted the reliance  placed  by  the  appellant  on  the
       documents, ".. albeit translated in the appellant's homeland, and not
       by a recognised interpreter in the United Kingdom..".  That was in my
       judgement an observation made by Judge Herwald, but his  reasons  for
       concluding that he could not place reliance on the documents  are  to
       be found at paragraphs [16(d)]  to  [16(i)]  of  the  decision.   The
       observation made by Judge Herwald must be considered in  the  context
       of what was said by the respondent in her decision dated 3rd December
       2019.  The respondent had stated:


         ".. You have not provided any evidence relating to the  translation
         of the  documents,  that  it  was  completed  by  a  certified  and
         accredited translator. The document is marked that it was completed
         by Md Zakir Hossain in Bangladesh, you  have  not  shown  that  the
         translated documents are an accurate translation  of  the  original
         document used for the translation therefore it is  considered  that
         the contents of the translation cannot be relied on in the  absence
         of such evidence."


   12. At paragraph  [15(d)],  Judge  Herwald  referred  to  the  background
       material that was before him  and  in  particular,  the  respondent's
       'Country Information Note, Bangladesh:  Documentation'  published  in
       January 2020.  He referred to paragraph 5.2.4  of  that  report  that
       refers to a Lifos report (i.e. a  Report  by  the  Swedish  Migration
       Agency's centre for country-of-origin information)  in  which  it  is
       noted that "..Translations of  documents  from  Bangladesh  were  not
       always reliable as it is possible to bribe an  authorised  translator
       to change or omit information in the translated document.".   Against
       such background material, the need for a  translation  that  properly
       complies with the best practice referred to in the Practice Direction
       that is relied upon by the appellant, is readily apparent.  Here,  as
       Mr Razzaq-Siddiq accepts,  the  translations  are  not  certified  as
       accurate, and fail to disclose the qualifications of the  translator.




   13. The assessment of the weight to  be  attached  to  the  documents  is
       always a highly fact sensitive task. Judge Herwald considered whether
       he could attach any weight to the  documents  having  considered  the
       evidence before him in the round, including the background  material,
       and the failure of the appellant to refer to the false claim  he  now
       alleges has been issued against him previously despite  his  evidence
       that he was aware of the claim since March 2018, and looking  at  the
       documents together.


Grounds 2 and 3; The  background  material  regarding  the  availability  of
forged or fraudulent documents


   14. In reaching his decision as to the  weight  to  be  attached  to  the
       documents relied upon by  the  appellant,  Judge  Herwald  noted,  at
       [16(d)], that the background material confirms that court and  police
       documents  in  Bangladesh  may  be  fraudulently  obtained  and  that
       corruption is widespread in the courts and in the police.


   15. The appellant claims that in reaching  his  decision,  Judge  Herwald
       failed to have regard to other background material  that  was  before
       the Tribunal that states that "..  Forged  or  fraudulent  police  or
       court  documents  are  not  easily  obtainable,  because  of  counter
       signature processes and the fact that all documents  can  be  checked
       against a database...".  The appellant claims Judge Herwald failed to
       resolve  the  conflict  in  the  background  material   as   to   the
       availability of forged or fraudulent documents. The appellant  claims
       the FIR  relied  upon  by  the  appellant  had  been  signed  by  the
       complainant and the court documents relied upon by the appellant, did
       indeed have the required counter signatures.


   16. The second and  third  grounds  of  appeal  are  without  merit.   At
       paragraph [15] of his decision, Judge Herwald carefully  referred  to
       the background material relied upon by the parties.


   17. Mr Razzaq-Siddiq submits that  at  paragraph  [15(d)]  Judge  Herwald
       refers to an extract from a 'Country  Information  Note,  Bangladesh:
       Documentation' published in January 2020, which, at 5.2.1, refers  to
       information from The Research  Directorate  of  the  Immigration  and
       Refugee Board of Canada ("Canadian IRB  report"),  that  states  that
       there  is  a  significant  prevalence  of  fraudulent  documents   in
       Bangladesh including passports, birth certificates, bank  statements,
       taxation documents, business documents, school documents and marriage
       certificates.  He submits that the report  identifies  the  types  of
       documents that  are  readily  available,  but  they  do  not  include
       documents from the police or courts of the type now  relied  upon  by
       the appellant.  At paragraph 5.2.3 of the Country  Information  Note,
       there is reference to a fact-finding mission  completed  by  UK  Home
       Office officials in May 2017. In its subsequent report  published  in
       September 2017, it was recorded that "... One anonymous source  noted
       that forged or fraudulent police or court documents  are  not  easily
       obtainable, because of counter signature processes and the fact  that
       all documents can be checked against a database..".


   18. Mr Razzaq-Siddiq submits Judge Herwald made  no  attempt  to  resolve
       whether fraudulent  documents  such  as  those  relied  upon  by  the
       appellant can easily be obtained. He submits there is  a  distinction
       as to the types of documents that are readily available that was  not
       addressed by the Judge.  He submits it appears Judge  Herwald  relied
       upon the information provided by the Canadian IRB, but  (i)  that  is
       information from a foreign body; (ii) the information in that  report
       is now somewhat dated (the response is  dated  20th  September  2010)
       whereas the Home Office Fact finding mission took place in  May  2017
       and its report was published in September 2017;  (iii)  the  Canadian
       IRB refers to documents in general only and does not refer to  police
       and court documents, and finally, (iv), the information in  the  Home
       Office fact finding mission report published in September 2017  makes
       a distinction between Court documents and other documents.


   19. In my judgement, the difficulty with the submission made by Mr Razzaq-
       Siddiq is that he overlooks entirely, the fact that in  reaching  his
       decision Judge Herwald refers, at paragraph [15(d)], to the objective
       material set out in  paragraph  5.3.6  of  the  respondent's  Country
       Information Note.  That draws upon a report on Bangladesh prepared by
       the Australian Government's Department of Foreign Affairs  and  Trade
       ("DFAT") dated August  2019.  Paragraph  5.3.6  of  the  respondent's
       Country Information Note states:


             "... Court and police documents may be fraudulently  obtained,
             for example by bribing police for minor offences to be removed
             from record. Corruption is widespread in the  courts  and  the
             police  and  it  is  possible  that  genuine   documents   are
             fraudulently obtained as part of this process.  (my  emphasis)
             Local media often report on cases where fake  court  documents
             are created for personal gain. The  court  system  and  police
             systems are heavily bureaucratic and often paper-based,  which
             can limit the  ability  to  detect  fake  documents.  Official
             documents,   including   identity,   nationality   and   court
             documents, can often be difficult  to  verify  through  formal
             channels. (my emphasis) This is  for  a  variety  of  reasons,
             including  expectations  by  some  officials  of  facilitation
             payments, or genuine lack of adequate  records  and  capacity.
             DFAT  assesses  that  fraudulent  court  documents,  or  court
             documents that  were  obtained  fraudulently,  are  relatively
             common in Bangladesh. (my emphasis)"


   20. It is in my judgement clear that the background material  that  Judge
       Herwald had in mind, was not material that related  to  documents  in
       general but was concerned with the availability of documents from the
       courts and police.  It was undoubtedly open  to  Judge  Herwald,  who
       clearly considered all the available background material, to conclude
       that he could not place reliance on  the  information  purporting  to
       come from the police and courts in Bangladesh for the reasons  given.
       I am quite satisfied that in  reaching  his  decision  Judge  Herwald
       carefully considered all the background material that was before  the
       Tribunal, and insofar as Judge Herwald failed to expressly state that
       he preferred the DFAT  report  (which  was  the  most  recent  report
       chronologically), his decision discloses no  material  error  of  law
       capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal. The reference in  the
       report of the fact-finding mission completed by UK Home  Office  that
       was published  in  September  2017,  to  a  single  anonymous  source
       suggesting that forged or fraudulent police or  court  documents  are
       not easily obtainable because of counter signature processes and  the
       fact that all documents can be checked against a database, was not on
       any view, capable of undermining the other background  material  that
       was before the Tribunal and carefully considered by Judge Herwald.


   21. I reject the submission made by Mr Razzaq-Siddiq that  Judge  Herwald
       erred in his analysis of the FIR relied  upon  by  the  appellant  at
       paragraph [16(e)] of his decision. Judge Herwald noted that  the  FIR
       submitted by the appellant may not meet all the requirements  as  set
       out. Paragraph 3.1.1 of the respondent's 'Country  Information  Note,
       Bangladesh: Documentation', sets  out  the  information  that  a  FIR
       should contain.  All the information identified is not set out in the
       FIR relied upon by the appellant that is to be found  at  pages  [48]
       and [49] of the appellant's bundle. Mr Razzaq-Siddiq submits that the
       complaint that is to be found at pages [52] and [53]  forms  part  of
       the FIR and provides the required information regarding the facts  of
       the incident, but even if that is correct,  the  two  documents  read
       together do not list the names of witnesses.  The names and addresses
       of witnesses are set out on the 'Charge Sheet' that is to be found at
       pages [62] to [64] the appellant's bundle,  and  that  is  plainly  a
       separate document.


   22. I accept the submission made by Mr  Whitwell  that  the  decision  of
       Judge Herwald  that he could not  place  reliance  on  the  documents
       relied upon by  the  appellant  was  reached  after  considering  the
       evidence before the Tribunal in the round and having proper regard to
       the background material.  In my judgment, in reaching  his  decision,
       Judge Herwald clearly applied the correct test to his analysis of the
       claim made by the appellant and the documents relied  upon.   As  the
       Court of Appeal said at [18] of Herrera v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ   412,
       it is necessary to guard against the temptation  to  characterise  as
       errors of law what are in truth no more than disagreements about  the
       weight to be given to different factors, particularly  if  the  judge
       who decided the appeal had the advantage of  hearing  oral  evidence.
       The assessment of such a claim is  always  a  highly  fact  sensitive
       task.  The FtT judge was required to consider the evidence as a whole
       and he plainly did so, giving adequate reasons for his decision.  The
       findings and conclusions reached by the judge are neither  irrational
       nor unreasonable.  The decision was one that was open to the judge on
       the evidence before him and the findings made.


   23. It follows that I dismiss the appeal.


Notice of Decision


   24. The appeal is dismissed and the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
       Herwald promulgated on 9th October 2020 shall stand.

Signed        V. Mandalia                                    Date        8th
April 2021
       Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


