
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00397/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 17 September 2019                 |On 25 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Mr I S I A
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Assis, Counsel, instructed by Lei Dat & Baig
                    Solicitors (Renshaw House)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1    This is an appeal  brought  by  the  Secretary  of  State  against  the
    decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Gould dated 18  July  2019
    in which the judge allowed the appeal of the  Respondent,  who  was  of
    disputed nationality. The Respondent had made a claim  for  protection,
    asserting  that  he  was  of  Sudanese  non-Arab  Darfuri  origin   (in
    particular, being of the Bergo tribe); that in or around 2015 Janjaweed
    militia had launched attacks on his village; and  that  he  and  family
    members had suffered as a result.  He gave an account  of  leaving  the
    area and then ultimately leaving Sudan.  He travelled through a  number
    of countries including France before arriving in the United Kingdom and
    making his claim for protection on 3 July 2018.

2    The Appellant refused that claim for protection in a decision dated  27
    December 2018, rejecting the Respondent's claim to  be  a  national  of
    Sudan, on the basis inter alia that there was a record that  whilst  in
    France he had given his nationality as being from Chad.

3    The Appellant  also  asserted  in  the  decision  letter  that  certain
    information  given  by  the  Respondent  in  interview,  regarding  the
    geography of the Darfur region, the use of currency, and the  names  of
    certain foods was inconsistent with country information.

4    The Appellant also asserted that  there  were  inconsistencies  in  the
    Respondent's account regarding: the circumstances of the attacks by the
    Janjaweed (paragraph 59); when the attacks had taken  place  (paragraph
    60); the use of vehicles and whether houses  were  searched  (paragraph
    61); whether the Respondent's father had been killed, or taken away, or
    had disappeared,  and  when  that  had  happened  (paragraph  62);  the
    Respondent's escape from the region, and whether he left alone or  with
    others (paragraph 63-64); and relating to the  alleged  involvement  of
    the  sheikh  of  the  village  in  his  escape,  and   the   assistance
    subsequently said to have been given to the Respondent and a friend  by
    another man, for whom they agreed to work (paragraph 65).

5    A proper reading of the Appellant's  decision  overall  discloses  that
    the  issues  informing  the  Appellant's  view  of   the   Respondent's
    nationality were not limited to the Respondent's knowledge of geography
    in Darfur and the customs of non-Arab Darfuri tribes persons, but  also
    included the alleged discrepancies in the Respondent's account.

    The Judge's decision

6    The Respondent appealed, and the matter came  before  the  judge  on  2
    July 2019.  Before the judge were witness statements of the Respondent,
    and a country expert report from Mr Peter Verney (pages 48 to 77 of the
    Respondent's bundle), which I have read.  The judge made the  following
    findings (paragraph 31):

         "The Appellant has repeatedly stated (SI Q1.9, AIR  5/9/18  Q5  and
         AIR 4/12/18 Q25) that he is Sudanese and has been consistent.   The
         Respondent asserts that the Appellant is from Chad because, by  his
         own admission, he told the French  authorities  that  he  was  from
         Chad.  In my judgment this comment needs  to  be  assessed  in  the
         context in which it was made.  The Appellant asserts that  he  made
         this comment because of a genuine fear that if he disclosed he  was
         from Sudan he would be returned to Sudan and he had been told  that
         other asylum seekers were being returned to Sudan (w/s, para 4).  I
         reject the Respondent's submissions because the Appellant has  been
         otherwise consistent and there is support for his explanation in an
         excerpt from media coverage in France (dated 22 March 2017) at page
         37 of the Appellant's bundle confirming that the French authorities
         were returning asylum seekers from Darfur to Khartoum."

7     The  judge  also  considered  the  alleged  gaps  in  the  Appellant's
    knowledge of Sudan as follows:

         "32. I reject the Respondent's submission that the  knowledge  that
         the Appellant demonstrated about Sudan could have been gained  from
         living there  for  a  period  of  time  or  by  research.   If  the
         Respondent is correct that the Appellant is from Chad, there is  no
         support for the proposition that the Appellant spent time in Sudan:
         it is no  more  than  speculation  without  any  evidential  basis.
         Whilst I accept that some knowledge could be gleaned from research,
         the Appellant's ability to describe matters  including  traditions,
         culture and geography in such a level  of  detail  is  inconsistent
         with research as submitted by the Respondent.  Accordingly, I  find
         that the Appellant's intimate knowledge of Sudan is  based  on  his
         life in Sudan over many  years  until  he  fled  to  Libya:  he  is
         credible and reliable."

8    The Home Office Presenting Officer had argued  before  the  judge  that
    little weight should be given to Mr Verney's report because  he  lacked
    expertise, in particular in his purported opinion  as  to  the  use  of
    language by the  Respondent.   The  judge  found  at  paragraph  35  as
    follows:

         "35  In particular the Respondent submits that Mr Verney is  unable
         to provide a linguistic assessment as he is unable to  speak  Bergo
         (confirmed by Mr Verney  at  paragraph  200).   Whilst  this  is  a
         superficially  attractive  submission  it  loses  its  force   when
         assessed against Mr Verney's supplementary report  (two  pages,  in
         the  Appellant's  bundle  dated   13   June   2019).    Mr   Verney
         comprehensively answers the criticisms levelled against him  and  I
         accept that, whilst he is unable to speak Bergo himself, he is able
         to  provide  a  linguistic  assessment  based  on  his  experience.
         Furthermore, Mr Verney has taken the additional step of  consulting
         with the other Sudanese language experts and this further  enhances
         his opinion.  For these reasons, I accept that Mr  Verney  is  both
         objective and an expert and I rely on his conclusions.

         36.  Mr Verney concluded (para 321 - 333) that he was satisfied  as
         to the Appellant's nationality beyond reasonable doubt.  Mr  Verney
         concluded that the Appellant spoke Sudanese Arabic with  noticeable
         Darfuri influences and there was nothing in his use of Arabic  that
         would indicate he came from Chad.

         37.  For the reasons set out, I am satisfied that the Appellant has
         proved to the lower standard and that he is a national of Sudan and
         I am satisfied that his assertion that he is a non-Arab from Darfur
         is reliable.  It follows from  my  finding  about  the  Appellant's
         nationality that I reject  the  Respondent's  submission  that  the
         Appellant is a national of Chad."

9    The judge then stated at paragraph 39 that he  followed  the  authority
    of AA (Non-Arab Darfuris - relocation) Sudan CG [2009] UKAIT 00056  and
    MM (Darfuris) Sudan CG [2015] UKUT 00010  (IAC),  which  provided  that
    "All non-Arab Darfuris are at risk of persecution in Darfur and  cannot
    reasonably be expected to relocate  elsewhere  in  Sudan".   The  judge
    consequently allowed the appeal on asylum grounds.







    Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

10   The Appellant appeals on grounds dated 26  July  2019  that  the  judge
    erred in law, in summary, firstly  by  failing  to  take  into  account
    issues raised in the decision letter and in failing to resolve  certain
    conflicts of opinion.  In particular, the  Appellant  argues  that  the
    refusal letter had raised disputes as  to  the  Respondent's  level  of
    knowledge of local geography and his knowledge of the cost  of  living,
    which was internally and externally inconsistent.   These  issues  were
    said to be key issues on consideration  of  nationality  and  that  the
    judge erred by  failing  to  consider  or  address  these  points  when
    resolving the issue of nationality, or failed to give reasons as to why
    these issues were not material.

11   Secondly, the grounds argued that the judge  considered  the  issue  of
    risk on return to Sudan  but  that  the  decision  was  devoid  of  any
    findings on the Appellant's claim to have been the subject to an attack
    in 2015.  A range of inconsistencies in the Respondent's evidence  were
    raised in the refusal letter at paragraphs 59 to 67, yet the judge  had
    not engaged with them and had not balanced these findings  against  any
    conclusions made by the expert Peter Verney, on whose report the  judge
    heavily relied.

12   Thirdly, it was argued that the judge erred in  failing  to  deal  with
    the  Presenting  Officer's  submission  that   the   Respondent   could
    internally relocate, that argument  being  based  on  certain  passages
    within a Home Office Country Policy and Information Note regarding  the
    alleged safety of non-Arab Darfuris within the Khartoum area and  which
    suggested that the country guidance cases of AA and MM were  no  longer
    applicable.

13   Permission to appeal was granted by Designated Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Woodcraft on 15 August 2019, finding  that  the  grounds  were
    arguable.

    Submissions

14   Mr McVeety noted in relation to the third ground, that in the  case  of
    AAR and AA (as yet unreported,  PA/08701/2017  and  PA/112245/2017),  7
    August 2019 (which  had  been  listed  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  as
    potential Country Guidance on  the  issue  of  internal  relocation  in
    Khartoum for non-Arab Darfuris), the Secretary of  State  had  recently
    conceded, given  present  volatile  conditions  in  Sudan,  that  those
    appeals should be determined on  the  basis  of  the  existing  country
    guidance cases. The paragraph following paragraph 29 of  that  decision
    reads as follows:

         "The answer to the country guidance question  that  was  originally
         asked in these appeals  is  as  follows.  The  situation  in  Sudan
         remains volatile after civil protests started in late 2018 and  the
         future is unpredictable there is  insufficient  evidence  currently
         available to show the guidance given in  AA  (non-Arab  Darfuris  -
         relocation) Sudan CG [2009] UKAIT 00056 and MM (Darfuris) Sudan  CG
         [2015] UJUT 00010 (IAC) requires revision. Those cases should still
         be followed."

    Therefore, although not  formally  withdrawing  the  third  ground,  Mr
    McVeety did not pursue it.

15   In relation to the first ground, Mr McVeety argued  that  at  paragraph
    31 it was inconsistent for the judge to have described  the  Respondent
    as being 'consistent' in  his  evidence,  when  he  had  patently  been
    inconsistent on one occasion, stating that he was from Chad.

16   Mr McVeety also argued that the  judge  had  erroneously  purported  to
    adopt wholesale the opinion of Mr Verney, who had  expressed  the  view
    that the Appellant's account was entirely credible.  Mr McVeety  argued
    that there were a number of matters, relating not only  to  matters  of
    knowledge of geography and customs  in  Sudan,  but  also  relating  to
    inconsistencies within the Respondent's account, as set out within  the
    refusal letter, which the judge had not dealt with himself.

17   Mr Assis argued that Mr Verney should be treated as a relevant  expert,
    as found by the judge, that his report was detailed and the  judge  was
    entitled to place significant weight upon  it,  and  that  no  material
    error of law was disclosed by the Appellant's grounds of appeal.

    Discussion

18   In relation to the Appellant's third ground, it is  apparent  that  the
    judge fails to state at paragraph 39 why the CG cases of AA and MM were
    still applicable, notwithstanding  the  evidence  relied  upon  by  the
    Appellant before the judge that conditions  in  Khartoum  had  improved
    sufficiently for non-Arab Darfuris that they  could  safely  internally
    relocate there. Arguably, the judge's decision in this respect required
    greater reasoning. However, whether the judge's failure to provide such
    reasoning represents a material error of law is moot. Given the outcome
    in the recent case of AAR and AA, it is likely that  any  decision  now
    being remade would result in a  finding  that  internal  relocation  to
    Khartoum would not be a viable for a non-Arab Darfuri. I say  'likely',
    on the basis that AAR and AA itself does not yet appear  to  have  been
    reported as Country Guidance, or indeed reported at all at the  present
    time. It is not necessary for me to come  to  a  concluded  view  about
    whether the judge's failure to provide further reasoning  at  paragraph
    39 of the decision represents a material error,  because  I  find  that
    there are, for other reasons, material errors in the decision requiring
    the matter to be set aside and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

19   With respect to Mr McVeety's submission that the judge erred in law  in
    purporting to find that the Respondent's account of his own nationality
    had been consistent, I find that the judge was clearly  aware  that  it
    was an element of the Respondent's evidence that at one point he stated
    that he was from Chad. The judge considered that issue within paragraph
    31, and made reference to certain country information which was said to
    be relevant to the phenomenon of Sudanese nationals in  France  fearing
    being removed to Sudan.  I find that no material error of law  is  made
    out in respect of any ground alleging that the  judge  failed  to  take
    into account the Respondent's evidence that he had been from Chad, when
    considered as a discrete issue.

20   I turn to the judge's treatment of the  expert  evidence  of  Mr  Peter
    Verney dated 11 March 2019, and the adequacy of the judge's findings on
    the Respondent's past account. The structure of Mr Verney's  report  is
    to first set out an  interview  with  the  Respondent,  followed  by  a
    discussion  of  some  discreet  human  rights  issues,  and  then   his
    conclusions. A significant proportion of Mr Verney's report is made  up
    of the account of his interview with the Respondent, although  not  set
    out verbatim.  Throughout that part of the report  Mr  Verney  provides
    headings and it is clear that Mr Verney discussed certain paragraphs of
    the Appellant's decision letter with the Respondent.  Mr  Verney  asked
    the Respondent some questions regarding  the  geography  of  Sudan.  Mr
    Verney records the Respondent's answers, which demonstrated,  according
    to Mr Verney's own experience, relevant knowledge of the  geography  of
    the area. The judge was clearly entitled to  take  that  evidence  into
    account and to treat it as expert evidence.

21   Mr Verney also opines at his paragraph 84, that there may have been  an
    interpreting error on the part of the Home Office interpreter confusing
    the words 'east' and 'west'. Further, in his report at  paragraphs  94-
    99, Mr Verney explores with the  Respondent  the  allegation  that  the
    Respondent had shown a lack of knowledge  of  journey  times  from  his
    village to a place named ForoBoranga, and from there,  to  Geneina.  Mr
    Verney asserts that an apparent error by the  Respondent  as  to  these
    journey times 'seems to have been a slip of the tongue'.  However,  the
    supposition that the Respondent may have engaged  in  a  'slip  of  the
    tongue' does not, it seems to me, represent expert opinion.

22   In the section of Mr Verney's report entitled 'Attacks on  village'  at
    his paragraphs 156-159, Mr Verney appears to be addressing paragraph 59
    of the decision letter. He provides as follows:

         "156.    The HO letter seems to be mixing up the two attacks on his
         village, I note.

         157. You told me there were two attacks, is that right? I asked.

         158. Yes, he said. The first time they were searching for  weapons,
         and did not find anything. The second time they  were  burning  and
         destroying.

         159. It seems highly likely that he was not properly understood  in
         the HO interviews, because his Sudanese Darfuri is  very  different
         from the Iraqi Arabic of his interpreter."

23   However, there is no finding in the judge's decision as to whether  the
    Respondent did indeed  have  problems  understanding  the  Home  Office
    interpreter during the SEF interview as alleged.

24   Further, Mr Verney does not appear to address  at  this  part  of  this
    report the other concerns of the Appellant set out in paragraphs  60-61
    of  the  decision  letter  regarding  other   alleged   inconsistencies
    regarding the timing and events of the two attacks.  Further,  although
    at paragraph 160 of his report, Mr Verney purports  to  address  issues
    raised at paragraph '62' of the decision letter, the  issues  discussed
    therein (the Respondent's journey to Hilat Taiba village) is  a  matter
    actually raised at paragraph 63 of  the  decision  letter,  not  62.  I
    cannot therefore see anything within  Mr  Verney's  report  seeking  to
    address the issues actually raised at  paragraph  62  of  the  decision
    letter, which relates to alleged discrepancies regarding  the  fate  of
    the Respondent's father;  a  fairly  serious  matter,  one  might  have
    thought.

25   Further, the issues set out  at  paragraphs  63  -65  of  the  decision
    (summarised at paragraph 4 above) are barely touched upon by Mr Verney,
    and his  observations  at  paragraphs  160-163  do  not  in  any  event
    represent expert opinion in my view;  merely  the  recitation  of  some
    further information given by the Respondent.

26   In making the observations I have above, I am not seeking to draw  into
    question the standing of Mr Verney as an expert; merely the limitations
    of specific paragraphs of this particular report.

27   Even if Mr Verney's  report  was  capable  of  being  given  weight  in
    certain respects, the carte  blanche  adoption  by  the  judge  of  the
    opinion of Mr Verney did not excuse the judge for performing  his  task
    to resolve certain issues in dispute between the parties. I  find  that
    the issues raised at  paragraphs  59-65  of  the  appellant's  decision
    letter are not adequately determined by the judge in  the  appeal.  For
    that reason, I find that the  judge's  decision  contained  a  material
    error of law which was to fail to resolve issues in dispute.

28   Going forwards, the issue likely to  be  key  in  this  appeal  is  the
    Respondent's nationality. I find that the dispute over the Respondent's
    nationality was not limited to issues of knowledge of geography and non-
    Arab Darfuri customs.  Rather,  the  credibility  of  the  Respondent's
    account overall was also a factor  relevant  to  the  question  of  his
    nationality. Therefore, the judge's error in failing to resolve matters
    in dispute in the appeal relating  to  the  Respondent's  account,  was
    material to the question of the Respondent's nationality.

29   It is therefore necessary  for  the  credibility  of  the  Respondent's
    account to be  revisited  afresh,  including  a  determination  of  his
    nationality. The judge's decision is set aside with no findings of fact
    retained. Due to the extent of the findings of fact which will need  to
    made in this appeal, it shall be remitted to the First  tier  Tribunal,
    and the Tribunal  shall  then  take  into  account  relevant  published
    Country Guidance.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision contained an error  of  law  which  was  material  to  the
    outcome of the appeal and the decision is set aside.

    The appeal is remitted to the First tier Tribunal.


Signed   Date: 23.9.19

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date: 23.9.19

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan

