
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00995/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34 of the                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules   |On 02 July 2020                |
|2008                                        |                               |
|On 17 June 2020                             |                               |
|                                            |                               |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     Z L
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008,
I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper  Tribunal  or  a  Court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant  or  members  of
his family. This direction applies to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.

This decision has been made without a hearing, pursuant to rule  34  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of China.  His wife and young son  are  also
    citizens of that country.  They are dependents on  him  in  respect  of
    these proceedings.

 2. This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Agnew ("the judge"), promulgated on 18 February 2019, in
    which she dismissed the appellant's  appeal  against  the  respondent's
    refusal of his protection and human rights claims.

 3. Following that decision, the appellant unsuccessfully sought permission
    to appeal from the First-tier Tribunal and  then  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    The decision of the latter was challenged by  way  of  judicial  review
    proceedings.  A Joint Minute was submitted by the parties  and,  by  an
    Interlocutor dated 12 February 2020, the Court of Session  reduced  the
    decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  refuse  permission  to  appeal.
    Following this, the Vice-President granted permission to appeal  on  10
    March 2020.

 4. Before the matter could be listed for an  error  of  law  hearing,  the
    Covid-19  pandemic  took  hold  and  all  listings   were   temporarily
    suspended.  Directions were sent out to the parties on 1 May 2020.  The
    stated provisional view of the Vice-President was that the questions of
    whether the First-tier Tribunal had  erred  in  law  and,  if  it  had,
    whether the decision should be set aside, could  be  fairly  determined
    without a hearing.

 5. The appellant filed and served submissions, dated  11  May  2020.   The
    respondent filed and served a response on the 19th of  that  month.   A
    reply was received from the appellant on 28 May.

 6. During the course of the appellate proceedings, the appellant had  been
    accepted as a victim  of  trafficking.   However,  the  respondent  had
    refused to grant him a period of discretionary leave to  remain.   This
    decision was challenged by way of judicial review proceedings.   In  an
    Opinion dated 14 May 2020, the Court of Session reduced  that  decision
    and ordered that the respondent make a fresh decision on  the  question
    of discretionary leave (ZL [2020] CSOH 44).  The essence of the Court's
    Opinion was that the respondent failed to  lawfully  consider  evidence
    relating both to the risk  of  the  appellant  being  re-trafficked  if
    returned to China and the provision of appropriate  treatment  for  his
    son (who suffers from a complicated form of epilepsy known as Myoclonic
    astatic epilepsy).

 7. As a consequence of  this,  the  respondent  decided  to  withdraw  her
    decision to refuse the appellant's protection and human rights  claims.
    It was said that the appellant's circumstances as  a  whole  should  be
    reconsidered.  The response of 19 May 2020  focused  entirely  on  this
    point, with the assertion that the Upper Tribunal should not proceed to
    determine the question of whether the First-tier Tribunal had erred  in
    law.

 8. Following further correspondence, the appellant stated that he did  not
    want to withdraw his appeal to the Upper Tribunal  and  requested  that
    the Tribunal reached a decision on the error of law issue.

The first procedural issue: withdrawal

 9. On a purely technical point, the Tribunal has  not,  as  far  as  I  am
    aware, received formal notification from the respondent  that  she  has
    indeed withdrawn the refusal of the appellant's  protection  and  human
    rights claims.  However, in the circumstances I am prepared  to  accept
    the assertion made in the written submissions is to this effect.

10. The appellant's submissions make reference to guidance published by the
    respondent in respect of  the  withdrawal  of  decisions  ("Withdrawing
    Decisions", version 3.0, dated 6 February 2020).   At  page  5  of  the
    guidance, it is stated that:

         "A decision should only be withdrawn with a view to granting leave.
         You do not have to be certain that leave will be granted,  but  you
         must be genuinely of the view that it might."

11. After being asked for clarification as to the respondent's reasons  for
    withdrawing the decision and  the  prospects  of  the  appellant  being
    granted leave to remain, an email response was received  including  the
    following passage:

         "The respondent can confirm that following the  withdrawal  of  the
         decision, the matter has been allocated to a decision maker who  is
         looking into this next week and a fresh decision should follow. The
         respondent cannot currently confirm that the reconsideration  would
         definitely lead to a grant of some form of leave at this stage."

12. The position remained ambiguous and I asked for further  clarification.
    In an email dated 28 May 2020, the respondent replied that:

         "As referred to in my previous correspondence, the decision was not
         withdrawn with a view to grant the  appellant  leave,  but  it  was
         withdrawn so that a  consistent  decision  can  be  made  with  the
         parallel decision in respect of the leave to remain decision.  This
         does not mean that a reconsideration will automatically lead  to  a
         refusal either, as both reconsiderations  are  being  made  on  the
         basis of previously submitted and fresh evidence  as  well  as  the
         views on Lord Armstrong. If either reconsideration leads to a grant
         of leave, this will clearly impact the other and therefore  it  was
         considered that the most sensible and pragmatic way in dealing with
         both decision was  to  reconsider  them  both,  in  light  of  Lord
         Armstrong's decision, any fresh evidence and the latest case law."

13. In my view, the approach taken by the respondent does not  reflect  her
    own guidance on withdrawing decisions.

14. In considering the appropriate course  of  action,  I  also  take  into
    account the fact that the appellant's challenge to the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal involves issues beyond solely the medical condition
    of the son.

15. It is the case that  the  respondent's  withdrawal  of  the  underlying
    decision which led to the appeal be made under section 82 (1) NIAA 2002
    does not require consent from  the  Tribunal  order  to  be  effective.
    However, following such a withdrawal, the Tribunal retains jurisdiction
    to decide the appeal in any  event  (see  SM  (withdrawal  of  appealed
    decision: effect) Pakistan [2014] UKUT 64 (IAC)).

16. In all the circumstances, I  consider  it  appropriate  to  proceed  to
    determine questions of whether the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    is vitiated by error of law and, if it is, whether  it  should  be  set
    aside.

The second procedural issue: reaching a decision about a hearing

17. The issues before me have been clearly identified by the appellant.   I
    have all of the relevant evidence referred to by the judge and  in  the
    grounds of appeal  on  file.   Nothing  has  risen  from  the  parties'
    respective written submissions which requires me to direct a hearing to
    take place.  In respect of those submissions, the  respondent  did  not
    address the question of whether a hearing should take  place.   On  the
    appellant's side, reference is made to a hearing, but as  I  understand
    it, this is in the context of any re-making decision which might follow
    from a conclusion that the First-tier Tribunal erred in  law  and  that
    its decision should be set aside.

18. Having regard to rule 34 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008, the overriding objective, the parties' submissions, and the
    nature of the issues in this appeal as a whole, I have  concluded  that
    it is appropriate  to  reach  a  decision  on  whether  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in law without holding a hearing.

The judge's decision

19. In a detailed decision, the judge did not go behind the  conclusion  of
    the Competent Authority that the appellant was a victim of trafficking.
     In light of this, she found that he was a vulnerable witness.

20. The judge ultimately concluded that the appellant's account  of  events
    said to underpin the protection claim was, "not plausible  and  [I]  do
    not find him to be a credible witness."  (See [45]).  In  summary,  the
    judge deemed the  following  matters  to  significantly  undermine  the
    appellant's evidence:

      i. the lack of  independent  corroborative  evidence  as  regards  the
         claimed land dispute and consequent disturbances (see [25]-[26]);

     ii. inconsistencies and implausibilities regarding the claimed  contact
         between the appellant and family members in China (see [29]-[40]);

    iii. the inconsistency in the appellant's evidence as to whether he  had
         trained as a chef in China (see [41]).

21. In light of the overall credibility  assessment,  the  judge  concluded
    that the appellant was not at risk of being  re-trafficked,  or  indeed
    for any other reason.

22. As regards Article 8 and  the  appellant's  son,  the  judge  addressed
    medical evidence at [50]-[54].  She found that the child had been on  a
    course of steroids, and  that  this  had  resulted  in  an  absence  of
    seizures.  She found that the son was doing well  at  nursery.   Having
    regard to country information relied on by the respondent and competing
    evidence  from  a  Paediatric  epilepsy  nurse  consultant,  the  judge
    concluded  at  [54]  that  the  appellant  had  failed  to  show   that
    appropriate medication for the child's condition would not be available
    in China.  Following from this,  she  concluded  that  his  health  and
    development would not deteriorate on return to China and  that  such  a
    return would, in all circumstances, be reasonable and not  contrary  to
    his best interests.  Having proceeded through the  staged  approach  to
    Article 8, the judge concluded that the removal of the  appellant,  his
    wife, and their son China would be proportionate and therefore  lawful.
    The appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

The grounds of appeal

23. Having regard to the grounds  of  appeal  accompanying  the  permission
    applications made  to  both  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  Upper
    Tribunal, the broad thrust of the appellant's challenge can be  divided
    into three elements.  First, it is said that the  judge's  reliance  on
    the absence of corroborative evidence was an  error  of  law.   Second,
    that the judge's findings as to family contact are flawed on the  basis
    that: (i) she failed to have a  look  had  regard  to  the  appellant's
    vulnerability as a witness; and (ii), that  she  misapprehended  and/or
    left out of account relevant evidence.  Third,  that  when  considering
    the issue of the son's medical condition and treatment if  returned  to
    China, the judge read conclusions that were not  open  to  her  on  the
    evidence.

The parties' written submissions

24. The appellant's written submissions, dated  11  May  2020,  essentially
    follow the content of the two sets of grounds of appeal.  They focus on
    the appellant's vulnerability, the absence  of  specific  corroborative
    evidence as regards the land dispute, the issue of the contact that the
    appellant claimed to have had with family members  in  China,  and  the
    son's medical condition.  I shall deal  with  various  aspects  of  the
    submissions (and the associated grounds) in more detail, below.

25. In respect of the respondent's written submissions, as noted previously
    they focus entirely on the withdrawal of the underlying decisions.   No
    submissions are made as to the substance of the appellant's grounds  or
    written submissions.

Decision on error of law

26. Not each and every aspect of the  grounds  of  appeal  are,  on  proper
    analysis, made out.  However, having considered the challenges and  the
    decision in the round, I conclude that there are material errors of law
    in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, and that it must  therefore
    be set aside.

27. It is clear from [25] and [26] that the judge considered the absence of
    specific corroborative evidence relating to  the  claimed  disturbances
    arising from the land dispute to be adverse to  the  appellant's  case.
    Corroborative evidence is  never  a  legal  requirement  in  protection
    claims.  Having said that, there will be cases where such  evidence  is
    legitimately said to be easily obtainable and that  its  absence  might
    properly be held against an individual's overall credibility.   In  the
    present case, I conclude that  the  judge's  expectation  that  reports
    "would have" been placed in one  or  more  sources  of  media  was  not
    justified.  There was no evidence to suggest that each and  every  land
    dispute in China had (or would be) the subject of  media  reporting  or
    Internet posting.  As far as I can see  from  the  country  information
    that was before the judge (and  referred  to  in  paragraph  2  of  the
    grounds to the First-tier Tribunal),  the  examples  of  relevant  land
    dispute/conflicts was never said to be exhaustive in  nature.   On  the
    appellant's case,  he  had  not  claimed  that  the  disturbances  were
    particularly large-scale.  Further, the judge had  accepted  that  land
    disputes involving violent clashes was a widespread problem  in  China.
    There is merit in the appellant's submission that  the  nature  of  the
    Chinese regime is such that reporting and  Internet  activity  is  very
    often effectively suppressed.  In light of the foregoing,  the  judge's
    adverse view of  the  appellant's  credibility  was  based  upon  undue
    speculation and a failure to consider this aspect of his claim  in  its
    proper context.  There is an error here.

28. I turn to the  issue  of  the  appellant's  vulnerability.   The  judge
    correctly identified him as a vulnerable witness  at  [16].   The  fact
    that an individual is a vulnerable  witness  does  not  mean  that  any
    adverse credibility findings are, for that reason alone, susceptible to
    challenge appeal (see SB (vulnerable adult: credibility)  Ghana  [2019]
    UKUT 00398 (IAC)).  It is also the case that it is for the  fact-finder
    to  determine  what,  if  any,  connection   there   is   between   the
    vulnerability and the assessment of particular aspects of the  evidence
    (again, see SB).

29. In the present case, the  judge  makes  reference  to  the  appellant's
    vulnerability at three points of her decision ([16],  [22],  and  [45])
    and I exercise real caution before concluding that the  recognition  of
    vulnerability was  not  actually  applied  to  the  assessment  of  the
    evidence.  There are, however, two aspects of the appellant's  evidence
    in respect of which the judge did not in my view adequately consider or
    provide reasons.  The first relates to the number  of  times  that  the
    appellant had contacted his mother: there was an apparent ambiguity  as
    to whether this had occurred once or twice.  A  the  Appellant  claimed
    that the second occasion involved indirect contact.  The judge took the
    view that there was  a  material  discrepancy  in  the  evidence.   The
    context surrounding that aspect of the evidence was that the  appellant
    was a victim of trafficking and that  the  second  "contact"  with  his
    mother had occurred whilst he  was  still  under  the  control  of  the
    traffickers.  At the hearing, the appellant was being asked  to  recall
    events from that time.  In my view, this  context  required  particular
    care to be attributed to the issue of vulnerability  and  the  possible
    effect this might have had on the evidence  provided  (whether  at  the
    hearing itself, or to the respondent previously).  I conclude  that  on
    this specific issue, the judge failed to adequately consider or provide
    reasons in respect of the acknowledged vulnerability.  In this respect,
    she erred in law.

30. The third and final matter to be addressed relates to  the  appellant's
    son.  The central focus of the appellant's challenge is  that  at  [54]
    the judge erroneously concluded that a  specified  type  of  medication
    that  was  available  in   China   (Valproate)   was   an   appropriate
    "alternative" to that being taken by the child in  the  United  Kingdom
    (Sodium Valproate).  The country information adduced by the  respondent
    and upon which the judge was presumably basing her  conclusion,  stated
    that "valproic acid or valproate" was  available.   I  agree  with  the
    appellant's grounds and written submissions that there was no  evidence
    to show that these two alternatives were either effectively the same as
    the  Sodium  Valproate,  or  that  they  were   nonetheless   medically
    appropriate substitutes.  I fully appreciate that the burden  of  proof
    rested with the appellant to prove the essential facts upon  which  his
    case rested.  However, he had provided medical evidence  to  show  what
    the child was being prescribed.   The  respondent's  evidence  did  not
    specifically contradict that evidence, but at best resulted in  a  lack
    of clarity.  I am satisfied  that  the  issue  of  the  equivalence  of
    medication was not raised at the hearing.  In all the circumstances,  I
    conclude that there was no sound evidential  basis  for  the  judge  to
    conclude that the medication named in the respondent's evidence  was  a
    medically appropriate alternative to that already being  prescribed  to
    the appellant's son.  This is the third error of  law  in  the  judge's
    decision.

31. The errors discussed above go to both  the  protection  and  Article  8
    claims.  They relate to material aspects of the overall  assessment  of
    those claims.  I conclude that they are all material.   Therefore,  the
    judge's decision must be set aside.  In all  the  circumstances,  there
    shall be no preserved findings of fact, save that the  appellant  is  a
    victim of trafficking and that his son suffers from  Myoclonic  astatic
    epilepsy.

Disposal

32. Neither party has provided their view on what should  happen  were  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal to be set aside.  I have had regard
    to paragraph 7.2 of the Practice Statement and  the  guiding  principle
    that remittal is the exception to the rule.

33. I conclude that the appropriate course  of  action  is  to  remit  this
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a complete re-hearing (subject to
    the two preserved findings of fact set out above).  This  is  in  large
    part because of the need to re-assess the  appellant's  credibility  as
    regards the protection claim.  Oral evidence is likely to  be  required
    and the fact-finding will be relatively extensive in nature.

Additional observation

34. In view of the respondent's ongoing reconsideration of the  appellant's
    circumstances, both parties are reminded of their obligation to  inform
    the Tribunal if the appellant is granted any form of leave to remain in
    the United Kingdom.

Anonymity

35. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction.   However,
    in light of the usual practice in protection cases, together  with  the
    fact that there is a minor child and that the appellant is a victim  of
    trafficking, I consider it appropriate to  make  a  direction  at  this
    stage.

Notice of Decision

36. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did the making of
    an error on a point of law.

37. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

38. I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.



Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

      1. This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal;

      2. The remitted appeal shall not be heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge
         Agnew;

      3. The remitted appeal shall be concerned with  both  the  appellant's
         protection and human rights claims;

      4. The only two preserved findings of fact from the decision of First-
         tier Tribunal Judge Agnew are those set out in paragraph 31, above.


Signed: H Norton-Taylor    Date:  17 June 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

