
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00683/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|by Skype for Business                |                                     |
|On 19 March 2021                     |On 24 March 2021                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                 P P (Nepal)
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Nisham Paramjorthy of Counsel, instructed by
                    Cranbrook Legal Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr Stephen Walker, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity order

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) The Tribunal has ORDERED that no one shall publish  or  reveal
the name or address of P P who  is  the  subject  of  these  proceedings  or
publish or reveal any information which would  be  likely  to  lead  to  the
identification of him or of any member of  his  family  in  connection  with
these proceedings.

Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.



Decision and reasons

1. The appellant appeals with permission from the  decision  of  the  First-
   tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the respondent's decision  on
   28 January 2019 to refuse him refugee status under the  1951  Convention,
   humanitarian protection, or leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  on
   human rights grounds. The appellant is a citizen of Nepal.



Background

2. The appellant was born in 1986 and is now  34  years  old.   On  19  July
   2009, when he was 23 hears old, he entered the United Kingdom with a Tier
   4 (Student) visa and remained here lawfully, first as a student and  then
   as a skilled worker, until 15 October  2015,  when  his  final  visa  was
   curtailed due to the revocation of his sponsor employer's  licence.   The
   appellant did not embark for Nepal.

3. The First-tier Judge accepted that the appellant was  in  a  genuine  and
   subsisting relationship with his partner, a Nepalese woman  who  came  to
   the United Kingdom in September 2009.  A friend told him of  her  arrival
   in October 2009 and asked the appellant to help her.  Over time, feelings
   developed between the two young Nepalese, and by March 2010 they were  in
   a relationship.  In June 2010, they began to cohabit.

4. The appellant's account is that  cohabitation  ended  in  November  2010,
   when his partner told her mother about the relationship.   The  issue  is
   said to be that they are both Brahmin Hindus, of the same caste, and that
   therefore marriage between them is prohibited.  He  also  says  that  his
   partner's mother  is  a  Communist  Party  member,  with  a  position  of
   influence extending beyond her home area,  who  ahs  been  the  Communist
   Party representative on the local Council since 2017.

5. In December 2014, the appellant returned alone to Nepal.   He  wanted  to
   visit his partner's family and ask for her hand in marriage.  His partner
   telephoned her parents to say that he was in Nepal,  and  an  arrangement
   was made for him to meet some men.  The appellant  thought  he  would  be
   taken to his partner's parents' home to meet them, but instead,  he  says
   he was taken to another place and beaten up.  He had to go  to  hospital.
   Contact between his partner and her family since then has been rare.

6. The appellant says that  he  was  told  that  in  2016,  members  of  the
   Nepalese Communist Party contacted his family in Nepal  to  ask  for  his
   address in the United Kingdom and when he would return to Nepal.

7. The appellant returned to the United Kingdom (it is  not  clear  on  what
   basis  he  was  able  to  re-enter).   He   made   various   unsuccessful
   applications for leave to remain between 2016  and  2019.   He  considers
   that the threat  from  his  partner's  family  and  the  Communist  Party
   remains.  His partner's witness statement stated that Nepal was  a  small
   and social country and that they would be found wherever they went.

8. The application with which we are concerned was made on 18 January  2019,
   after the appellant was detained on reporting, and was  an  international
   protection claim. It was rejected on 28 January 2019  and  the  appellant
   appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.



First-tier Tribunal decision

9. The First-tier Judge did not find most of the  appellant's  core  account
   to be credible, but he did accept that the appellant and his partner  are
   in a genuine, but prohibited  relationship.   He  found  that  there  was
   nevertheless an internal relocation option.

10. The First-tier Judge noted that the appellant's partner has no right  to
   reside in the United Kingdom and that  the  parties  have  not  cohabited
   since  2010.   He  accepted  that  the  relationship  was   genuine   and
   subsisting, but not that it amounted to family life.

11. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal.



Permission to appeal

12. Upper Tribunal  Judge  Perkins  granted  permission  to  appeal  on  the
   following basis:

    "3.  A difficulty I have with the decision  and  reasons  is  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal finds that if there is family life, it can continue
    in Nepal (paragraph 110 of the decision and  reasons)  even  though  it
    appears that the relationship is forbidden (paragraph 94).

    4.   Whilst I may be able to follow the conclusion that  the  appellant
    would not risk personal violence throughout Nepal  immediately  on  his
    return there this, even if sound, arguably does not  answer  the  claim
    that returning him to a country where he could not develop his 'private
    and family life' with his partner is unlawful'."

13. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.



Upper Tribunal hearing

14. At the Upper Tribunal hearing, both representatives submitted  that  the
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal was flawed and could not stand.

15. I agree.  The decision in this appeal will have to be remade and I  have
   a number of other concerns regarding  the  judge's  reasoning.   It  will
   unfortunately be necessary for the decision to be remade  afresh  in  the
   First-tier Tribunal.



DECISION

16. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:


   The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error on  a
   point of law.
   I set aside the previous decision.  The decision in this appeal  will  be
   remade in the First-tier Tribunal.




Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                           Date:      19 March
2021
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

