
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00310/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 August 2019                    |On 02 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  Errol [T]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Najma, Legal representative, ASR Legal
Solicitors Ltd


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The respondent (hereafter "the claimant") is a citizen of Jamaica  aged
39.  Having arrived in the UK in June 2014 as a visitor, he overstayed.   In
November 2014 he married a British  citizen,  LM,  but  his  application  to
remain on  that  basis  was  unsuccessful.   On  26  November  2015  he  was
convicted of three counts of supply of a Class A drug - crack cocaine -  and
on 9 June 2016 was sentenced to three concurrent terms of  three  years  and
recommended  for  automatic  deportation.   Having  been   served   with   a
deportation decision the same month, he made a human right  claim  and  then
an asylum  claim.   On  21  December  2017  the  appellant  (hereafter  "the
Secretary of  State"  or  "SSHD")  refused  his  claims  and  confirmed  the
deportation decision, making a  subsequent  deportation  order  on  9  March
2017.  The  decision  also  certified  that  he  had  been  convicted  of  a
particularly serious crime  warranting  the  application  of  a  Section  72
certificate under Section  72(9)(b)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
Asylum Act 2002.  The claimant appealed. In a decision sent on  20  February
2018 Judge Burns of the  First-tier  Tribunal  (FtT)  dismissed  the  asylum
grounds of appeal, but allowed his appeal on Article 8 grounds.

2.   In a decision posted on 18 April 2019,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Rintoul
and I set aside the decision.  We identified several errors in  the  judge's
assessment of the claimant's Article 8 circumstances.

3.   At the end of our decision we stated (at  para  24)  that  because  the
only live issue  concerned  paragraph  399A(ii)  and  the  related  s117C(5)
issue of whether it would be unduly harsh for the children to  live  in  the
UK without the claimant, and because  almost  none  of  the  facts  were  in
dispute, we would retain the case in the Upper Tribunal. We  then  gave  the
following Directions:

    "Directions

    As will be evident from the terms of our error of law decision, we have
    particular concerns about the lack of  evidence  regarding  the  likely
    situation of the wife if she is left to bring up her four  children  on
    her own (we note that in addition to the issue of  whether  the  effect
    of the claimant's deportation would be unduly harsh  on  the  children,
    s117C(5) also requires an examination of the same issue in  respect  of
    the effect on the partner).  To this end we direct that the  claimant's
    representatives obtain and produce to the Upper Tribunal  within  eight
    weeks of the date  this  decision  is  sent  (with  copy  to  the  SSHD
    Presenting Officer) an independent social welfare report addressing:

    (a)  the likely circumstances of the wife and children if the  claimant
         is deported;

    (b)  the history and extent of contact between the two stepchildren and
         their biological fathers;

    (c)  the history of the family and how it  managed  during  the  period
         when the claimant was in prison; and

    (d)  the number of family members on the wife's and claimant's side who
         live near to the claimant, with details of any help they have given
         to the wife in relation to caring for the children."

4.   It can be seen from the text  of  the  directions  that  we  recognised
that, as well  as  the  issue  of  whether  the  effect  of  the  claimant's
deportation would be unduly harsh  on  the  children,  we  had  to  consider
whether it  would  be  unduly  harsh  on  his  wife,  LM.  Subsequently  the
claimant's  representatives  produced  a  report  from  Diana   Harris,   an
Independent Social Worker dated 14 May  2019.  After  discussions  with  the
parties at  a CMR hearing on 17 May 2017, I  directed  that  the  claimant's
representatives produce an addendum  report that  (i)  addressed  the  Upper
Tribunal's error of law decision and directions; and (ii) obtained and  then
addressed the social services records held by Birmingham Social Services  on
the family, as this report  failed  to  fully  address  all  four  questions
identified in our Directions.

5.    Within  the  specified  time  period  the  claimant's  representatives
produced an updated independent social work assessment of the  claimant  and
family dated 4 June 2019 from Diana Harris.

6.   The case is now before me in order that I re-make the decision  on  the
appeal confined to the Article 8 issue. I should explain that  in  referring
impersonally to the claimant's wife either as "his wife"  and  the  children
by capital letters, I have in mind the need to ensure that the children  are
not identified.

7.   At the hearing I heard  submissions.  It  is  convenient  to  summarise
these later, but I note here that in initial discussions it was agreed  that
this updated/addendum report still did not fully address points (c) and  (d)
of the Upper Tribunal's Directions. I considered whether it would be in  the
interests of justice to adjourn to obtain  a  further  supplementary  report
that did, but decided to proceed for three reasons. First of  all,  as  will
be  summarised  below,  Ms  Harris  did  submit  a  6-page  addendum  headed
"Response to Directions from the Upper Tribunal", which dealt in  turn  with
points )a)-(d) of the Upper Tribunal directions and identified some  changes
made in the text of the original report inserted in  light  of  her  further
review. Second, even though it still did not deal  fully  with  points  (a)-
(d), it  contained  sufficient  information  (including  an  email  sent  by
Birmingham Children's Trust on 21 May 2019 in response to enquiries made  by
ASR legal), read together with the other documentary  evidence,  for  me  to
assess the points of concern at  (c)  and  (d).   Third,  the  original  and
updated reports are both based on an assessment made only some three  months
ago and which is therefore relatively recent.

8.   As noted above, the claimant's appeal against the above  decisions  was
dismissed by the First tier Tribunal judge on asylum grounds but allowed  on
Article 8 grounds. The judge noted in respect of the Article  8  claim  that
it was not in dispute that the claimant enjoys family  life  with  his  wife
and three children (the two oldest being  step-daughters;  the  other  being
born in July 2004 [there has since been another child born to the couple  in
March 2019])). The judge  noted  that  the  SSHD  in  the  refusal  decision
acknowledged that the best interests of the  children  would  be  to  remain
with both the claimant and his wife.

9.   There was extensive evidence produced for the appeal before the  First-
tier Tribunal judge. The appellants' bundle alone runs to 513  pages.  I  do
not intend to enumerate the contents, except to note that I have  taken  all
of the evidence, including that which  has  been  submitted  more  recently,
into account. I note that the 513-page bundle includes school  reports.  The
most important new evidence comprises the independent social worker  report.


The independent social worker assessment of 4 June 2019

10.  In this report Ms Harris, a qualified social worker trained  in  social
work with children, describes her undertaking of an independent social  work
assessment lasting three and a half hours of the claimant's  family  in  May
2019. Those present included the claimant's wife,  her  two  daughters  from
previous relationships, M1 (aged 15) and M2 (aged 10) and the  couple's  own
two children (born in September 2015 and February  2018  respectively).  She
notes that the claimant's wife works 24 hours a week as an adult  carer  and
the claimant takes the role of primary carer to the children. If  forced  to
leave the UK she states that it would prevent the claimant from  actualising
the majority of his parental responsibilities and his wife would  be  forced
into the position  of  being  a  single  parent  and  would  have  no  other
childcare to enable her to continue working, reducing the family  resources.
The family would be able to improve their resources and  better  meet  their
needs if the claimant was enabled to work.

11.  Ms Harris observes that the claimant's wife  has  been  diagnosed  with
anxiety and depression, which increases her vulnerability to  mental  health
issues. Removal of her partner would put increased  pressures  on  her.  She
has stated that she would commit suicide if he was forced to  leave,  "which
is a clear safeguarding concern". Ms Harris states  that  she  has  concerns
about the claimant's wife's  ability  to  continue  parenting  the  children
alone and there  is  a  risk  that  they  would  require  alternative  carer
arrangements. The impact of family breakdown would almost  certainly  affect
the children's developmental and educational progress.  She states  that  in
the event that [the claimant] is forced to leave the UK she "would urge  the
Home Office to make an urgent safeguarding referral to  Children's  Services
to assess the risks."

12.  Turning to the  children,  she  states  that,  using  a  balance  sheet
approach, she was unable to identify any benefits to the children  from  the
claimant's forced departure from the UK and this action would be against  M1
and M2's expressed wishes and feelings. As  regards  the  couple's  own  two
children,  Ms  Harris  states  that  she  was  able  to  ascertain   through
observations that they were attached to both their  parents  and  would  not
therefore wish their father to disappear from their  lives  and  the  family
home.  The impact on all the children of losing  the  physical  day  to  day
contact with the claimant was that it would make it more difficult for  them
to have  their  daily  physical  needs  met.   The  children's  routine  and
stability would be disrupted. She considered that it would be in their  best
interests to remain in their current circumstances with the  claimant  being
enabled to work to support the family and improve the housing.

13.  Ms Harris's report does not  fully  address  point  (d)  in  the  Upper
Tribunal's directions, but does provide a significant amount of  information
about the claimant's and wife's extended family. Ms Harris  notes  that  the
claimant's mother and younger sister reside in Birmingham. His wife has  two
half-sisters and one half-brother on  her  mother's  side  from  a  previous
marriage (one sister died four years ago). Her biological parents  had  five
children between them, although one died  of  cot  death.  Under  a  subhead
'Adult  Social  Support/Community  Links',  Ms  Harris   states   that   she
established that the claimant's  mother,  aunt  and  uncle  and  his  wife's
parents "are their strongest support and provide  them  with  emotional  and
practical help. They also have close historical friends and described  their
relationship with their neighbours  as  very  close..."  (she  refers  to  a
character reference from one of their neighbours).

14.  In the  6-page  "Response  to  Directions",  Ms  Harris  first  of  all
addressed point (a), the likely circumstances of the wife  and  children  if
the claimant is deported. It lists  the  wife's  prescribed  medication  and
repeats her concern about the impact of the claimant's  deportation  on  the
wife's mental health and the effect on her parenting  and  ability  to  meet
the children's needs. She notes that she is "unable to state if  [the  wife]
would be able to continue working but consideration needs  to  be  given  to
childcare support and her heath". She then addresses point (b), the  history
and extent of contact  between the two  stepchildren  and  their  biological
fathers,  drawing  attention  to  her  findings  that  the  claimant's  wife
reported that  the   eldest  stepdaughter  (M1)  has  no  contact  with  her
biological father and that the second stepdaughter (M2) has  consistent  and
regular contact with her biological father and  visits  him  frequently  and
for special occasions (she also notes that M2 is  diagnosed  with  ADHD  and
takes prescribed medication.). As regards point  (c),  the  history  of  the
family and how it managed  during  the  period  when  the  claimant  was  in
prison, she notes that enquiries to Birmingham  Children's  Trust  found  no
records of historical concerns or assessments of the family (email dated  21
May 2019) and that she believed it "worthy of note  that  the  circumstances
whilst [the claimant] was incarcerated were a temporary arrangement  whereby
the family were able to physically visit  him.  In  the  event  that  he  is
removed to Jamaica, it will be a permanent arrangement  and  they  will  not
have the resources to visit him".  Finally  she  addresses  point  (d),  the
number of family members on the wife's and claimant's side who live near  to
the claimant, with details of any help  they  have  given  to  the  wife  in
relation to caring for the children. She notes that on the  claimant's  side
he has a mother, aunt and uncle and sister living  in  Birmingham  and  that
the claimant's wife has several family members.  She ends  by  stating  that
she bases her assessment  on  the  family  circumstances  at  the  time  she
visited them (in  May)  and  "in  my  opinion  a  permanent  change  is  not
comparable to a temporary change."

The parties' submissions

15.  Mr Kotas in his submissions stated that even though in response  to  my
case management directions of 17 May 2019 the  claimant  had  been  afforded
the opportunity to provide a fuller report, the  new  one  still  failed  to
deal fully with points (c) and (d) ((c) being "the  history  of  the  family
and how it managed during the period when the claimant was in  prison";  and
(d) being "the number of family members on the wife's  and  claimant's  side
who live near to the claimant, with details of any help they have  given  to
the wife in relation to caring for the children."). It  was  significant  in
his view that even though the independent social  worker  had  checked  with
the city social services, nothing to suggest  any  concerns  had  come  back
from them in the May 2019 email.  In  his  submissions  the  updated  report
supported the SSHD's rather than the claimant's  case,  in  that  it  showed
that the oldest stepchild, M1, did not have a close  relationship  with  the
claimant and the second stepchild, M2,  was  in  regular  contact  with  her
biological  father,  The  diagrams  filled  out  by  the   children   mostly
identified "mum" as doing the primary  care  functions  within  the  family.
The independent social worker said the family had a strong support  network;
hence his removal would not leave his wife adrift.  The  evidence  was  that
whilst the claimant was in prison for some 18 months the family made do  and
she coped. She was a single parent and would  retain  accommodation.   There
was no evidence that the children's schooling would be affected. There  were
no school reports indicating any particular concerns.

16.  Ms Najma submitted that the new report does not  favour  the  SSHD.  It
confirms that the claimant's deportation would have inordinate  consequences
for his wife and the children.  Ms Harris in her report expressed a  concern
that his wife would commit suicide. The  social  worker  had  described  the
effects on the children as severe. Even though M1's  relationship  with  the
claimant was not very close, the evidence was that she  was  an  introverted
child who needed her own emotional space, and it was not disputed  that  the
claimant was close with M2. Both publicly referred to the claimant as  their
'dad'. The social worker assessed that the  claimant's  removal  would  have
physical effects on the children in terms of daily  needs.  The  absence  of
any school reports was not important, since  the  social  worker  was  best-
placed to assess their circumstances. The claimant was  clearly  playing  an
indispensable role as primary carer of the children.

My assessment

The issues concerning whether the effect of the  claimant's  deportation  on
the claimant's wife and the children would be unduly harsh

17.  I am tasked with re-making the decision on the appeal relating  to  the
Article 8 grounds. It is not in dispute that the claimant 's asylum  grounds
of appeal were properly dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal  judge.   There
is a voluminous body of documents produced by both parties for this  appeal.
As noted earlier, I have had regard to all  of  it,  including  Ms  Harris's
first (May 2019) report.

18.  As already noted, it is common ground in this case  that  it  would  be
unduly harsh to expect the claimant's children to leave the UK and  live  in
Jamaica. This also reflects the strong evidence that it would not be in  the
children's best interests to be faced with the  prospect  of  relocating  to
Jamaica.

19.  The respondent has not sought to argue before me that it would  not  be
unduly harsh for the claimant's wife to  accompany  him  to  Jamaica.  Given
that his wife's support network is in the UK, that  all  four  children  are
British citizens and that he has two children by  a  previous  relationship,
one of whom maintains  contact  with  the  biological  father,  this  is  an
understandable point of agreement

20.  As already noted, there are indeed only two  issues  that  fall  to  be
determined in this appeal: (1) the issue under s117C(5)  of  the  NIAA  2002
as to whether it would unduly harsh for the claimant's wife to live  in  the
UK without the claimant; and (2) the issue under paragraph 399A(ii)  of  the
Rules and the corresponding  provisions of 117C(5) of the 2002  Act   as  to
whether it would be unduly harsh for the children to live in the UK  without
the claimant.

21.  Section 117(C) (3) of the 2002 Act provides  that  in  the  case  of  a
foreign criminal who has not been sentenced to a period of  imprisonment  of
four years or more, the public interest requires his deportation unless  one
of two exceptions apply.  The  only  relevant  exception  in  this  case  is
Exception 2:

    ("5)  Exception  2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with a qualifying partner, or  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with a qualifying child, and the  effect  of  C's
    deportation on the partner of the child would be unduly harsh."

22.  It is not in dispute that the claimant has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
relationship with  his  wife  and  with  his  children,  including  his  two
stepchildren, M1 and M2.

23. In assessing whether the effect of the  claimant's  deportation  on  his
wife and children would be unduly harsh, I must have regard to  the  settled
case law on this matter. In KO  (Nigeria)  [2018]  UKSC  53  at  [22],  Lord
Carnwath (with whom the other Justices agreed) stated at para 23:

    "On the other hand the expression "unduly harsh" seems clearly intended
    to introduce a  higher  hurdle  than  that  of  "reasonableness"  under
    section  117B(6),  taking  account  of  the  public  interest  in   the
    deportation of foreign criminals. Further the word "unduly" implies  an
    element of comparison. It assumes  that  there  is  a  "due"  level  of
    "harshness", that is a level which may be acceptable or justifiable  in
    the relevant context. "Unduly"  implies  something  going  beyond  that
    level. The relevant context is that set by section 117C(1), that is the
    public interest in the deportation of foreign criminals. One is looking
    for a degree of  harshness  going  beyond  what  would  necessarily  be
    involved for any child faced with the deportation of a parent. What  it
    does not require in my view (and subject to the discussion of the cases
    in the next section) is a balancing of relative levels of  severity  of
    the parent's offence, other than is inherent in the  distinction  drawn
    by the section itself by reference to length of sentence. Nor (contrary
    to the view of the Court of Appeal in IT (Jamaica) v Secretary of State
    for the Home Department [2017] 1 WLR 240, paras 55 and 64)  can  it  be
    equated with a requirement to  show  "very  compelling  reasons".  That
    would be in effect to replicate the additional test applied by  section
    117C(6) with respect to sentences of four years or more."

24. Lord Carnwath also cited, without  demur,  the  guidance  given  by  the
Upper Tribunal in MK (Sierra Leone) [2015] UKUT 233 that:

    "... 'unduly harsh' does not equate with  uncomfortable,  inconvenient,
    undesirable or merely difficult.  Rather, it poses a considerably  more
    elevated threshold ...".

25. As  analysed  by  Holroyde  LJ  in  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department v PG (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA Civ 1213 at [34] (with  the  agreement
of LJJ Hickinbottom and Floyd):

    "It is therefore now clear that a tribunal or court considering section
    117C(5) of the 2002 Act must focus, not on the comparative  seriousness
    of the offence or offences committed by the foreign criminal who  faces
    deportation, but rather, on whether the effects of his deportation on a
    child or partner would go beyond the degree of  harshness  which  would
    necessarily be involved for any child or partner of a foreign  criminal
    faced with deportation. Pursuant to Rule 399,  the  tribunal  or  court
    must consider both whether it would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the  child
    and/or partner to live in the country to which the foreign criminal  is
    to be deported and whether it would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the  child
    and/or partner to remain in the UK without him."

26. At [39] he concluded:

    "Formulating the issue in that way, there is in my view only one answer
    to the question. I recognise of  course  the  human  realities  of  the
    situation, and I do not doubt that SAT  and  the  three  children  will
    suffer great distress if PG is deported. Nor  do  I  doubt  that  their
    lives will in a number of ways be made more difficult than they are  at
    present.  But  those,  sadly,  are  the  likely  consequences  of   the
    deportation of any foreign criminal who has a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with a partner and/or child in this country. I  accept  Mr
    Lewis's submission that if PG is deported, the  effect  on  SAT  and/or
    their three children will not go beyond the degree of  harshness  which
    is necessarily involved for the partner or child of a foreign  criminal
    who is deported. That is so, notwithstanding that the passage  of  time
    has provided an opportunity for the family ties  between  PG,  SAT  and
    their three children to become stronger than they were  at  an  earlier
    stage.  Although  no  detail  was  provided  to  this  court   of   the
    circumstances of what I have referred to as the knife  incident,  there
    seems no reason to doubt that it was both a comfort  and  an  advantage
    for SAT and the children, in particular R, that  PG  was  available  to
    intervene when his son was a victim of crime. I agree, however, with Mr
    Lewis's submission that the knife incident, serious though it may  have
    been, cannot of itself elevate this case above the norm.  Many  parents
    of teenage children are  confronted  with  difficulties  and  upsetting
    events of one sort or another, and have to face one or  more  of  their
    children going through "a difficult period" for one reason or  another,
    and the fact that a parent who is a foreign criminal will no longer  be
    in a position to assist in such circumstances  cannot  of  itself  mean
    that the effects of his deportation are unduly harsh  for  his  partner
    and/or children. Nor can the difficulties  which  SAT  will  inevitably
    face, increased as they are by her laudable ongoing efforts to  further
    her education and so to improve her earning capacity, elevate the  case
    above the commonplace so far as the effects of PG's deportation on  her
    are concerned. In this  regard,  I  think  it  significant  that  Judge
    Griffith at paragraph 67 of her judgment referred to the "emotional and
    behavioural fallout" with which SAT would have to deal: a phrase which,
    to  my  mind,  accurately  summarises  the  effect  on  SAT   of   PG's
    deportation, but at the same time reflects its commonplace nature."

27.   Whilst  PG  concerned  a  different  set  of  facts,  I  consider   it
instructive to have regard to the way in which their lordships  set  out  in
this case how the assessment of the unduly harsh issues must be  framed,  in
terms of effects going beyond  the  harshness  inevitably  involved  in  the
deportation of a foreign criminal parent.

28.  In the instant case, I do not consider that the  evidence  relating  to
the claimant's  relationship  with  his  children  demonstrates  any  likely
consequences or impact beyond  the  norm  for  deportation  cases  involving
family separation. I shall say more below about why I have come to the  view
that the impact of the claimant's deportation on the children would  not  be
unduly harsh, but would observe here that I  have  taken  into  account  the
evident fact that  the claimant enjoys a family life relationship  with  all
four children and acts in relation  to  all  as  a  father  figure.  I  also
adjudge that it would be better for the children if they continued  to  have
two primary carers, the claimant and their mother. However, that  does  mean
that I consider that  the  resultant  situation  in  which  they  will  find
themselves, of being brought up by a single parent, would be  unduly  harsh.
In reaching this conclusion, it is appropriate to  set  out  several  of  my
reasons at this stage. There is a limit to the strength of his  relationship
with the two stepchildren, one of whom (M2)  retains  close  ties  with  her
biological father and the other (M1) who does not consider herself close  to
the  claimant  (albeit  this  may  in  part  be  because  she  is  presently
introverted). The claimant's own children are both  under  five  and  of  an
adaptable age. As with M2, they can be expected in time  to  find  males  in
the extended family who will be  able  to  some  degree  to  act  as  father
figures (I shall address the relevance to the  children's  circumstances  of
the support the claimant's wife receives  from  the  extended  family  in  a
moment).

29.  If the claimant's case discloses circumstances going beyond  the  norm,
that largely depends, therefore, on the impact on his wife  being  shown  to
be unduly harsh. If it is likely to have an  unduly  harsh  impact  on  her,
then it is likely to have an unduly harsh impact on the children,  since  in
that scenario she would not be able to cope with looking after her  children
as a single mother.

30.  In this regard it is submitted that the claimant's  wife  suffers  from
anxiety and depression and that the effect  of  the  claimant's  deportation
would be to increase his wife's mental health problems.

31.  However, it is necessary to consider his  wife's  health  circumstances
in their entirety. First, whilst she has been recognised by  social  workers
to suffer from depression  and  anxiety,  on  one  occasion  this  being  on
referral [presumably form her GP], there is no medical  report  specifically
diagnosing her or, more to the point, no medical  evidence  identifying  any
degree of severity to her condition.  She  is  not  said  to  be  under  any
treatment although she has been prescribed anti-depressants.  She  has  been
able to work for a considerable period as a carer.  There  is  no  evidence,
therefore, that her anxiety and depression are severe.

32.  Second, it would appear that concerns about her anxiety and  depression
have arisen primarily in the context of  her  expressed  anxiety  about  the
claimant's  pending  deportation.  Thus  the   letter   from   Maypole   and
Chinnbrooke Children's Centre dated 4 January 2016 noted that it received  a
referral  in  January  2016  stating   that   the   claimant's   wife   "was
depressed/anxious about her situation  with  her  husband",  being  "visibly
upset when discussing [him] being deported "  and  stating  that  she  feels
[it] is the route (sic) of her depression." This letter goes on to say  that
it was feared that if the claimant was deported his wife "would sink into  a
deeper depression", which would have  a  direct  impact  on  the  family.  A
letter from a teacher at M2's school notes that his wife had disclosed  that
she suffers from depression and anxiety which she believes  is  due  to  the
threatened deportation of her husband.  This letter mentions  that  she  has
also said that "if 'the claimant' were deported she would end her life.

33.  If the claimant is deported, she will no longer  have  the  anxiety  of
his impending deportation. The question will then be the nature  and  extent
of her anxiety about her new circumstances, knowing  he  has  been  deported
and that she can no longer rely on his presence and  support  as  a  husband
and a father.

34.  In terms of her likely new circumstances, it  is  the  evidence  of  Ms
Harris (echoing that  of  the  aforementioned  letter  from  the  Children's
Centre) that if the claimant is deported, her depression  and  anxiety  will
worsen. Ms Harris noted that she had talked about committing suicide.   That
is also something she said to  a  schoolteacher  at  M1's  school.  Notably,
however, Ms Harris goes no further than indicating that if the  claimant  is
deported she  would  recommend  a  referral  to  social  services.  That  is
obviously prudent, but falls well short of establishing that there would  be
a real risk of the claimant's wife  becoming  an  active  suicide  risk.  In
terms  of  the  claimant's  wife's  likely  situation  if  the  claimant  is
deported, the gravamen of Ms Harris's report is that in  that  scenario  she
would then have to manage  as  a  single  parent.  Whilst  she  expresses  a
concern that the claimant's wife would not be able to cope in this role,  it
is not expressed as more than a possibility. At page 2 of her  "Response  to
Directions from the Upper Tribunal", she states that "I am unable  to  state
if  [the  claimant's  wife]  would  be  able   to   continue   working   but
consideration needs to be given to childcare support and her  health".  Nor,
considering the evidence as a whole, do I consider that it is  more  than  a
possibility. In deportation cases  being  a  single  parent  (regrettable  a
situation though it is and despite it not being in  the  best  interests  of
the children to be deprived of the physical presence of their other  parent)
is the norm. I am not persuaded by the evidence read as a whole  that  there
would be a real possibility that his wife would be unable to cope  and  that
the impact on her would be unduly harsh. And in consequence of her being  in
my judgement able to cope, I am not satisfied that it would be unduly  harsh
on the children either, since they will still have their mother  as  primary
carer coupled with (as I come to below) support  from  the  extended  family
network also.

35.  In this regard, it is relevant  to  consider  how  the  family  managed
during the period of approx. 18 months  when  the  claimant  was  in  prison
(between 2016 and 20 April 2017). At the  stage  the  case  was  before  the
First-tier Tribunal judge, there was some uncertainty as to  whether  during
this period the family had been in need of social services support.  It  has
now been clarified that this was not the case. It  has  not  been  submitted
that during this period the claimant's wife ceased to work.

36.  Of course, the fact that during  this  period  his  wife  was  able  to
manage does not necessarily mean she would be able to cope in the  different
situation where the claimant is not simply some distance away  in  a  prison
for a finite period of 18 months (and there  is  evidence  that  during  his
time in prison there were  weekly family visits),  but  thousands  of  miles
away in a different country with little or  no  immediate  prospect  of  any
visits from her or the children and none in the immediate or medium term  of
the claimant being permitted to return to the UK. That is a  specific  point
made in the social work report and also by Ms Najma.

37.  However, one of the matters on which the  Upper  Tribunal  sought  more
evidence was the degree of family support and  community  support.  Here  Ms
Harris's report indicates that the claimant's  wife  is  much  better-placed
than many single  mothers  facing  the  removal  through  deportation  of  a
partner and primary carer in respect of family support. Ms  Harris's  report
was unequivocal that that there is family support, the  "strongest  support"
being provided by his wife's mother, aunt and uncle and his wife's  parents.
Ms Najma confirmed that these family members live  nearby.  Ms  Harris  also
notes that the family also enjoy particularly  close  ties  with  neighbours
living in the same could-de-sac.  I consider that in light of  this  network
of support his wife  will  be  able  (contrary  to  Ms  Harris's  fears)  to
continue her employment as an adult career, since it is  probable  she  will
receive help during her absence for work from grandparents or  other  family
members or close neighbours. It is probably in my judgement  that  once  the
reality of the claimant's deportation has set in, the family, with the  help
of the wider family network, will adjust.

38.  I return to the fact that the claimant's  wife's  family  circumstances
have not  been  considered  by  Birmingham  social  services  to  raise  any
concerns. The e-mail from the Birmingham Children's Services  dated  2  June
2017 confirmed that the family were known to  Birmingham  Social  Care  from
February 2012 but stated that although there had been two  referrals,  there
were no safeguarding or health or education concerns for  the  children.  Ms
Harris's report (with reference to an email  of  21  May  2019)  notes  that
enquiries made by ASR Legal to the Birmingham Children's  Trust  found  that
'there has not been any review of the children's health or education and  no
mention in this area previously".

39.  As regards the children, (as already noted) whilst the claimant  has  a
genuine and subsisting relationship with M1 (and Mr Kotas does  not  dispute
this), she herself stated to  Ms  Harris  that  her  relationship  with  the
claimant was "not very close", although to persons outside  the  family  she
describes him as her "dad". She stated that he was  very  important  in  the
family and looks after the kids and prepares food  etc  when  his  wife  was
working. (It was seemingly overlooked by the representatives but there  were
school  reports  relating  to  M1  dated  March  2017.)  MsHarris's   report
identifies a number of negative  effects  the  claimant's  deportation  will
have on the children, but it is not suggested  that  the  two  stepdaughters
would be unable to continue their schooling or that the couple's  two  young
children would be unable to progress through the normal educational  stages.


40.  M2 has weekly telephone contact with her biological father  and  visits
him frequently. Whilst she could not  describe  her  relationship  with  the
claimant, she said that he looked after the family when her mum was  working
and he had taken her to school in the past. To persons  outside  the  family
she refers to him as "dad". She felt that if the  claimant  could  not  stay
with them then her mother would not be able to  go  to  work  and  would  be
really sad. As regards the couple's own two children, both are  under  five,
there is no evidence to indicate other  than  that  they  enjoy  a  parental
relationship with the claimant much like any  other  for  children  of  that
age.  The  evidence  taken  as  a  whole  certainly  establishes  that   the
deportation of the claimant will have  negative  effects  on  them  and  the
stepdaughters  and that their life will be adversely affected by  having  to
transform from a two-parent to a one-parent  family,  but  bearing  in  mind
that the "unduly harsh" threshold is an elevated one,  I  am  not  persuaded
that these harsh effects will cross the threshold to be  or  become  "unduly
harsh". There is nothing to  indicate  features  (such  as  children's  ill-
health) that take the circumstances of these four children outside the  norm
relating  to  families  affected  by  deportation  decisions  taken  against
foreign criminals.

The claimant's Article 8 circumstances outside the Rules

41.  In NA (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2016]
EWCA Civ 662, Jackson LJ at [36] summarised the approach which  Part  5A  of
the 2002 Act, and the Rules, require  a  tribunal  or  court  to  take  when
considering the position of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced  to  a
term of imprisonment of at least 12 months but less than 4 years:

    "... first see whether he falls within Exception 1 or Exception  2.  If
    he does, then the article 8 claim succeeds. If he does  not,  then  the
    next stage is to consider whether there  are  "sufficiently  compelling
    circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1  and  2".
    If there are, then the article 8 claim succeeds. If there are not, then
    the article 8 claim fails. ... there is no room for a general article 8
    evaluation outside the 2014 Rules, read with sections 117A to  117D  of
    the 2002 Act".

42.  In considering whether there are sufficiently compelling  circumstances
outside the Rules, I apply the  balance  sheet  approach  set  out  by  Lord
Thomas at [83] of Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC 60.

43.  In favour of the claimant are the fact that he has resided been in  the
UK for

44.  He has a good command of the English language.

45.  Prior to his convictions for Class A drug offences, he was of  previous
good character. Whilst identifying him as performing a Category 3 role,  the
judge accepted that the claimant had entered into criminal activity  because
of  debt.  In  a  letter  dated  26  March  20127  the  claimant's  offender
supervisor has given him a positive character  reference,  noting  that  the
claimant was exceptionally well behaved and had treated staff with  a  great
deal of regard and respect deserving of a reference.  It  is  also  relevant
that the claimant's bundle contained a number of  letters  of  support  from
other family members, friends and neighbours,  some  specifically  attesting
to the claimant's good conduct and devotion to his family.

46.  The claimant has also obtained certificates whilst in  prison  and  has
worked in a voluntary organisation. He  has  acted  as  a  mentor  in  maths
classes and there is a letter from  one  of  the  class  members  expressing
support for the claimant's positive work in this capacity.

47.  Then there are the claimant's  family  circumstances  which  have  been
dealt with in detail in the earlier assessment of the issue of unduly  harsh
effect. In summary he has an established family life with his wife and  with
his two stepdaughters and their two children. He also  has  extended  family
ties with his own mother and aunt and with his wife's mother. It is  clearly
in the best interests of the children to remain with the  claimant  and  his
wife as a family unit.  It  is  also  clear  that  his  removal  would  have
negative effects on the children's lives, in  particular  their  daily  home
lives, where he has been playing the role of primary carer whilst  his  wife
has been at work. All of the children are British citizens  and  it  is  not
contended by the SSHD that either the claimant or them  should  be  expected
to live in Jamaica (I note that M1 is in secondary school and will  soon  be
taking GCSE's).

48.  Although he  is  currently  unable  to  work,  the  claimant  has  been
employed previously and on the balance of  the  evidence  would  become  the
family breadwinner if he was allowed to stay.

49.  However, in my  assessment  the  factors  weighing  in  favour  of  the
claimant are significantly outweighed by factors weighing against.

50.  The claimant came to the UK as a visitor and then overstayed from  2014
to the present. One consequence is that his private life ties formed in  the
UK have been precarious throughout.

51.  The claimant is a foreign criminal. In June 2016 he  was  sentenced  to
three years for three offences as a crack cocaine  dealer,  the  second  two
running concurrent with the first count. According to the sentencing  judge,
he had a significant role in supplying  crack  cocaine  to  others  and  the
incidents were not isolated. The  judge  also  noted  that  in  his  dealing
activities he "used your wife".  Whilst it is to  his  credit  that  he  was
assessed by OASys to be  a  low  risk  generally  (although  medium  to  the
public), rehabilitation is not an important facet of  the  public  interest.
It was stated in Danso [2015] EWCA Civ 596 that "rehabilitation  ...  cannot
... contribute greatly to the existence  of  very  compelling  circumstances
required to outweigh the public interest in deportation".

52.  Although the claimant enjoys a family life relationship with his  wife,
this was formed at a time when his immigration  status  was  precarious  (he
met her a month before whilst he was  in  the  UK  as  a  visitor  and  they
married on 8 November 2014. This is  a  relevant  factor  in  assessing  the
proportionality of the decision. see Rajendran (s117B - family life)  [2016]
UKUT 00138 (IAC).

53.  In terms of the claimant's role as primary carer, whilst  it  is  clear
he has been actively involved in looking after  the  children  and  managing
the home whilst his wife is at work, she only works 24 hours a week  and  is
said to receive strong support from other family members. A letter from  his
wife's  mother  states  that  the  claimant's  mother  had  taken  the   two
stepchildren under her wing and treats them as her own grandchildren. It  is
clear that during the period when the claimant  was  in  prison  (around  18
months) she was able to manage with the help of her  family  support.  There
are other family members living nearby to the  claimant's  and  wife's  home
and his mother had stated in the context of his bail  proceedings  that  she
could assist the family.

54.  However, as already indicated when addressing the issue of whether  the
claimant's deportation would have unduly harsh effects, I am  not  persuaded
that the disruption and harsh effects that the claimant's  deportation  will
have on his wife and children rises to the level of being unduly  harsh.  To
repeat, I am required to decide this case by  applying  the  principles  set
out in the case law  which  make  very  clear  that  "unduly  harsh"  is  an
elevated threshold.

55.  The claimant has no  health  issues;  he  is  a  fit  and  healthy  and
relatively young man.

56.  Taking into account the evidence as a whole and having  regard  to  the
relevant factors going to the  assessment  of  the  proportionality  of  the
decision, I am satisfied that the claimant has failed  to  show  that  there
are very compelling circumstances warranting a grant of  leave  outside  the
Rules. The only thing  I  would  note,  in  the  context  of  public  policy
discussions about the proportionality of lengths of  time  that  deportation
orders should subsist once the subject has left the UK, is  that  given  the
significant evidence that the claimant has rehabilitated,  I  would  express
my own view (nothing more than that; such a view can have no binding  effect
on the SSHD /Entry Clearance Officer) that if in three years' following  his
deportation the claimant continues to show that  he  has  remained  free  of
criminal activity and is occupying himself positively and there is  evidence
that he remains committed to family life with his wife  and  children,  that
it might be appropriate, upon any such application from the  claimant,   for
the SSHD to review his circumstances with a view to considering  whether  to
revoke the deportation order.



    Notice of Decision

57.  For the above reasons:

       . the decision of the First-tier Tribunal judge as regards Article  8
         has already been set aside for material error of law;

       . the decision I re-make is to dismiss the claimant's appeal  against
         the decision of the SSHD to deport him.

58.  Although I previously made an anonymity direction, so  as  to  maintain
the one made by the First-tier Tribunal judge, I see  no  proper  basis  for
continuing it any further. It is sufficient in  my  judgement  that  I  have
anonymised the children's details and that of the claimant's wife.


Signed                                  Date: 22 August 2019

              [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
