
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00283/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th November 2015                |On 21st December 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     deputy upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                                     X H
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms D Revill, Counsel, instructed by K&G Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a female citizen of the  People's  Republic  of  China
    born on 1st October 1986.  It is not in dispute that she entered the UK
    illegally sometime in 2006 and applied for  asylum  on  21st  May  2015
    having been arrested as an illegal  immigrant.   That  application  was
    refused on 8th June 2015 for the reasons given by the Respondent  in  a
    letter of that date.  At the same time the Respondent decided to remove
    the Appellant under the provisions of Section 10 Immigration and Asylum
    Act 1999.  The Appellant appealed, and her appeal was heard by Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal Keane (the Judge) sitting  at  Yarl's  Wood  on
    24th June 2015.  He allowed the appeal  on  asylum  grounds  and  under
    Article 3 ECHR for the reasons given in his Decision  dated  26th  June
    2015.  The Respondent sought leave to appeal that Decision, and on 18th
    September 2015 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the Decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Judge found that the Appellant was at risk on return to  China  and
    therefore  allowed  the  appeal  because  he  was  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant was a credible witness who had given a  credible  account  of
    events in China.  The Judge found the  Appellant's  credibility  to  be
    damaged in accordance with the provisions of Section 8(6) of the Asylum
    and  Immigration  (Treatment  of  Claimants,  etc.)   Act   2004,   but
    nevertheless the Judge decided that the Appellant's account  of  events
    should not be rejected.  She had given an account which was  absent  of
    any discrepancies and inconsistencies, and could be described as  clear
    and cogent.  The Judge decided to  attach  no  weight  to  the  factors
    concerning credibility raised by the Respondent in the Refusal  Letter.
    The Judge found that the Appellant had made honest attempts  to  answer
    difficult questions concerning the start of the Falun Gong movement and
    the purpose of its exercises.

 4. As a consequence of his finding as to credibility, the Judge found that
    the Appellant had become an orphan at the age of 8 years and from  that
    age she had survived by begging in the streets of  her  village.   When
    she had been about 18 years of age, she had noticed a group  of  people
    practising Falun Gong exercises.   She  had  then  joined  a  group  of
    adherents, but sometime in 2006 she had heard her name shouted out.  As
    she had believed that her name was included on a wanted list,  she  had
    believed that she would be caught, arrested and detained.  She had then
    been helped to leave China and had come to the UK.

 5. It is recorded in the Decision that at the outset of the hearing before
    the Judge, Mr Morris, the Home Office Presenting Officer, applied to be
    excused as a result of a personal emergency.  Mr Morris did  not  apply
    for an adjournment of the hearing,  and  indicated  that  he  would  be
    content to rely upon written submissions  which  he  had  prepared  and
    which he submitted.  The Judge decided to proceed on that basis, taking
    into account the  overriding  objective  set  out  in  what  the  Judge
    described as Rule 2 of the Tribunal Procedure Rules 2004.   During  the
    hearing, which took place in the absence of  Mr  Morris  or  any  other
    representative for the Respondent, the Judge  asked  questions  of  the
    Appellant after she had given her evidence-in-chief which  amounted  to
    the Appellant identifying herself and stating that the contents of  her
    statement were true.  At the hearing before me Mr Whitwell said no more
    than he relied upon the grounds of  application.   Those  grounds  were
    that there was an error of law in the Decision  of  the  Judge  because
    there had been a procedural irregularity in the conduct of the  hearing
    before him.  That hearing had been conducted in a  way  unfair  to  the
    Respondent.  The Home Office Presenting Officer had not agreed  to  the
    hearing taking place on the  basis  that  the  Judge  would  hear  oral
    evidence from  the  Appellant.   The  Judge  had  made  no  attempt  to
    ascertain the availability of  a  replacement  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer.  The Judge had conducted the hearing not  in  accordance  with
    the Surendran guidelines, and the Judge's questioning of the  Appellant
    amounted to independent post-hearing research of the sort  deplored  in
    such decisions as EG Nigeria [2008] UKAIT 00015.  The Judge  had  erred
    in criticising the Respondent for not  cross-examining  the  Appellant.
    The Judge had not asked the Appellant's representative to deal with the
    issues concerning credibility raised in the Refusal Letter.

 6. The grounds continue to argue that the Judge further erred  in  law  by
    making perverse or irrational findings of fact and failing to give  any
    or adequate reasons for them.  It was perverse for the  Judge  to  find
    that the  Appellant  had  been  a  Falun  Gong  practitioner  when  her
    knowledge of that movement had been so  sparse.   The  Judge  had  paid
    scant attention to what the Appellant had said  during  her  interview.
    Finally, the Judge had not specifically assessed the risk on return  to
    China for this Appellant.

 7. In response, Ms Revill submitted that there had been no such errors  of
    law.  She referred to her Skeleton Argument and argued that  there  had
    been no breach of the Surendran guidelines in the  way  the  Judge  had
    conducted the hearing.  No application had been  made  to  adjourn  the
    hearing by the Respondent, nor for the case to be put back in the  list
    so that a replacement Home Office Presenting Officer could be arranged.
     The conduct of the hearing was exclusively a matter for the Judge, and
    there had been no procedural irregularity in the course  of  action  he
    had chosen.  The Judge had  not  conducted  any  sort  of  post-hearing
    research, and had not made any unfair  criticism  of  the  Respondent's
    absence.  The Surendran guidelines did not prevent a Judge from  asking
    questions of a witness for the sake of clarification, and the Judge had
    done no more than that.  In any event, it was decided in WN (Surendran;
    credibility; new evidence) (Democratic Republic of Congo) [2004]  UKIAT
    00213 that a breach of the Surendran guidelines was not  in  itself  an
    error of law.  The real test to be applied was "whether the hearing was
    fair or unfair and whether a fair-minded and  informed  observer  would
    conclude that there was a real possibility  that  the  Adjudicator  was
    biased".  In this case, there was no evidence of bias, and bias was not
    relied upon by the Respondent.  In particular, it  was  decided  in  SW
    (Somalia) [2005] UKIAT 00037 that there was no obligation upon a  Judge
    to ask a representative to ask questions and deal with issues raised in
    the Refusal Letter.

 8. In any event, the questions asked by the Judge had been  very  limited.
    The Judge had asked no  more  than  four  questions  of  the  Appellant
    relating to the credibility issue.

 9. As regards the second ground, Ms Revill argued that the Judge had  made
    findings of fact open to him on the evidence before him  and  which  he
    had fully explained.  As established in Nixon  (Permission  to  appeal;
    grounds) [2014] UKUT 00368 (IAC) a very high threshold had  to  be  met
    for perversity to be established.  The Respondent had failed to  do  so
    in this case.

10. I find no error of law in the Decision of the Judge requiring it to  be
    set aside.  I find no procedural irregularity  in  the  way  the  Judge
    conducted the hearing of the  appeal.   The  Judge  was  faced  with  a
    situation whereby the Respondent's  representative,  apparently  for  a
    very good reason, needed to absent  himself  from  the  hearing.   That
    representative did not seek an adjournment, nor the opportunity to find
    a replacement, and there was no error of law in the Judge  deciding  to
    proceed with the hearing on the basis that the  Respondent  would  rely
    upon  written  submissions.    It   is   not   for   the   Respondent's
    representative to dictate the terms upon  which  a  hearing  will  take
    place, and it is trite law that there is  no  bar  to  a  Judge  asking
    questions of a witness for the purpose of clarification either  in  the
    Surendran  guidelines   or   elsewhere.    Indeed,   those   guidelines
    specifically state  that  the  Judge  "should  be  at  liberty  to  ask
    questions for the purposes of seeking clarification".  It  is  apparent
    from reading the Decision that  the  Judge  did  no  more.   Ms  Revill
    helpfully produced a copy of her note of the proceedings which revealed
    that only four questions were asked by the Judge, each one in order  to
    clarify evidence given by the Appellant in her interview which had been
    criticised in the Refusal  Letter.   At  paragraphs  6  and  8  of  the
    Decision the Judge explained that he had asked questions  in  order  to
    provide the Appellant with an opportunity of dealing  with  credibility
    issues raised by the Respondent in the Refusal Letter, and in the  last
    line of paragraph 14 the Judge referred to clarification being provided
    by the Appellant's answers to his  questions.   In  any  event,  as  Ms
    Revill pointed out, non-compliance with the Surendran guidelines per se
    does not amount to an error of law.  For there to be an error  of  law,
    there must also be bias or unfairness.  I find no evidence of  such  in
    the Judge's conduct  of  the  hearing.   The  Judge  did  not  unfairly
    criticise the Respondent for not cross-examining the Appellant nor  did
    he use that factor in  the  Appellant's  favour.   Quite  the  opposite
    appears to be the case from what the Judge wrote at paragraph 14 of the
    Decision.  There was certainly no unfairness in the Judge  choosing  to
    ask the clarificatory questions himself as  opposed  to  requiring  the
    Appellant's representative to carry out this task.

11. I also find no error of law in the Judge's fact-finding.  As argued  by
    Ms Revill, I am satisfied that the Judge made findings of fact open  to
    him upon the evidence and which he satisfactorily explained.  The Judge
    dealt with each point in the Refusal Letter challenging the credibility
    of the Appellant in a way which in  my  view  cannot  be  described  as
    perverse.  The Judge clearly did take account of what the Appellant had
    said during  her  interview.   The  Judge  considered  the  Appellant's
    evidence against the background information  at  paragraph  14  of  the
    Decision.

Notice of Decision

The making of the Decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the Decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for anonymity and  I  find  no
reason to do so.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
