
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00038/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Determination Promulgated       |
|On 25 July 2019                 |On 2 August 2019                |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                                    [E N]
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Slatter, Counsel
                    (instructed by Sohaib Fatimi Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



        1. Permission to appeal was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
           Scott-Baker on 21 June 2019 against the decision to dismiss  the
           Appellant's protection appeal made by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
           Aziz in a decision and reasons promulgated on 21 March 2019.


        2. The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan, born on  21  January
           2005, and thus a minor.  His protection claim was refused by the
           Respondent on 11 September 2018.


      3.    Judge Aziz found that the Appellant's fear  of  return  was  not
           objectively well founded, for a  number  of  reasons:  see  [51]
           onwards of his determination where those reasons are set out  in
           detail and which need not be repeated here.  Thus the appeal was
           dismissed.


      4.    Permission to appeal was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
           Scott-Baker because it was considered arguable  that  the  judge
           had not considered the practicalities of return of the Appellant
           and that his findings that adequate reception facilities were in
           place were insufficiently reasoned.  It was also  arguable  that
           the Appellant who is a child had  not  had  his  best  interests
           considered.


      5.    The Respondent filed a rule 24 notice in  letter  form  dated  3
           July 2019, opposing the onwards appeal.


      6.    Mr Slatter for the Appellant relied on the grounds submitted and
           the grant of permission to appeal.  The Appellant's  return  was
           not hypothetical but actual, as the Appellant had  been  granted
           no leave to remain at all  by  the  Respondent.   There  was  no
           evidence of a  removal  plan.   The  judge's  finding  that  the
           Appellant could be safely met at the airport and accompanied  to
           his home village by  his  family  was  an  entirely  speculative
           assumption.  It could not be assumed that the  family  would  be
           willing to assist in receiving him.  The  safe  return  was  the
           Respondent's  responsibility.  The  facts  had  not  been  fully
           grasped by the judge  and  he  applied  the  wrong  authorities,
           perhaps misled by the CIPIN.


      7.    It was further submitted that even if  the  Appellant  could  be
           safely returned to his family, the judge's overall consideration
           of objective  risk  was  flawed.   The  Appellant,  having  been
           kidnapped once, as the judge had accepted, would  be  unable  to
           lead a normal life.  The judge had been mistaken  to  find  that
           there had been no  further  security  measures  to  protect  the
           family,  which  was  not  supported  by   the   evidence.    The
           determination should be set aside and the appeal reheard.


      8.    Mr Walker for the Respondent relied on the  rule  24  notice  as
           served.  The judge had addressed every  point  and  had  reached
           findings open to him.  There was no material error of law in the
           First-tier Tribunal's determination  and  the  judge's  findings
           were sustainable.  The appeal should be dismissed.


      9.    There was nothing which Mr Slatter  wished  to  add  by  way  of
           reply.


      10.   The grant of permission to appeal was in the tribunal's view  an
           over generous one, effectively accepting that  it  was  arguable
           that an experienced judge of the First-tier Tribunal had made  a
           series  of  egregious,  basic  errors.   Such  allegations   are
           routinely made, without proper reflection, drawing out meritless
           appeals.  The grounds lodged in the present appeal amount to  no
           more than elaborate sophistry, bordering on  the  misleading  as
           seen in the attempt to revive the Article 8  ECHR  appeal  which
           was rightly conceded by the Appellant's counsel at the  hearing,
           as the judge recorded at [64].    In  reality  the  grounds  are
           simply an extended verbose expression  of  disagreement  with  a
           full and careful decision.


      11.   There was no misunderstanding by  the  judge  of  the  evidence,
           which he considered meticulously.  His findings  might  even  be
           considered  generous.    Anxious   consideration   was   applied
           abundantly.  The judge did not engage in  speculation  but  drew
           proper inferences  from  his  primary  findings.   It  was,  for
           example, entirely open  to  him  to  find  that  there  were  no
           additional security arrangements at the Appellant's family home,
           notwithstanding the historic kidnapping: that was drawn from the
           Appellant's own evidence.


      12.   The assertion that the judge erred by following the  authorities
           about hypothetical removal when actual removal was to take place
           was not easy to follow.  There  is  and  can  be  no  difference
           between the two.  The tribunal has to consider what might happen
           in order to determine whether or not an appellant faces  a  real
           risk on return.   There was no requirement for the  Home  Office
           to submit a removal plan for the approval of the tribunal, since
           that it is an operational matter on  which  the  tribunal  could
           have no view once it agreed (as  in  the  present  appeal)  that
           return could be  safely  effected.   Judge  Aziz  addressed  all
           relevant matters at [62] of  his  determination,  as  Mr  Walker
           submitted, and gave detailed and sound reasons why the Appellant
           would not face a real  risk  and  could  resume  life  with  his
           wealthy family.


      13.   In the tribunal's judgment the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had
           reached careful and sustainable findings, in  the  course  of  a
           thorough, balanced determination, which  securely  resolved  the
           issues and applied the correct  lower  standard  of  proof.  The
           Appellant's best interests taking into account his minority  and
           past experiences were plainly to rejoin  his  family,  since  he
           could do so safely, as the judge found.  The tribunal finds that
           there was no error  of  law  and  the  onwards  appeal  must  be
           dismissed.


      DECISION


      The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


      There was no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
      decision and reasons, which stands unchanged.




      Signed                            Dated 25 July 2019


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
