
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00545/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 17th August 2021                  |On 27 August 2021                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                                     ED
                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Reid, of Counsel, instructed by Sentinel
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Albania born  in  September  2001.  He
       arrived  in  the  UK  in  February  2015  and  claimed  asylum.  His
       application was refused but he was granted  leave  to  remain  until
       13th July 2018 as an unaccompanied child. He applied to  extend  his
       leave and for asylum/humanitarian protection on 3rd July  2018,  but
       this application was refused in a decision dated 18th December 2018.
       His appeal against this decision was dismissed on human  rights  and
       protection  grounds  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Russell  in  a
       determination promulgated on the 20th February 2020.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted, and  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Kekic
       found that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law in  relation  to
       the decision under Article 8 ECHR in a decision promulgated  on  8th
       October 2020. Judge Kekic preserved the findings and decision of the
       First-tier Tribunal in relation to  the  protection  claim  however.
       Judge Kekic directed that prior to  the  resumed  hearing  that  the
       appellant should serve statements from  all  witnesses  including  a
       statement from his sister's social worker about the impact on her of
       his removal. Her decision is at Annex A to this decision.

    3. In light of the decision in R (JCWI) v  President  of  UTIAC  [2020]
       EWHC 3013 Admin I asked the parties if they had any objection to the
       error of law decision having been taken on the papers under Rule  34
       of the Procedure Rules. Neither party raised any objections.

    4. The matter came before  me  to  remake  the  appeal  pursuant  to  a
       transfer order from Principal Resident  Judge  Kopieczek  dated  1st
       July 2021. The remaking of the appeal is concerned as to whether  it
       would be a disproportionate interference with the appellant's  right
       to respect for family and private life protected by Article  8  ECHR
       to remove him from the UK.

    5. The updating statements of the appellant and his sister, DD, and the
       statement of the appellant's sister social worker, Mr KA, were  only
       received by the Upper Tribunal and Mr Tufan immediately prior to the
       hearing. We  had  a  twenty  minute  adjournment  to  read  the  new
       documentation after which time Mr Tufan confirmed he  was  happy  to
       proceed. Ms Reid also took this time to  take  instructions  on  the
       social work report as she too had only just received this  document.
       I noted that the witness statement of the  appellant's  sister,  DD,
       dated 4th August 2021 said that she and the  foster  carer  had  not
       attended the First-tier Tribunal as they  had  been  unable  to  get
       confirmation from the local authority that this was  acceptable.  Ms
       Reid said that the foster carer, Ms JK, still was not in  attendance
       as she understood from the appellant's solicitors that this was  not
       needed, but as the appellant's sister was now 16 years old  she  had
       attended by herself. The appellant was accompanied  by  his  support
       worker. An Albanian interpreter was in attendance at  the  start  of
       the hearing but the appellant and his sister confirmed that they did
       not wish to use the interpreter and so she was discharged.

    6. As a result of what was said in the social work report of Mr  KA  Mr
       Tufan looked up the appellant and his sister's mother,  ED,  on  the
       Home Office database and confirmed that she was in the  UK  and  had
       been given discretionary leave to remain until 6th April 2022.



Evidence & Submissions Remaking

    7. The evidence of the appellant from his written statement  dated  4th
       August 2021 and oral evidence is, in summary, as follows. He arrived
       in the UK with his sister, DD, on 5th February 2015, and  they  were
       both taken into Social Services care, and from  there  to  the  Home
       Office to claim asylum. At the time of his arrival he was  13  years
       old and DD  was  9  years  old.  He  currently  lives  in  temporary
       accommodation  arranged  by  the  local  authority,   his   previous
       accommodation provided by them having flooded. He is currently doing
       a Level 3 plumbing course at Acton College, having completed a level
       2 course last year. His intention is to do a further  one  year  gas
       and boiler course and qualify to work as a plumbing  engineer  after
       that. His evidence is that he sees DD four or five times a  week  at
       the current time. He generally goes to visit  her  near  her  foster
       carer's address in Palmers Green, and they have a coffee or  go  out
       to eat. Her foster carer is supportive  of  their  relationship.  He
       also has telephone contact, but DD really needs these face  to  face
       meetings. She suffers from anxiety and depression, and she needs him
       as he is her only biological family and she is a fragile person.  He
       also helps her practically, such as by helping her with  her  CV  to
       get her current apprenticeship.  If  he  had  to  leave  the  UK  he
       believes that this would be devastating for both of them. They  were
       not allowed to see each other between 2017 and 2019. This was due to
       a decision of the local authority because of their having  arguments
       at that time. He accepts that he had been quite  controlling  to  DD
       when they were both in care together and  that  there  were  sibling
       issues. However, during the time when he was not there for her  DD's
       mental state became very bad: she ran away from home and her anxiety
       and depression got worse. He fears that DD would go  off  the  rails
       again if he were not here for her to provide support as  she  starts
       her apprenticeship. Neither he nor DD have current contact with  any
       family in Albania.  He was offered the possibility of having contact
       with his mother, ED, by his then social worker, Mr KA, in late  2018
       but he declined to do this because of her ex-boyfriend. He  was  not
       aware that DD had had contact with his mother  in  the  UK  in  2018
       until he read the statement of Mr KA, this was not something she had
       shared with him.

    8. The evidence of the appellant's sister's (DD's) foster carer, Ms  JK
       in her statement of December 2019, is that  that  the  appellant  is
       incredibly supportive of  his  sister,  despite  their  having  been
       separated by Social Services in the past. He is a mature and  caring
       brother who was there for her nearly all the time when  she  was  in
       North Middlesex Hospital. Having the appellant in the  UK  means  DD
       does not feel alone and instead feels that she has family. She talks
       to him and enjoys visits even when they are brief. Ms  JK  would  be
       concerned if the appellant was removed from the UK. DD has a history
       of depression and Ms JK is concerned that if  he  were  removed  she
       might have a relapse. She wrote herself suicide notes when she heard
       about his refusal. Ms JK feels DD would lose everything if  he  were
       removed.

    9. The evidence of DD, the appellant's sister, from her statements  and
       oral evidence is, in summary, as follows. She  was  treated  as  the
       dependent of the appellant when they came  to  the  UK  and  claimed
       asylum. She was 9 years old and  the  appellant  13  and  they  were
       accommodated together until  2017  when  they  were  given  separate
       foster carers due to arguments between them and were not allowed  to
       see each other until 2019.  She was initially granted leave in  line
       with her brother but now has been given another four years from June
       2019 to June 2023. She has now finished her schooling and GCSEs, and
       is  doing  a   hairdressing   apprenticeship   at   Central   London
       Hairdressing.

   10. She has a history of depression and has  received  counselling  from
       CAMHS, and fears that the appellant not being in her  UK  will  make
       her mental health worse as she would lose his support. She currently
       takes Mirtazapine for her depression and to reduce  her  heart  rate
       and Propofol to help her sleep. He mental health became worse  after
       she was not allowed to see her brother in 2017 and this is when  she
       started to suffer from  anxiety  and  depression.   She  has  harmed
       herself in the past, and when he received  his  refusal  notice  she
       wrote herself suicide notes. She feels that the appellant  has  been
       the only constant in her life and is the only person who understands
       her as they have been through the same experiences. The appellant is
       the only birth family she has not lost and the person she  can  open
       up to. She fears that she would go rapidly  down  hill  without  his
       love and support.

   11. She has had no contact with her birth family since coming to the  UK
       apart from the fact that  she  had  contact  with  her  mother,  ED,
       through Social Services in 2018 on about 6  or  7  occasion.  Ms  JK
       advised her that it would be good to have that contact. She  stopped
       the contact as she felt that her foster carer, Ms JK, was  going  to
       tell her mother things that  were  not  true  and  that  this  would
       tarnish the relationship with her biological mother ED.

   12. DD currently sees the appellant four or five times a week as she  is
       closer to him as she is doing her apprenticeship in central  London,
       and also has contact via phone. Sometimes  they  go  to  the  cinema
       together, sometimes they eat together and chat. She  feels  she  can
       contact her brother if she has a problem and confide  in  him.  When
       she needed her appendix removed in 2019  she  was  in  hospital  for
       three days and her brother was with her all of the time, along  with
       her foster carer Ms JK, and provided vital emotional support to cope
       with the operation. When the appellant blocks her on social media it
       is only for a short time and is just for  reasons  such  as  to  put
       pressure on her to continue her schooling.

   13. Mr KA, social worker  with  the  Royal  Borough  of  Kensington  and
       Chelsea provides a statement of truth dated 6th August 2021 in which
       he gives his academic qualifications and confirms that he  has  been
       working for a substantial amount  of  the  time  with  unaccompanied
       minor asylum seeking children since 2003. He has  been  DD's  social
       worker since October 2017. He confirms that  DD  and  the  appellant
       became looked after children in February 2015.  He  states  that  he
       usually visits DD every four to six weeks as a looked  after  child.
       The appellant and DD had a common foster placement until  May  2018,
       at which point due to an allegation of rape made by DD  against  the
       appellant he was moved out. DD withdrew the  allegation  immediately
       and did not raise it again, or demonstrate an understanding  of  the
       word rape, but it was  decided  due  to  sibling  disagreements  and
       animosity it was better for them to have separate foster placements.
       DD was moved from that foster placement in July 2018 as she did  not
       comply with the rules of the placement, and her next  placement  was
       terminated in March 2019 as she was engaging in unsafe behaviour and
       the relationship broke down. DD then moved to her current  placement
       where she appears more settled and to have a positive bond with  her
       carers.

   14. Mr KA records that in July 2018 DD's mother appeared at  her  foster
       placement. Prior to this it had been thought that she was  in  Italy
       but it then appeared that she was in the UK illegally. She then  had
       some contact with DD, and agreed to have a parenting assessment,  up
       until October 2018 when she ended contact.

   15. Mr KA says that DD and the appellant are very  private  and  do  not
       share much with the adults responsible  for  their  care,  but  DD's
       foster carers do confirm that they are in contact with  each  other.
       DD has also said that they are in contact on social  media  although
       sometimes the appellant blocks DD, but he regards  this  as  typical
       teenage behaviour. DD has told him that she calls and texts  two  or
       three times a week and see him here and there to eat or  go  to  the
       cinema. She has told him that they are "siblings being up and  down,
       although she wants him by my side as always".  Mr  KA  did  see  the
       appellant interacting with DD extremely well and providing emotional
       support whilst she was  in  hospital  having  an  appendicectomy  in
       September 2019. The appellant gave DD his  chain  with  an  Albanian
       emblem on it which was clearly a source  of  comfort  when  she  was
       feeling anxious and vulnerable. He also saw them on Teams at a video
       Teams meeting with  the  appellant's  barrister  in  July  2021  and
       observed that they were very much in contact and wanting to maintain
       their contact as siblings for the future. DD told  Mr  KA  that  she
       wanted to support his appeal as the appellant "was the only one that
       keeps me going and without him I will break down" and also that  the
       appellant " is the only family I have and as  my  mental  health  is
       bad, he is the only person I like to talk about my family with".  Mr
       KA confirms that DD has had a significant amount of  trauma  in  her
       past  and  has  engaged  (although  not  very   consistently)   with
       therapeutic services.  He  confirms  that  DD  takes  Melatonin  and
       Propranolol to support her sleep, manage anxiety and panic  attacks.
       It is his opinion that: "DD's mental health is already significantly
       impacted by the trauma  experienced  in  Albania,  her  journey  and
       separation and loss from her mother." He  concludes  that  he  would
       have: "concerns in relation to the impact of DD's future mental  and
       emotional health, which is already fragile, should  her  brother  be
       removed from the UK."

   16. Mr Tufan submits, in summary, that it is accepted that the appellant
       and DD are biological siblings, and that DD is a minor.  He  accepts
       that their mother is not in the picture, and the two siblings have a
       family life relationship as DD is  a  minor.  He  accepts  that  the
       evidence is that they meet a few times a week, but  argues  that  it
       would be  proportionate  to  remove  the  appellant  as  the  family
       relationship is not  of  such  a  degree  as  to  require  that  the
       appellant should remain. The appeal should therefore be dismissed.

   17.  Ms  Reid  submits,  in  summary,  that  the  key   issue   in   the
       proportionality assessment is the appellant's relationship  with  DD
       his minor sister who has leave to remain in the UK. She submits that
       they have a strong relationship, which, despite its ups and downs as
       described by the social worker Mr KA in his candid  report,  is  now
       one which is very protective of DD by  the  appellant  and  somewhat
       parental when he is  trying  to  ensure  her  future  by  trying  to
       encourage her to attend school and  helping  with  her  CV  for  her
       apprenticeship. His removal would have a  negative  impact  on  DD's
       mental health, a concern not just of the appellant and  DD  but  one
       shared by DD's foster carer Ms JK and her social worker Mr  KA.  The
       social worker has provided a very objective report which  ultimately
       concludes that  the  appellant  has  a  positive  influence  on  his
       vulnerable minor sister DD.

   18. In addition it is argued that it should also  weigh  in  his  favour
       that the appellant has lived in the UK since 2015, he was 13  years,
       and thus for almost seven years, and that he left Albanian at a very
       young age and would not be returning there with any  family  support
       or meaningful relationships in that country, as although his  asylum
       claim was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal it was  believed,  as
       set out at paragraph 25 of the decision, that he had been the victim
       of domestic violence at the hands  of  his  father.  It  is  also  a
       neutral matter that he speaks English.

   19. Ultimately, for  all  of  these  reasons,  it  is  argued  that  the
       appellant's removal would be a  disproportionate  interference  with
       his right to respect for his family and private life ties  with  the
       UK, and the family life ties of his vulnerable sister DD.

Conclusions Remaking

   20. It was not argued by Ms Reid  that  the  appellant  could  meet  the
       private or family life provisions of the Immigration Rules, so  this
       appeal is advanced solely on the basis that a free ranging Article 8
       ECHR claim outside of those Rules succeeds.

   21. There was no contention from Mr Tufan that the evidence  of  any  of
       the witnesses who submitted statements was not  credible  or  should
       not be given weight. I find the evidence before me is consistent  in
       all material respects. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Russell  in
       his consideration of the protection claim advanced by the  appellant
       concluded, whilst dismissing it found that: "The appellant's  claim,
       set out in his witness statements and  interviews  is  coherent  and
       plausible and consistent with the background evidence. I am prepared
       to accept the appellant's evidence is probably true".  I  find  both
       the appellant and DD's evidence credible. I find that  I  can  place
       significant weight on the statement of truth from Mr  KA  as  he  is
       suitably qualified, has had long-term and on-going contact  with  DD
       and in the past contact with  the  appellant,  and  puts  forward  a
       picture  which  clearly  includes  the  negatives  as  well  as  the
       positives. I also give weight to the witness statement of Ms  JK  as
       although she did not attend to give oral evidence  her  evidence  is
       consistent with that of Mr KA, the appellant and DD.

   22. In this appeal I must give  weight  against  the  appellant  and  in
       favour of his removal because he cannot meet the  Immigration  Rules
       as the maintenance of immigration control is in the public interest,
       applying s.117B(1) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
       2002.  I  must  also  give  weight,  applying   s.117B(3)   of   the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 against  the  appellant
       remaining as he is not (as yet) financially independent and  I  find
       that he will, for a year or so at least, be a burden  on  taxpayers.
       In relation to the appellant's integration however I find  that  the
       facts of this case show he is in fact at college and thus in reality
       is as integrated in society as any young person of his age might  be
       expected to be.  I have regard to the fact that little weight is  to
       be given to his private life as formed in the UK, applying s.117B(4)
       and (5) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  as  all
       of these private life ties have  been  formed  whilst  he  has  been
       unlawfully and precariously, with discretionary  leave,  present  in
       this country. I find however that little is not no weight, and  that
       as Ms Reid has submitted, the appellant has spent six  of  his  most
       formative years in the UK growing from a child to a young  adult  in
       circumstances which were not of his own choosing as it  is  accepted
       by the First-tier Tribunal that his history of fear of violence from
       his father was probably true. I find, as Ms Reid, has submitted that
       the appellant does speak English, and that this must be treated as a
       neutral matter, and not one weighing against him, applying s.117B(2)
       of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

   23. I now move to consider the decisive issue of the appellant's  family
       life relationship, as accepted by  Mr  Tufan,  with  his  biological
       sister DD who is a minor who has continuing leave to remain  in  the
       UK until 2023, having arrived in the UK with the appellant in  2013.
       The appellant and DD initially lived together  for  the  first  four
       years they were in the UK. They do not live together now,  and  have
       not done so since 2017/8 when they fell  out  over  a  very  serious
       allegation made by DD against her brother. It is the evidence of the
       appellant, DD and the conclusion of her social worker, Mr  KA,  (who
       was at the time also the appellant's social worker) that this was  a
       false allegation. Nevertheless, social services decided that a break
       in the relationship was the correct course, and DD and the appellant
       did not see each other again for about  two  years,  until  2019.  I
       find, relying on evidence from the appellant, DD and the  statements
       of the social worker and DD's foster carer, that the  current  state
       of the contact between DD  and  the  appellant  is  that  they  live
       separately but see each other face to  face  several  times  a  week
       outside of their respective  homes  in  cafes,  restaurants  or  the
       cinema, and also speak regularly on the phone/via social media.

   24. It is accepted by Mr Tufan for the respondent that  the  appellant's
       mother has no contact with the appellant or DD, and so I  find  that
       the appellant is DD's only biological relation  with  whom  she  has
       contact.

   25. I find that DD is a vulnerable 16 year old  girl  who  suffers  from
       depression, anxiety, insomnia and panic  attacks  since  around  the
       time of her separation from the appellant  in  2017,  based  on  her
       evidence, that of Mr KA and her foster carer Ms  JK.  She  has  also
       committed acts of self harm, engaged in unsafe behaviours  and  when
       she learned of the appellant's removal decision  she  wrote  herself
       suicide notes. She has found it hard to settle and form any sort  of
       relationship with a foster carer, and is on  her  fourth  placement,
       although this one is going better and she has  been  there  for  two
       years. DD, whilst having the normal short-term teenage ups and downs
       with her brother, very much wants him to stay with her  in  the  UK.
       Her evidence is that: "I would go rapidly downhill without his  love
       and support. I would be back to square  one  and  my  mental  health
       would again worsen."  It is the view of her foster  mother,  Ms  JK,
       that the appellant is: "incredibly supportive of his sister.  I  can
       see that this helps her enormously; she feels that she is not  alone
       and has family here." She concludes that "were the appellant  to  be
       sent back, DD would lose everything."  Mr  KA,  DD's  social  worker
       concludes  that:  "DD's  mental  health  is  already   significantly
       impacted by the trauma experienced in Albania, her journey and  loss
       of her mother", and that he has "concerns in relation to DD's future
       mental and emotional health, which already is  fragile,  should  her
       brother be removed from the  UK."  It  is  clear  from  all  of  the
       evidence that when things are particularly difficult for DD, such as
       when she was in hospital, that the appellant is fully there for  her
       and providing her with very significant emotional  comfort.  I  also
       find that he provides helpful adult older brother type support  with
       practical matters such  as  trying  to  sustain  her  attendance  in
       education and with her CV for her apprenticeship.

   26. I find, having considered  all  of  the  evidence  relating  to  the
       appellant's family life relationship with DD, that  it  weighs  very
       heavily in the appellant's  favour  that  he  has  this  significant
       relationship with his sister DD in the UK;  that  he  provides  very
       regular and vital face to face support to DD who is emotionally  and
       psychologically vulnerable; and that he is the only adult to whom DD
       can really open up as he is the only person  who  has  gone  through
       those traumatic past experiences with her and  her  only  biological
       family member left with whom she is in contact. I combined this with
       the small amount of weight in the appellant's  favour  that  I  have
       concluded I can give to his private life ties formed over  the  past
       six years in the context  of  his  having  come  to  the  UK  as  an
       unaccompanied asylum seeking child and grown up  here,  and  in  the
       context  of  his  clearly  having  engaged  very   positively   with
       opportunities in the UK and being on the  path  to  employment,  and
       thus integration and financial self-sufficiency,  as  a  plumber.  I
       weigh this against the public interest  in  maintaining  immigration
       control, and thus removing those who cannot meet the requirements of
       the Immigration Rules and the fact that the appellant would probably
       be able to reintegrate himself in Albania due to his  qualifications
       and language skills, and the appellant's lack of  current  financial
       independence. I conclude however that on all the evidence before  me
       that  the  removal  of  the  appellant  is   not   a   proportionate
       interference with his right to respect for his family life ties with
       his sister DD and his right to respect for his private life  as  the
       impact of his removal on DD would be devastating and damaging  to  a
       vulnerable minor with mental health problems who has just started to
       experience some stability  in  her  life  against  a  background  of
       trauma.




    Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   2. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal with respect to the Article  8
      ECHR appeal was set aside by Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic.

   3. Judge Kekic preserved the findings  and  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal dismissing the protection appeal.

   4. I re-make the Article 8 ECHR appeal by allowing it.



    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. We do so in order to avoid a  likelihood
    of serious harm as a result of the  mental  health  conditions  of  the
    appellant's sister.



Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date:  18th August 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

Annex A: Error of Law Decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic:

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Representation (by way of written submissions)

For the appellant:     Sentinel Solicitors
For the respondent:    Ms R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


          Background

       1. This appeal comes before me following the grant of permission  to
          appeal to the appellant by Upper Tribunal Judge Blum on  14  July
          2020 against the determination of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  S
          Russell, promulgated on 20 February 2020 following a  hearing  at
          Taylor House on 14 January 2020.

       2. The appellant is an Albanian national born on 13  September  2001.
          He entered the UK with his sister  in  2015  and  claimed  asylum.
          Although  their  applications  were  refused,  both  were  granted
          discretionary leave as unaccompanied minors. The appellant is  now
          over 18 and his application for asylum/further leave was  refused;
          his sister has leave until 2023 and is in foster care.

       3. The appellant's appeal against the  respondent's  decision  of  18
          December 2018 was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Russell
          on asylum and article 8 grounds. The appellant obtained permission
          to appeal against the decision on  article  8  grounds  only.  His
          claim that he would be at risk on return to Albania from a violent
          father and as a possible victim of trafficking was rejected.

          Covid-19 crisis: preliminary matters

       4. The matter would ordinarily have been listed for but  due  to  the
          Covid-19 pandemic,  and  need  to  take  precautions  against  its
          spread, this could not happen. The grant of permission, therefore,
          contained directions by which the parties were required to present
          any objections to the matter being dealt with on the papers and to
          make any further submissions on the  error  of  law  issue  within
          certain time limits.

       5. The Tribunal has received replies from both parties  with  respect
          to the issue of whether the matter should  be  determined  on  the
          papers. Both are content  that  this  should  be  done  and  I  am
          satisfied that would be an  appropriate  way  to  deal  with  this
          appeal.

       6.  However,  despite  Judge  Blum's  directions  in  the  grant   of
          permission, neither party has put forward any  submissions  as  to
          the error of law issue. Having satisfied myself that  the  parties
          have plainly received  the  grant  of  permission  containing  the
          directions, and that they have had the opportunity to respond  but
          have  chosen  not  to  assist  the  Tribunal  with   any   written
          submissions, I now proceed to consider the matter.

          Discussion and conclusions

       7. I have considered all the  evidence,  the  determination  and  the
          grounds for permission.

       8. The appellant has not been granted  permission  to  challenge  the
          findings and conclusions of the judge as to his asylum and article
          3 claim. In the absence of any submissions addressing the basis of
          the grant of permission, I conclude that the judge's  decision  to
          dismiss the asylum and article 3 claims stands.

       9. I am left with  the  article  8  claim  to  consider.  Judge  Blum
          considered that there was an arguable error of law in the  judge's
          failure to properly consider the appellant's relationship with his
          sister and the impact of his removal upon her.

      10. The judge's assessment of the relationship between the siblings is
          contained at paragraphs 56 and 57. It is brief and I reproduce  it
          below:

                 "...the appellant claims that he has  a  relationship  with
                 his sister who has leave to remain in the UK as a child. It
                 is said that  it  will  harm  her  best  interests  if  the
                 appellant is removed to Albania".

                 "Notably, none of the  evidence  in  the  form  of  witness
                 statements or medical reports addresses  the  substance  of
                 the relationship between the appellant and  his  sister.  I
                 note that the appellant and his  sister  were  accommodated
                 together at one point but  were  then  separated  owing  to
                 differences between them. The appellant and his sister  now
                 appear to be on  different  trajectories  and  neither  her
                 witness statement nor that of her social  worker  speak  to
                 where her best interests lie.  In  those  circumstances,  I
                 find that there is no evidence that her best interests will
                 be harmed by the removal of the appellant".

      11. The difficulty with this assessment is that it disregards entirely
          what the appellant's sister expresses in  her  witness  statement.
          She maintains that they were  accommodated  together  until  March
          2016 when they were separated due to bickering. Nevertheless,  she
          maintains that it would be bad for  her  mental  health  were  her
          brother to be removed. She fears she would lose support, that  she
          would self harm as she had done in the past  and  that  she  would
          lose the one stable thing in her life. She  speaks  of  him  being
          constant in her life and being willing to drop everything to  help
          her. She feels that he understands what she has  been  through  as
          they shared the experience (witness statement: paragraph  7).  She
          states that they see each other at weekends, go to the cinema  and
          eat together. They also talk and if she has  a  problem  he  makes
          time to see her during the week too (at 9). She says that she  has
          lost contact with all family except for her brother and that  when
          she was in hospital with appendicitis, he was there with  her  all
          the time and provided her with emotional support (at 11).

      12. A statement from the appellant's sister's foster  carer  was  also
          adduced. This confirms that the girl has a supportive relationship
          with  the  appellant,  that  he  helps  her  "enormously"  and  is
          "incredibly supportive" of her, that they talk to each  other  and
          see each other and that were he to be  removed,  she  would  "lose
          everything". She speaks of the girl writing suicide notes when she
          heard of  the  appellant's  refusal  and  she  confirms  that  the
          appellant was beside her in  hospital  nearly  all  the  time  (at
          paragraphs 5 and 6 of the witness statement).

      13. There is also the evidence from  the  appellant  himself.  In  his
          witness statement he confirms that they lived  together  for  some
          three years before they were separated by social services  due  to
          arguments but that  they  love  each  other  and  see  each  other
          regularly. The statements are referred to in the skeleton argument
          which was before the judge at the time of the hearing.

      14.  It  may  be  seen  from  the  judge's  brief  assessment  of  the
          relationship between the siblings  that  these  matters  were  not
          taken into account. Whilst the judge refers to a lack of evidence,
          he does not consider in full the evidence that was adduced and nor
          does he take account of the fact that he refused the  request  for
          an adjournment to enable the appellant's  sister  and  her  social
          worker to attend. No doubt that would have provided him  with  the
          further evidence he sought. Even without that evidence, however, I
          consider that the judge  failed  to  have  proper  regard  to  the
          evidence that was before and that pointed to a close  relationship
          between the appellant and his sister.  That is an  error  of  law.
          The article 8 claim will need to be re-decided by a judge  of  the
          Upper Tribunal at a date to be arranged.

          Decision

      15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal on asylum  and  article  3
          grounds is upheld.

      16. The decision on article 8 contains errors of law  and  it  is  set
          aside. The matter is retained in the Upper Tribunal  and  a  fresh
          decision shall be made in due course.

          Anonymity

      17. I continue the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal.

          Directions

      18. The appeal shall be listed for a face to face hearing at a date to
          be arranged.

      19. The following directions are issued:

          (i) No later than 14 days from the date this decision is sent  out
          the appellant's representatives are to inform the  Upper  Tribunal
          of the number of witnesses to  be  called  with  their  names  and
          addresses and of any requirement for an interpreter.

          (ii) No later than  7  days  prior  to  the  resumed  hearing  the
          appellant shall file and serve  statements  of  evidence  for  all
          witnesses to be called including a  statement  from  his  sister's
          social worker as to the nature of the impact  of  the  appellant's
          removal upon her.

          (iii) any other documentary evidence from  the  parties  shall  be
          filed and served no  later  than  7  days  prior  to  the  resumed
          hearing.




      Signed


      R. Keki?
      Upper Tribunal Judge


      Date: 24 September 2020


