
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00287/2020 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Remotely on 30 July 2020             |On 12 August 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     BMS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kumar of Optimus Law
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.



Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who is of Kurdish ethnicity.  He was
    born on 1 June 1991.  He comes from Mosul in the north of Iraq.

 3. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom sometime in  December  2016
    clandestinely and, on 20 December 2016, he claimed asylum.

 4. The appellant's case was initially considered to fall within the Dublin
    III Regulation.  However, following the failure by Italy to respond  to
    a take back request, on 21 July 2017 the appellant's case  was  removed
    from consideration under the Dublin III Regulation.  On 28 August 2019,
    the appellant completed a Preliminary Information  Questionnaire  (PIQ)
    and a substantive asylum interview took place on 17 October 2019.

 5. On 30 December 2019 the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    claims for asylum, humanitarian protection and under the ECHR.

The Appeal

 6. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a decision  sent
    on 20 February 2020, Judge Clemes dismissed the appellant's  appeal  on
    all grounds.

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal.  On 26 March 2020, the First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge J K Swaney) granted the  appellant  permission  to
    appeal.

 8. Following the grant of permission, the Upper Tribunal, in the light  of
    the Covid-19 crisis, directed  that  a  remote  hearing  by  Skype  for
    Business should take place in order to determine whether the judge  had
    erred in law in dismissing the appellant's appeal.

 9. The appeal was listed for a  remote  hearing  on  30  July  2020.   The
    hearing took place before me based in the Cardiff Civil Justice Centre.
      Mr  Kumar,  who  represented  the  appellant,  and  Mr  Howells,  who
    represented the Secretary of State, took part  remotely  by  Skype  for
    Business.

The Judge's Decision

10. The appellant's claim before  Judge  Clemes  had  a  number  of  limbs.
    First, he claimed to fear capture, detention and torture by  ISIS/Daesh
    in  Iraq  having  previously  been  captured  and  detained  by   them.
    Secondly, he claimed to fear his father, whom he said had threatened to
    kill him because he would not agree to  an  arranged  marriage  to  his
    cousin.  Thirdly, he claimed to fear the family of a Yezidi woman  with
    whom he had a relationship.  Fourthly, he claimed to fear  the  Kurdish
    authorities in the IKR because his father had  been  a  member  of  the
    Ba'ath Party when Saddam Hussein was in power  in  Iraq.   Finally,  he
    claimed to fear Shia militia in Iraq as he is a Sunni Muslim.

11.  Judge  Clemes  rejected  each  of  the  limbs   of   the   appellant's
    international protection claim.

12. First, he rejected  the  appellant's  claim  based  upon  his  fear  of
    ISIS/Daesh on the ground that he did not accept that the appellant  was
    a member of a PSG, as a former detainee of  ISIS  (para  25).   In  any
    event, there was no evidence of what, if any, risk  he  would  face  in
    Mosul.

13. Secondly, the judge rejected the appellant's claim to fear  his  father
    following his refusal to contract  an  arranged  marriage.   The  judge
    found, contrary to some parts of the  appellant's  evidence,  that  his
    father was still alive in Mosul (para 18).  The judge did  not  accept,
    however, that the appellant had been placed under pressure to marry his
    cousin (para 21).

14. Thirdly, having concluded that the appellant was not  a  "witness  upon
    whom I can rely", the judge rejected his  account  that  he  was  in  a
    relationship with a Yezidi woman and had been threatened by her  family
    (para 20).

15. Fourthly, the judge did not accept  that  the  appellant  was  at  risk
    because of his father's claimed involvement with the Ba'ath Party.  The
    judge did not accept that the appellant had established that his father
    had been involved with the Ba'ath Party, not least because, despite his
    claimed prominence, there was no supporting  material  (including  from
    the internet) of his involvement.  In addition, putting the appellant's
    claim at its highest, the judge concluded that he did not consider that
    his father's membership almost 30 years previously, and bearing in mind
    that the appellant had never been to the IKR, would  expose  him  to  a
    risk from the authorities in the IKR (para 19).

16. Fifthly, the judge rejected the appellant's claim to be  at  risk  from
    Shia militia.  He rejected the appellant's claim, based upon his  Sunni
    identity.  He said that the appellant was unlikely to be regarded as  a
    supporter of ISIS given that he had been detained  and,  therefore,  it
    had not been established that he was at real risk of serious harm  from
    the Shia militia (para 24).

17. In addition, the judge, having set out passages from  the  most  recent
    country guidance decision in SMO and Others  (Article  15(c);  identity
    documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 400  (IAC),  found  that  the  appellant
    either had left his CSID at home in Mosul and could  obtain  it  or  he
    could obtain a new one prior to return to Iraq.  The judge  found  that
    it was likely that the appellant and his family  would  know  the  page
    number in the relevant Family Book held at the registry  and  also  the
    required details of his nationality (para 23).  At para 29,  the  judge
    was satisfied that it was reasonable to expect the appellant to  engage
    with the Iraqi Embassy in the UK and obtain a passport.   At  para  31,
    the judge went on to find that  the  appellant  could  successfully  on
    return be in possession of a CSID given "the likely  existence  of  his
    CSID in Iraq, or the support of his father and family" (para 31).



The Grounds of Appeal

18. The appellant's grounds of appeal contain six  grounds  upon  which  Mr
    Kumar addressed me.

19. Ground 1 challenges a number of the judge's factual findings across the
    range of the limbs of the appellant's international protection claim.

20. Ground 2 contends that the judge wrongly took into account the  absence
    of supporting evidence in reaching adverse findings.

21. Ground 3 contends that  the  judge  failed  properly  to  consider  the
    country guidance decision in SMO  and  Others  when  finding  that  the
    appellant's CSID was left at home in Mosul and could be contained given
    the impact that the fighting had had on the infrastructure in Mosul.

22. Ground 4 contends that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  the  evidence
    holistically in reaching adverse credibility findings.

23. Ground 5 contends that the judge, in finding that the  appellant  would
    not be at risk from ISIS  on  return,  failed  properly  to  take  into
    account that it was accepted that the appellant had been  detained  and
    tortured by ISIS and that, in applying Art 4(4)  of  the  Qualification
    Directive and para 339K of the Immigration Rules (HC  395),  that  past
    persecution was a "serious indicator" that the appellant  would  be  at
    risk in the future unless there were good reasons to consider that that
    persecution or serious ill-treatment would not continue.

24. Ground 6, again relies upon the country guidance decision  of  SMO  and
    Others and contends that the judge wrongly reached the finding that the
    appellant would be able to obtain a CSID  as  he  would  not  have  the
    required documents or information either to obtain it  in  the  UK  or,
    through the help of his family, in Iraq.

25. In his oral submissions, Mr Kumar focused particularly upon the grounds
    which relied upon SMO and Others.  At my invitation, he sought to  deal
    with the remaining grounds but, even then, made no  specific  reference
    to grounds 2 and 4.

Discussion

26. I will take each of the grounds in turn.

    Ground 1

27. Mr Kumar relied upon a number of passages in the judge's reasons which,
    he submitted, were unsustainable and wrongly led  the  judge  to  reach
    adverse findings.

28. First, he contended that the judge had been wrong in  para  18  of  his
    decision to rely  upon,  what  he  saw  as,  an  inconsistency  in  the
    appellant's account as to whether or not his family (in particular  his
    father) had been killed in Mosul.   He  submitted  that  there  was  no
    inconsistency in the appellant's account.  On the basis of the grounds,
    he contended that the appellant had differing  knowledge  at  different
    times, he had first heard from others that his house had been destroyed
    and his family killed, then later his  uncle  had  told  him  that  his
    father had in fact survived.

29. Mr Howells submitted that this was not the case.  The point made by the
    judge in para 18 was that in both his PIQ and in his asylum  interview,
    the appellant had said that his  family  (including  his  father)  were
    dead.  However, in his evidence before  the  judge  he  said  that  his
    father was still alive and that his uncle had told  him  that  was  the
    case in 2017.  Mr Howells pointed out that  both  the  PIQ  and  asylum
    interview postdated 2017, namely 28 August 2019  and  17  October  2019
    respectively.

30. The judge's reasoning at para 18 was as follows:

         "The initial problem with the appellant's claim, founded as  it  is
         to a large extent in fear of his father, is his varying account  of
         whether he knows if his father is alive or dead.   He  has  altered
         this  account  during  the  claim   itself   and   given   mutually
         incompatible accounts.  At his asylum  interview  and  in  the  PIQ
         which preceded it, he made statements that  he  believed  that  his
         father was dead.  Yet he now says that he had been told in 2017  by
         his uncle, via the Messenger service, that his  father  was  alive.
         The conclusion that he had either lied in the PIQ and interview  or
         in the evidence to me is irresistible, I  am  satisfied.   His  PIQ
         presents as a document which is inconsistent at its heart: it  says
         'I have no home or family to turn to.  My family are  dead  ...  my
         family were killed during the ISIS attack, I have no home or family
         in Iraq.  I had mentioned that my father had threatened to kill  me
         if I did not marry my cousin however that was one  of  the  reasons
         for leaving as my father wanted me to marry my cousin and the other
         was that I feared the ISIS who had kidnapped me.   My  mother  paid
         the ransom for me to be released by ISIS'.   By  the  time  of  the
         hearing, the appellant had clarified that he now knew his father to
         be alive and he still feared him, although he had not been able  to
         check with the source of that information (as  he  had  lost  touch
         with his uncle).  As this is such a central part of the appellant's
         claim, his choice to put forward different  accounts  at  different
         times (although close together as the asylum interview was only  in
         October 2019) very much undermines his credibility, in my judgment.
          I am satisfied that he has always known his  father  to  be  still
         alive as his uncle told him so in 2017, on one of his accounts.  He
         has set out quite a sophisticated account of his father's demise in
         the asylum interview yet he must have known that it  was  false  at
         its heart.  I am satisfied the appellant has deliberately  set  out
         to represent that his father was dead as  he  considered  it  would
         probably be seen as harder for others to check  claims  about  him.
         In fact, it  directly  led  the  respondent  to  question  why  the
         appellant feared someone who was dead.  That led, I  am  satisfied,
         to his change of story to one that he knew was true all along -  as
         his uncle told him, his  father  was  alive  despite  the  dreadful
         events in Mosul.  I find as a fact that his father is alive".

31. I accept Mr Howells' submissions n this point.  The judge  was  clearly
    entitled to take into account that the appellant said in 2017  that  he
    had been told by his uncle that his father was alive  and  yet  in  two
    accounts - in his PIQ and asylum interview - he subsequently  said  the
    opposite.   The  judge  was  fully  entitled  to  consider   that   the
    appellant's evidence was inconsistent and, indeed, he had  deliberately
    sought to mislead in saying initially that his father  was  dead.   The
    appellant's current evidence was that his  father  was  alive  and  the
    judge was fully entitled to accept this evidence and to conclude, as he
    did, that the appellant's father is alive.

32. Secondly, Mr Kumar criticised the judge as going  beyond  the  evidence
    when he characterised the appellant's father as being a person who  was
    "fierce, tribal and religiously dogmatic" in para 21  of  his  decision
    and in reaching  his  conclusion  that  he  did  not  accept  that  the
    appellant's father had threatened the appellant because  he  would  not
    enter an arranged marriage with a cousin.  Mr Kumar submitted that  the
    appellant's evidence in  cross-examination  was  that  his  father  was
    "religiously strict".

33. At para 21 the judge said this:

         "The same approach applies to  his  account  that  his  father  was
         placing him under duress to marry his cousin.   He  maintains  that
         both sides of the family were pressurising him  to  marry  her  but
         nevertheless he managed to avoid doing so for about 3 years.  After
         his family had paid a bribe to secure his  release  from  the  ISIS
         detention.  In fact, he has given two accounts of who paid for  his
         release: his father paid dollars for it he told me in evidence  but
         at the time of his asylum PIQ he  said  that  it  was  his  mother.
         These are significant facts - being kidnapped and tortured by  ISIS
         would have been an unforgettable experience for the appellant - and
         I am satisfied that matters such as who secured his  release  would
         be important and memorable.   He  has  given  a  false  account  of
         pressure to marry and his inability to recall  surrounding  details
         arises, I find, illustrates that his account is fabricated.  It  is
         hard to marry up the picture of a fierce,  tribal  and  religiously
         dogmatic father (with similar parents for his cousin) allowing  him
         for so long to evade the question of marriage,  with  the  evidence
         that he managed to remain living at home and single, having had his
         release from ISIS paid for by his father.  I reject  this  part  of
         his claim".

34. Mr Howells, in his submissions, commented that the judge  had  possibly
    gone beyond the evidence but any error was not material.  He  submitted
    that the real reason for disbelieving the appellant on this  issue  was
    the differing accounts in who had paid for his release - his father  or
    his mother.   That latter issue was also raised  by  the  appellant  in
    ground 1 where it is contended that any discrepancy, about who paid for
    the appellant's release, was a minor point.

35. The judge's reasons in para 21 must be seen, and read, as part  of  the
    judge's determination as a whole.  In addition, the judge found in para
    18 that the appellant had, in effect, lied in his asylum interview  and
    PIQ about whether his father was alive or dead.  That was also a matter
    which the judge was entitled to take  into  account  in  assessing  the
    appellant's truthfulness always bearing in mind that a  person  may  be
    untruthful about one matter  while  not  necessarily  being  untruthful
    about another.  There may be many reasons why a person has  lied  about
    one matter but nevertheless told the truth about another.  That is  the
    well-known 'Lucas' direction (see, R v Lucas [1981] QB 720  at  p.723C)
    which is equally applicable in appeals before the FtT IAC (see Uddin  v
    SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 338 at [11]).

36. The judge plainly had well in mind the appellant's  explanations  (see,
    in particular para 8  of  his  determination).    The  appellant's  own
    evidence, recorded by the judge at para 8, was that both his family and
    his cousins were "tribal and religious".  It was within  the  range  of
    reasonable inferences for the judge to find that, given  that,  it  was
    implausible that his father would allow him to continue  to  evade  the
    issue of marriage despite continuing to live with him for a significant
    period (three years) after he  was  released  from  detention.   In  my
    judgment, the judge was rationally  and  reasonably  entitled  to  have
    regard to the appellant's previous false account and the  inconsistency
    in his evidence concerning who paid the bribe  to  secure  his  release
    from ISIS.

37. Thirdly, Mr Kumar submitted that the judge had been wrong in  para  19,
    to find that the appellant's father was  not,  as  he  claimed  in  the
    Ba'ath Party, so as to give rise  to  any  risk  to  the  appellant  on
    return, because there was no information available  on  him,  including
    from the internet.  Mr Kumar submitted that  the  judge  was  wrong  to
    characterise the appellant's father as a "prominent" person.  In  fact,
    in his interview, the appellant described his  father  as  "well-known"
    and "famous" (see answer to question 57).  The appellant also says that
    his father was a "mustashar" which, Mr Kumar accepted, meant adviser or
    counsellor.  In  my  judgment,   given  what  was  being  said  by  the
    appellant about his father's position within  the  Ba'ath  Party  as  a
    "well-known" and "famous" person  who  was  a  "mukhtar",  it  was  not
    unreasonable for the judge to take  into  account  that  there  was  no
    supporting  evidence  identifying  the  appellant's  father   in   that
    capacity.

38. But, in any event, as Mr Howells submitted, at the end of para  19  the
    judge concluded that the appellant could not succeed even  putting  his
    case on this issue at its "highest".  The judge said this:

         "He struggles to show how there would  be  any  nexus  between  his
         father's membership almost  30  years  ago  and  hostility  by  the
         Kurdish authorities, bearing in mind that he has nothing to do with
         the KRG and its Peshmerga.  I am satisfied that the  appellant  has
         not made this part of his claim out".

39. In my judgment, that reasoning sustains the judge's adverse finding  in
    any event.  It is difficult to see why the appellant would be  at  risk
    on return to Mosul given that his father continues to  live  there  and
    there is no suggestion that he fears for his life  on  the  very  basis
    which the appellant vicariously claims to be at risk.  Likewise, if  as
    the appellant claims, his  father  was  not  so  significant  that  his
    identity can be gleaned from news reports including on the internet, it
    is difficult to see why the appellant, if he were to  relocate  to  the
    IKR, would be identified as a person linked to his father.

40. Fourthly, Mr Kumar criticised the judge for identifying  a  discrepancy
    in the appellant's evidence as to whether he had left his CSID card  at
    home before leaving Iraq or that he had "possibly lost"  it  coming  to
    the UK.  Mr Kumar submitted that the appellant had never said  that  he
    had brought the CSID with him and that he had lost it.  Rather, he  had
    been responding to a hypothetical about what might have happened to  it
    if he had indeed brought it with him.

41. At para 22, the judge said this:

         "The appellant was asked about his CSID when being  cross-examined.
         The reference to 'ID documents' in his  evidence-in-chief  amounted
         to a reference in paragraph 11 that was 'unable  to  obtain  them',
         suggesting he had made some sort of  attempt  to  do  so.   In  his
         asylum interview, the appellant said that he had left his  identity
         documents behind at home.  In evidence he conceded that [he]  would
         have needed a CSID to study at university.  He went on to say  that
         he did not know the number and that it would be difficult to do so.
          He told me that he had left his CSID at home as he did not need it
         - he was not going to be flying.  He then changed his story  to  'I
         might have lost it on the way.  It was a difficult  and  precarious
         road and not easy to keep everything'.  I  am  satisfied  that  the
         appellant - who is university-educated - realised that his  initial
         account of leaving his CSID at home was unlikely to suit the  parts
         of his claim that he would find it hard to get about internally  if
         he was returned to Iraq and changed it from 'it is at home'  (where
         it might be recovered from) to 'it  is  possibly  lost'  (where  it
         becomes irrecoverable).  I find as a fact that the  appellant  left
         his CSID at home when he left Iraq.  I am satisfied  that  he  fled
         from under his father's gaze but that his departure was an  orderly
         one organised by his family, including his father".

42. At the hearing, neither Mr Kumar nor Mr Howells were able to assist  me
    as to what the appellant's actual evidence was at the hearing.  When  I
    consulted the judge's Record of  Proceedings,  it  appeared  reasonably
    clear that the point he relied upon arose at the end of the appellant's
    evidence in respect of a question asked  by  the  judge  himself.   The
    judge asked  him  "What  happened  to  it?",  meaning  the  CSID.   The
    appellant responded:

         "At home, I left it there I  didn't  fly  so  did  not  go  through
         checkpoints.  I never planned to leave  Iraq,  it  was  only  after
         arrested by Daesh and tortured.  Chose to leave illegally.  I might
         have lost it and the difficult and precarious road -  not  easy  to
         keep anything".

43. As I have said, neither representative was able to  assist  further  on
    what the evidence given by the appellant.  It does not appear, however,
    that the appellant was seeking to answer a hypothetical question, 'what
    would have happened to the CSID if you had brought it with you?'

44. Of course, in any event, the judge accepted  the  appellant's  evidence
    that he had left his CSID at home.  It is the central finding  in  para
    22 which is consistent with, as I understand it, his case.   The  point
    made by the judge in para 22 was not a  central  part  of  the  judge's
    reasoning that led him to doubt parts of  the  appellant's  account  or
    credibility.  It was, in fact, a paragraph in which the judge  accepted
    what the appellant says happened, namely that  his  CSID  was  left  at
    home.  Whatever, therefore, the ambiguity  in  the  evidence  may  have
    been, that ambiguity has not led the judge into error in para 22 of his
    determination.

45. Fifthly, Mr Kumar submitted that the judge had been wrong in para 25 to
    find that the appellant was not at risk from ISIS  as  a  member  of  a
    particular social  group,  namely  as  a  former  detainee.   Mr  Kumar
    submitted that the respondent  had  accepted  that  the  appellant  was
    detained and tortured as he claimed.

46. In my judgment, it is not material to the judge's decision that he  did
    not accept that the appellant was a member of a particular social group
    because, unlike the respondent, he did not  accept  that  he  had  been
    detained or tortured by ISIS.  The reason is that the appellant's claim
    to fear ISIS in his home area as a member of a PSG would have  required
    the appellant to establish, on the background evidence, that there  was
    a real risk from ISIS in his home area, namely Mosul.   As  Mr  Howells
    submitted, the appellant did not put forward any evidence that  he  was
    at risk from ISIS in Mosul.  Indeed, SMO and  Others  establishes  that
    ISIS is no longer in control of Mosul having lost the battle for  Mosul
    in 2016.  The judge  made  the  point  that  there  was  no  background
    evidence to establish any risk to the appellant in Mosul  at  para  27.
    In those circumstances,  even  if  the  judge  had  accepted  that  the
    appellant was a member of a PSG, he would inevitably have dismissed his
    appeal on this limb of his international protection claim on the  basis
    that he had not established a real risk from ISIS on return to Mosul.

    Grounds 2 and 4

47. I will take Grounds 2 and 4 together as Mr Kumar  did  not  press  them
    before me and both involve contentions that  the  judge  was  wrong  to
    reach adverse credibility findings, first on the basis that  there  was
    "no supporting evidence" in relation to a number of  matters  and  also
    that he failed holistically  to  assess  the  appellant's  credibility.
    Neither ground is, in my judgment, properly made out.

48. As regards Ground 2, the judge in paras  19  and  20  referred  to  the
    absence of supporting evidence that related (in para 19) to evidence of
    his father's involvement in the  Ba'ath  Party  and  (in  para  20)  to
    evidence concerning the appellant's relationship with a  Yezidi  woman.
    Providing a judge  does  not  seek,  in  a  formal  way,  corroborative
    evidence, it is perfectly proper for a judge to take into  account  the
    absence of any supporting evidence in determining whether the burden of
    proof has been discharged by an appellant  where  that  evidence  might
    reasonably be expected (see TK (Burundi) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ  40  at
    [21]).

49. Given what I have already said about the absence of supporting evidence
    concerning his father, it is clear that the judge was properly entitled
    to take into account its absence on the basis of the position which the
    appellant said that his father held within the Ba'ath Party.

50. In any event, in finding against the appellant  on  that  limb  of  his
    claim, as I have already indicated the appellant could not succeed even
    if his case was taken at its "highest".

51. In relation to the absence  of  any  evidence  supporting  his  claimed
    relationship with a Yezidi woman, the judge also took into account that
    the appellant had sought to, in effect,  deliberately  give  an  untrue
    account about the death of his father.  That was  a  matter  which  the
    judge was entitled to take into account and, taking the judge's reasons
    as  a whole, justified his conclusion in para 20  in  relation  to  the
    limb of the appellant's claim based upon his relationship with a Yezidi
    woman bearing in mind that the judge also gave reasons at para  21  why
    he did not accept that his father  had  pressurised  him  into  such  a
    marriage and had not  pursued  that  for  the  three  years  after  the
    appellant was released but the appellant lived with him.

52. Ground 4, which did not feature in Mr Kumar's oral submissions,  is  in
    my judgment hopeless.  It seeks to suggest that  the  judge  failed  to
    consider all the evidence before making an adverse credibility  finding
    essentially on the basis that as he  progressed  to  the  evidence  and
    aspects of the appellant's claim he  made  findings,  largely  negative
    findings, on the evidence.  That is not to fail  to  consider  all  the
    evidence holistically but rather the process by  which  a  judge  deals
    with individual factual issues  and  makes  findings  on  the  evidence
    progressively through  a  decision.   Providing  the  judge  takes  all
    matters into account overall, and  there  is  nothing  in  the  judge's
    decision to suggest that he did not do so, the approach of the judge in
    this appeal was both logical and lawful.

    Grounds 3 and 6

53. Mr Kumar principally relied upon Grounds 3 and 6.   He  submitted  that
    the judge had failed properly to  consider  the  decision  in  SMO  and
    Others in two principal respects.  First, in finding that the appellant
    could obtain his CSID which he had left at home, the  judge  failed  to
    take into account what was said at [24] of  SMO  and  Others  that  the
    battle for Mosul had resulted in  much  of  the  city  being  destroyed
    including  54,000  homes  and  64,000  families  being  displaced.   He
    submitted that given the evidence of the level of destruction in Mosul,
    the judge erred in law in finding that the appellant would be  able  to
    obtain his CSID from his home.

54. Secondly, Mr Kumar submitted that the judge had been wrong to find that
    the appellant could obtain a replacement CSID as he did  not  have  the
    relevant documentation or information.  He did not know  the  page  and
    volume in the Family Book which was an essential piece of  information.
    Mr Kumar also  told  me  that  the  appellant  had  made  a  number  of
    unsuccessful attempts to obtain documentation from the embassy  in  the
    UK.  However, he accepted that  this  evidence  postdated  the  judge's
    decision and could not assist him to establish that the judge had erred
    in law in his approach.

55. Mr Howells submitted that the  judge  had  made  alternative  findings.
    First, he had found that the appellant would  be  able  to  obtain  his
    existing CSID from his family in  Mosul,  given  that  his  father  was
    alive.  Secondly, he had found that the appellant did know the relevant
    page and volume of the Family Book.  Mr Howells relied upon on [392] of
    SMO and Others that it  will  be  "very  much  the  exception  that  an
    individual would be unaware of a matter so  fundamental  to  their  own
    identity and that of their family".   Mr  Howells  submitted  that  the
    judge was entitled to find the appellant was likely to know the  number
    and page of the  Family  Book  (see  para  23  of  the  determination).
    Further, the judge had found that the appellant would be able  to  seek
    the assistance of his family in Mosul to obtain a CSID.   Finally,  the
    judge had been entitled to find that the  appellant  could  obtain  the
    relevant documentation with the information that he had or could obtain
    from his family from the Iraqi Embassy in the UK.

56. It is plain from the CG decision  in  SMO  and  Others,  and  from  its
    predecessors, that possession of a CSID is vital for travel within Iraq
    and in order to live.

57. As regards obtaining a replacement CSID in the UK, the Tribunal in  SMO
    and Others at [383]  accepted  the  approach  in  the  earlier  country
    guidance cases of AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 444 (IAC) (and
    on appeal, AA (Iraq) v SSHD  [2017] EWCA Civ 944)  at  [173]-[177]  and
    AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT  212  (IAC)
    at [26].

58. In AA at [173]-[177] the Upper Tribunal said this based on  the  expert
    evidence of Dr Fatah:


         "Obtaining a CSID whilst in the UK


         173.    As regards those who have  an  expired  or  current  Iraqi
             passport but no CSID - Dr Fatah identifies in his first report
             that a CSID may be obtained through the "Consular  section  of
             the Iraqi Embassy in London", which will send a request for  a
             replacement or renewed CSID to  the  General  Directorate  for
             Travel and  Nationality  -  Directorate  of  Civil  Status.  A
             request for a replacement  CSID  must  be  accompanied,  inter
             alia, by "any form of official  document  in  support  of  the
             applicant's identity" and the application form must be  signed
             by  "the  head  of  the  family,  or  the  legal  guardian  or
             representative to verify the truth of its contents."  He  also
             added that an applicant must also authorise a person  in  Iraq
             to act as his representative  in  order  for  that  person  to
             "follow up on the progress of the application.


         174.     However, Dr Fatah  continued  by  explaining  that  if  an
             individual has lost his CSID and does not  know  the  relevant
             page and book number for it, then the Iraq Embassy  in  London
             will not be able to obtain one on his behalf. Instead,  he  or
             she will have to attend the appropriate local office of family
             registration in Iraq or give  a  relative,  friend  or  lawyer
             power of attorney to obtain his or her CSID. The process of  a
             giving power of attorney to a lawyer in  Iraq  to  act  "as  a
             proxy" is commonplace and Dr Fatah had done this  himself.  He
             also explained that the power of attorney  could  be  obtained
             through the Iraq Embassy.


         175.    Dr Fatah gave further evidence to the effect that having  a
             marriage certificate may be useful as it  would  contain  data
             found in the family records. It is, however, not  possible  to
             use a "health card" in order to obtain a CSID because there is
             no primary health care or  GP  system  in  Iraq,  but  instead
             patients attended hospital when they needed to do  so  and  no
             central records are held.


         176.    There is a consensus between Dr Fatah's evidence  and  the
             following more general  evidence  provided  by  UNHCR-Iraq  in
             April 2015 on the issue of obtaining CSID's from abroad.


                  "In principle, a failed asylum seeker, or indeed any Iraqi
                  citizen abroad, can acquire Iraqi documents through  Iraqi
                  embassies and consulates. There is a special authorization
                  granted to these bodies to  provide  documents  for  Iraqi
                  abroad on the condition that the beneficiaries should have
                  any  available  documents  in   order   to   prove   their
                  nationality."


         177.     In summary, we conclude that it is possible for  an  Iraqi
             national living in  the  UK  to  obtain  a  CSID  through  the
             consular section of the Iraqi Embassy in  London,  if  such  a
             person is able to produce a current or expired passport and/or
             the  book  and  page  number  for  their  family  registration
             details. For persons without  such  a  passport,  or  who  are
             unable to produce the relevant family registration details,  a
             power of attorney can be provided to someone in Iraq  who  can
             thereafter undertake the process of  obtaining  the  CSID  for
             such person from the Civil Status Affairs Office in their home
             governorate.  For  reasons  identified  in  the  section  that
             follows below, at the present time the process of obtaining  a
             CSID from Iraq is likely to be severely hampered if the person
             wishing to obtain the CSID is from an area where Article 15(c)
             serious harm is occurring." (emphasis added)

59. In AAH at [26], the Upper Tribunal added this:

         "If applying  through  a  consulate  abroad  the  requirements  are
         different. Having contacted the consulate in London, and checked on
         the website of the Iraqi embassy in Sweden, Dr  Fatah  states  that
         the  authorities  will  require  the  applicant  to  first  make  a
         statement explaining why he needs a CSID and  attach  this  to  his
         application form, which must  countersigned  by  the  head  of  the
         applicant's family and stamped by the consulate or embassy; he must
         then produce his Iraqi passport and proof of status in the  country
         where he is applying, the name of a representative (proxy) in Iraq,
         an additional form completed by the head of the applicant's  family
         verifying that the contents of his application form were true, four
         colour copies of his INC, and 10 colour photographs. Crucially  the
         applicant must be able to produce something which can establish the
         location of his family's details in the civil register. This should
         be a CSID, an INC or  birth  certificate.  If  none  of  these  are
         available to the applicant he must supply the identity documents of
         his parents. This evidence again  accords  with  that  of  Landinfo
         (December 2017) who conclude that it can  be  difficult  to  obtain
         replacement ID documents from an embassy abroad for the  individual
         who is unable to verify his or her identity."

60. In SMO and Others, the  Upper  Tribunal  at  [383]  noted  the  changes
    occurring in Iraq from issuing CSIDs to the new INID but that this  did
    not apply in an application to the Iraqi Embassy in the UK:

         "An Iraqi national in the UK would be able to apply for a  CSID  in
         the way explained  in  AA  (Iraq)  and,  if  one  was  successfully
         obtained, we find that it  would  be  acceptable  evidence  of  the
         individual's identity throughout Iraq.  Notwithstanding the plan to
         replace the old CSID system with the INID by the end  of  2019,  we
         accept what was said by EASO (in  February  2019)  and  the  Danish
         Immigration  Service  and  Landinfo  (in   November   2018),   that
         implementation was delayed and that the CSID was still  being  used
         in Iraq, and that it continues to be issued in those parts  of  the
         country in which the INID  terminals  have  not  been  rolled  out.
         Given this evidence, and the fact that the CSID has been a  feature
         of Iraqi society for so long, we do not accept that there will come
         a time at the end of this year when the CSID suddenly ceases to  be
         acceptable as proof of identity".

61. On the basis of this evidence, an Iraqi national living in the  UK  may
    be able to obtain his CSID from the Iraqi Embassy  if  he  is  able  to
    produce a current or expired passport "and/or" the book and page number
    for their family registration details.  That is made clear in [177]  of
    AA, and in AAH the Upper Tribunal adopted the same approach  as  in  AA
    (Iraq) (confirming AA in the UT  on  this).   Having  referred  to  the
    relevant paragraphs in AA, the UT in AAH stated at [103] that Dr  Fatah
    had confirmed in evidence  before  them  that  this  guidance  remained
    accurate.  He added two caveats but those related to the position  when
    seeking a CSID in Iraq.

62. Consequently, in obtaining a CSID, knowledge  of  the  details  in  the
    Family Book, namely the book and page number, is crucial.  As the  case
    law recognises, other documentation might assist but it does not appear
    to be essential.

63. That said, at para 29 Judge Clemes made the following finding:

         "I am satisfied it is reasonable to expect the appellant to  engage
         with the Iraqi Embassy to obtain a passport,  for  which  he  would
         need (and I am satisfied, be able  to  supply)  his  correct  name,
         place of birth, mother's name, ID card number  -  see  my  findings
         above, page number of the Family Registry (see my findings  above),
         Iraqi national certificate number and date of issue".

64. The reference to his findings above are t opara 23 where he said this:

         "Applying my findings about the links between the appellant and his
         family and his placing of his CSID at home, I am satisfied he  will
         be likely to know the number and that his evidence was  untrue  and
         evasive.  If he cannot recall it 'off the top of his  head' then he
         can contact his family and ask them for it.  The  same  applies  to
         the necessary details contained in his Family Book, i.e.  the  page
         number in the Family Registry and the  required  details  from  the
         Iraqi national certificate".

65. The judge sustainably found, as I  have  already  concluded,  that  his
    father was alive in Mosul and there was no dispute between  them.   The
    judge also referred to the passage in SMO  and  Others  at  [391]  that
    apart from the exceptional case, individuals are  likely  to  know  the
    volume and page reference to their Family Book.  In SMO and others, the
    UT said this:

         "We consider the number of individuals who do not  know  and  could
         not ascertain their volume and page reference would be quite small,
         however.  It is  impossible  to  overstate  the  importance  of  an
         individual's volume and  page  reference  in  the  civil  register.
         These details appear on numerous official documents,  including  an
         Iraqi passport, wedding certificate and birth certificate, as  well
         as the CSID.  It was suggested in a report from the British Embassy
         in Baghdad, quoted at 6.1.9 of  the  Internal  Relocation  CPIN  of
         February 2019, that '[a]ll Iraqi nationals will know or be able  to
         easily obtain this information'.   We  find  the  former  assertion
         entirely unsurprising.  The volume and page reference in the  civil
         register is a piece of information which is of significance to  the
         individual and their family from the moment of their birth.  It  is
         entered on various documents and is ever present in  that  person's
         life.  We do not lose  sight  of  the  fact  that  there  remain  a
         significant number of people in Iraq who are undocumented.   We  do
         not consider that problem to be attributable to a  difficulty  with
         recalling the relevant information.  It is instead attributable  to
         the closure - until comparatively  recently  -  of  the  local  CSA
         offices  at  which  people  were  required  to  obtain  replacement
         documents and to their reluctance to return to those areas  from  a
         place of relocation".

66. The UT then went on in para [392] to add this:

         "There will of course be those who can plausibly claim not to  know
         these details.  Those who left Iraq at a  particularly  young  age,
         those who are mentally  unwell  and  those  who  have  issues  with
         literacy or numeracy may all be able to make such a claim plausibly
         but we consider that it will be very much  the  exception  that  an
         individual would be unaware of a matter so fundamental to their own
         identity and that of their family.  The  letter  from  the  Embassy
         also suggested that most  Iraqis  would  be  able  to  obtain  this
         information easily.  Again, that  assertion  is  unsurprising  when
         viewed in its proper context.  As is clear from AAH (Iraq), Iraq is
         a collectivist society in which the family is all important.  It is
         also a country with a high prevalence of mobile phone  usage  among
         the adult population.  Even when we  bear  in  mind  the  years  of
         conflict and displacement in Iraq, we would expect there to be only
         a small number of cases in  which  an  individual  could  plausibly
         claim to have no means of contacting a family member from whom  the
         relevant volume and page reference  could  be  obtained  or  traced
         back".

67. In this appeal,  the  judge  was  entitled  to  find  that  either  the
    appellant would know the relevant details of  the  Family  Book  or  he
    could contact his family (in particular his father)  and  obtain  those
    details from him.  These details would allow the  appellant  to  obtain
    the relevant documentation, including a passport from the Iraqi Embassy
    in the UK.

68. The judge was entitled not to consider this one  of  the  "exceptional"
    cases where an individual might not be expected to know  the  important
    information  about  his  Family  Book.   The  judge  dealt   with   the
    appellant's  mental  health  in  para  34  of  his  determination  when
    considering Art 8.  He said this:

         "Regarding his mental health, I am  satisfied  that  amounts  to  a
         moderate and treatable condition with the most recent  prescription
         being for 25mg of Citalopram, a dosage that he has been on for some
         years.  I find as a fact that this is a low  or  starter  dose  for
         treatment of anxiety and depression and  the  most  recent  entries
         suggest that the condition is improving.  He has complained to  his
         GP about sleeping problems and some social stresses  (house-sharers
         and loneliness).  He has claimed that he has  had  memory  problems
         but I am satisfied that this is not supported by  the  GP  records.
         He has never been referred for secondary care and  his  GP  manages
         the condition with him".

69. In any event, that would not affect whether his father, whom the  judge
    found was alive and  was  entitled  to  conclude  the  appellant  could
    contact, could provide that information to him.

70. Although it is not entirely clear, it may well be that the  judge  also
    found when he said that he could obtain a CSID, inter alia,  with  "the
    support of his father and family" that he was concluding that it  could
    be obtained from  the  relevant  CSA  office  in  Mosul.   Despite  the
    evidence  concerning  the  impact  of  the  battle  for  Mosul  on  the
    infrastructure of Mosul, the UT  in  SMO  concluded  on  the  extensive
    evidence before it that all CSA offices had now reopened.  They  noted,
    however, that the extent to which the records had been destroyed by the
    conflict with ISIS was unclear and was  likely  to  vary  significantly
    depending on the extent and intensity of the conflict in that area (see
    [394]).  The UT, of course, was aware of the evidence which is referred
    to in the grounds and set out at [24].  Given that it is accepted  that
    the CSA office has reopened, on this  evidence  alone,  the  judge  was
    reasonably entitled to conclude that the appellant's family would  have
    access to the office and the relevant records there in order to  obtain
    a replacement CSID for the appellant.

71. However, even if that could not be done, the judge's finding  that  the
    appellant would be able to obtain the document in the UK was reasonably
    open to him.  As Mr Kumar accepted, the fact that he had  indicated  to
    me in his submissions that the appellant had unsuccessfully  approached
    the Iraqi Embassy in the UK is not a matter  relevant  to  the  judge's
    assessment of the evidence at the date of the hearing and available  to
    him.

    Ground 5

72. This ground contends, in effect, that in finding that the appellant had
    not established a  risk  from  ISIS  on  return  the  judge  had  given
    insufficient weight to the fact that the appellant  had  been  detained
    and tortured.  Reliance is placed upon Art 4(4)  of  the  Qualification
    Directive and para 339K of the  Immigration  Rules.   These  provisions
    recognise that where an individual has been subject to past persecution
    or serious harm that is a "serious indication" that he is  at  risk  of
    persecution or serious harm on return "unless there are good reasons to
    consider that such persecution or serious harm will not be repeated".

73. The simple answer to the appellant's reliance upon these provisions  in
    this appeal is that the  judge  found  that  there  was  no  background
    evidence as to the risk that the appellant would be exposed to in Mosul
    from ISIS.  That finding can be put in  another  way,  given  that  the
    judge was considering SMO and Others.  The evidence based upon SMO  and
    Others was that ISIS was no longer functioning in Mosul and  therefore,
    that evidence was a sound basis for considering that there  were  "good
    reasons" to consider that the past persecution or serious harm  to  the
    appellant from ISIS would not be repeated on his return to Mosul.

74. For all these reasons, I reject each  of  the  appellant's  grounds  of
    appeal.  The judge's decision to dismiss the appellant's  international
    protection claim (and indeed the humanitarian protection claim) did not
    involve the making of an error  of  law.   Consequently,  his  decision
    stands.

Decision

75. For the above reasons, the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal on  all  grounds  did  not  involve  the
    making of an error of law.  That decision stands.

76. Accordingly, the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.





                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                               7 August 2020

