

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00492/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                   |Sent to parties on:                   |
|On 21 April 2017                    |On 18 May 2017                        |
|                                    |                                      |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                            MR ADAM MOHAMMED SAID

                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Siddique
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the appellant's appeal to the  Upper Tribunal,  brought  with
the permission of a judge of the Upper Tribunal, from  a  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal (Judge Dearden hereinafter "the Judge") to dismiss his
appeal against the Secretary of State's decision of 26 June 2015  refusing
to grant him international protection.  The matter first came before  me  on
23 December 2016 and after that hearing, and in consequence  of  what  had
been said  at  that  hearing,  I  set  aside  the Judge's  decision  whilst
preserving certain of the findings.  My reasons for doing so  are  explained
in detail in a decision of 12 January 2017 which a reader of this decision
might possibly care to read first.

2.    By way of background, the appellant entered the United Kingdom ("UK")
on 21 April 2015.  It is recorded that he claimed asylum on the  following
day.  In so doing, he said that he had been  born  to  Eritrean  parents  in
Sudan on 24 December 1990.  His parents had fled Eritrea  and  had  sought
asylum in Sudan. The family,  including  the  appellant  himself,  had  been
recognised as refugees by the Sudanese authorities.  He says  he  is  not  a
national of Sudan and has never made an  application  for  such  nationality
but other family members of his, including his  father,  have  done  so  but
unsuccessfully.  He has Eritrean nationality because  both  of  his  parents
possess such nationality.  He had been born in and had lived  in  a  refugee
camp with his family. However he claims that in November 2013 he decided  to
move to Eritrea.  He says he took that  decision  because  he  had  suffered
harassment as an Eritrean refugee in Sudan and because he had  an  uncle  in
Eritrea who had urged him to go to that country.  He  claims  to  have  been
able to enter Eritrea lawfully by presenting  to  the  authorities  Eritrean
identity cards belonging to his parents and says that  he  was  subsequently
given his own Eritrean identity card along  with  permission  to  reside  in
that country on a temporary basis.  He claims to have managed to  find  some
employment  in  Eritrea  but  says  that  the  authorities   there   started
conducting "round-ups" of people in order to  coerce  them  into  performing
military service.  In consequence of that he decided that he would  have  to
leave Eritrea.  He travelled back to Sudan on foot and then  went  to  Libya
before making his way, via  various  countries  including  certain  European
countries, to the UK.  He asserted that were he to be  returned  to  Eritrea
he would be persecuted as a result  of  his  avoiding  military  service  or
would be made to  perform  military  service  which  would,  of  itself,  be
persecutory.  He also asserts that if  he  were  to  be  returned  to  Sudan
(which is the country of  proposed  return)  he  would  be  "refouled",  put
another way, he would be sent from Sudan to Eritrea.

3.    The Secretary of State disbelieved  much  of  the  above  account  and
refused the asylum claim.  The appellant appealed but  the Judge  dismissed
his appeal and the Judge's written decision  was  sent  to  the  parties  on
31 August 2016.  It is fair to say that the Judge, like the Secretary  of
State, did not believe quite substantial parts of the offered  account.   In
that context, the Judge did not express disbelief  as  to  the  appellant's
claim that he was a child of Eritrean parents and was a  refugee  in  Sudan.
However, the Judge thought  that  he  would  be  able  to  obtain  Sudanese
citizenship with ease if he had not  already  done  so  and  that  in  these
circumstances there  would  be  no  risk  of  refoulment.   The Judge  also
disbelieved, in  its  totality,  the  part  of  the  account  in  which  the
appellant had claimed to have left Sudan, gone  to  Eritrea  and  then  fled
Eritrea.

4.    When setting aside  the Judge's  decision  I  preserved  the  adverse
findings regarding the claimed trip from Sudan to Eritrea.  Specifically,  I
preserved the content  of  paragraphs 19(3),  19(5),  19(6)  and  19(7)  of
the Judge's written decision.  I directed a  further  hearing  should  take
place before me in the Upper Tribunal so that the decision could be remade.


5.    That hearing (a type sometimes referred to as a  continuance  hearing)
took place on 21 April 2017.  Representation was as stated above.  I heard
some relatively brief oral evidence from the appellant which  he  gave  with
the assistance of an Arabic speaking interpreter whom he appeared  to  fully
understand  throughout.   Having  heard  the  evidence   I   received   oral
submissions from each representative.  As to documentation, I had before  me
the various documents which had been before the Judge and I also  had  some
additional UNHCR evidence which had been given  to  me  at  the  hearing  of
23 December 2016 and an additional bundle containing a short supplementary
witness statement, some evidence concerning the claimed refugee  status  (as
opposed to citizenship status) of the appellant  and  his  father  and  some
background country material.

6.    The claimant,  in  his  oral  evidence  to  me,  said  that  he  still
maintained his claim that he had left Sudan and gone to  Eritrea.   Some  of
his family members, having been recognised as refugees in Sudan, had  sought
Sudanese citizenship.  They had applied to "the local authorities"  who  had
told them  that  it  was  not  possible  to  grant  them  citizenship.   The
appellant said, initially, that only oral  applications  had  been  made  by
them but he subsequently suggested written  ones  had  been  made.   Pausing
there, there was no clear explanation for that inconsistency.  He said  that
these applications had been made a long time ago and he confirmed  they  had
been made prior to his leaving  Sudan.   He  had  not  made  an  application
himself because, to his knowledge, all refugees  in  his  position  who  had
applied had had their applications rejected.

7.    As to the submissions, Mr Duffy said he would rely upon  the  content
of the original  reasons  for  refusal  letter  as  well  as  the  preserved
findings.  The appellant has been found not to  be  credible  regarding  one
component  of  his  claim  and  he  had  given  inconsistent  oral  evidence
concerning the way in which his family had sought citizenship in  the  past.
However, Mr Duffy acknowledged information contained in an Immigration  and
Refugee Board  of  Canada  Report  of  23 August 2016  (which  is  in  the
appellant's supplementary bundle file for  the  purposes  of  this  hearing)
supported the proposition that Sudanese nationality law was not  applied  to
refugees in Sudan.  He said that, on that basis, he could  accept  that  the
appellant and his  family  might  well  still  be  refugees  as  opposed  to
Sudanese nationals.  However,  whilst  there  was  some  background  country
material demonstrating that some Eritrean nationals had been  deported  from
Sudan to Eritrea the numbers were very small  given  the  amount  of  people
who, in all probability, do travel from Eritrea to Sudan and try  to  settle
there.  The appellant himself had, on his own account, lived for many  years
in Sudan without being refouled.  Accordingly, there was no real  risk  that
upon return he would be.

8.    Mr Siddique pointed to some documentation issued by the  UNHCR  which
he said confirmed that the appellant was a refugee in Sudan as opposed to  a
national of that country.  The  Immigration  and  Refugee  Board  of  Canada
document does demonstrate that persons who  are  refugees  in  Sudan  cannot
realistically entertain hopes of gaining  citizenship  notwithstanding  what
legislation concerning citizenship might state.  The appellant's account  of
citizenship being refused and of his suffering discrimination as  a  refugee
in Sudan is plausible.  I should find that he is not a Sudanese national.

9.    As to the risk of refoulment, Mr Siddique submitted that there was  a
risk which was more than fanciful.  It is not,  he  argued,  appropriate  to
simply make a statistical  calculation  based  upon  the  small  numbers  of
Eritreans who had been returned.  He would not have been at risk if  he  had
remained in the camp but his account is that he chose  to  leave  that  camp
and leave Sudan illegally.  The authorities in Sudan would  not  approve  of
his having done that.  He would be returned as a  failed  asylum  seeker  so
would come to the attention of  the  authorities  and  they  would  ask  him
questions and  would  realise  he  had  effectively  chosen  to  reject  the
protection  offered  to  him.   That  will  be   frowned   upon.    In   the
circumstances he would be in a distinct category of persons and would be  at
risk  of  refoulment.   Background  material  does  demonstrate  that  other
Eritrean nationals in Sudan  have  been  returned  to  Eritrea.   These  are
persons who would, according  to  UK  case  law,  properly  be  regarded  as
refugees.

10.   It is necessary for me to make some factual findings.  In so  doing  I
have taken account of all of the written and oral evidence  which  has  been
given to me.  I have, of course, preserved certain findings and my doing  so
results in my concluding that the appellant is a person who is  prepared  to
mislead if he feels that he might benefit from so doing.  I have noted  that
Mr Duffy did not seek to persuade me that the appellant is not  a  Sudanese
refugee from Eritrea and did not make any serious  attempt  to  persuade  me
that he has or is likely to be able to obtain Sudanese citizenship.  I  find
as follows:

      (a)   The appellant is a national of Eritrea because his parents  were
           born in that country and are nationals of that country.

      (b)   I find that the appellant's parents left Eritrea, prior  to  the
           appellant's birth, and lived in a refugee camp in Sudan.

      (c)   I find that the appellant was born on 24 December 1990 in  the
           Sudanese refugee camp and  that  his  family  have  subsequently
           remained there but that he chose to leave  the  camp  and  leave
           Sudan towards the latter end of 2013.

      (d)   I find that the appellant and is  family  members  were  granted
           refugee status in Sudan in January 2004 (that is in  accordance
           with UNHCR records).

      (e)   I find that the appellant's family did, at  some  point  in  the
           past, seek to apply for or at least make  enquiries  as  to  the
           possibility  of  applying  for  Sudanese  citizenship  but  were
           informed such could not be obtained.  I accept this part of  the
           account because I think it is plausible that persons  recognised
           as refugees would  wish  to  effectively  "upgrade"  by  seeking
           citizenship.  I also find,  in  light  of  the  content  of  the
           Immigration and Refugee  Board  of  Canada  document  that  such
           applications or enquiries were very likely to be  rebuffed.   (I
           note in passing that Mr Duffy appeared to accept the accuracy of
           what was contained in the report or, at least, did not  seek  to
           suggest it was not accurate).

      (f)   I find that the appellant became disenchanted with life  in  the
           refugee camp in Sudan.  In  this  context  there  is  background
           country  material  demonstrating  that  life  is  difficult  for
           refugees in Sudan (see the 2015 US Department of State  Country
           Report on Human Practices in Sudan).  In particular, that report
           made mention of refugees and asylum  seekers  being  subject  to
           arrest outside the camps and  indicated  that  refugees,  whilst
           technically allowed  to  work,  would  rarely  be  granted  work
           permits.

      (g)   I find that the appellant, as a result  of  his  disenchantment,
           left Sudan illegally in the hope of finding something better  in
           a different country.  I accept he left illegally because, on the
           material  before  me,  it  seems  unlikely  that  the   Sudanese
           authorities would simply grant him some form of exit Visa and it
           seems unlikely he would apply for one.

      (h)   In  light  of  the  preserved  findings,  I  conclude  that  the
           applicant, when he left Sudan, did not go to Eritrea and did not
           subsequently encounter any threat of being forced to  carry  out
           military service.  Instead, I find that he simply embarked  upon
           a journey which has ultimately  led  to  his  coming,  via  many
           countries including some European countries, to the UK.

11.   It is in light of the above findings that I  must  now  consider  what
would happen  to  the  appellant  if  returned.   Of  course,  there  is  no
suggestion that he will be  sent  to  Eritrea.   The  Secretary  of  State's
position has always been that he  will  be  returned  to  Sudan  though  the
Secretary of State does seem to accept and the Judge did find, correctly in
my judgment, that if he were to be returned  to  Eritrea  at  any  point  he
would be at real risk of being forced to undertake  military  service  which
would, itself, be persecutory.  He is a healthy  male  of  military  service
call-up age.  So, the refoulment risk is important.

12.   There is background country material  demonstrating  that,  in  recent
years, some Eritrean nationals have been forcibly  returned  to  Eritrea  by
the Sudanese authorities.  Information about that is contained in  a  report
entitled "Human Rights Watch, Sudan:  hundreds  deported  to  likely  abuse"
which was issued on 30 May 2016.  It appears that all  of  these  enforced
returns took place in or about May 2016.  Mr Duffy says that approximately
1,000 such persons were involved.  The position is not entirely clear but  I
am happy to proceed on the basis  that  that  is  broadly  correct.   It  is
apparent from the report, though, insofar as it may be  relevant,  that  not
all of those Eritrean nationals had actually  been  recognised  as  refugees
when forcibly returned.  In fact, it may be that  only  six  of  them  were.
Presumably the others were persons who had entered Sudan illegally  and  had
either made applications which had not  been  determined  or  had  not  made
applications.

13.   Mr Duffy suggested, entirely uncontroversially  I  think,  that  many
persons leave Eritrea unlawfully and go,  at  least  as  a  first  stop,  to
Sudan.  He says that there  is  an  indication  in  the  documentation  that
something in the region of 3,000 such persons arrive in  Sudan  each  month.
Extrapolating from that he argues that if a thousand such persons  had  been
forcibly returned (and he does accept that) it represents only a very  small
percentage indeed of the number of such persons in Sudan. So,  any  risk  of
refoulment is fanciful because it hardly ever happens. Mr Siddique did  not
appear to dispute the likely figures.

14.   Whilst it perhaps seem odd to base a conclusion as to real risk  on  a
simple statistical analysis, I would be inclined  to  agree  with  Mr Duffy
that the numbers might suggest any risk is fanciful if  matters  are  looked
at in that rather simple way.  I also agree with Mr Siddique, though,  that
an assessment as  to  risk,  in  this  case,  has  to  be  a  somewhat  more
sophisticated one.

15.   In that context, I  have  accepted  (and  such  was  not  specifically
disputed before  me)  that  the  background  country  material  demonstrates
refugees are treated poorly in Sudan with  respect  to  such  as  access  to
citizenship and access to employment and that they are not welcomed  outside
of the refugee camps.   The  Human Rights  Watch  Report  of  30 May 2016
referred to above mentions that, with respect to the enforced  returns,  the
Sudanese authorities had arrested  377  people  attempting  to  leave  Sudan
unlawfully to travel  to  Libya.   It  is  noted  that  amongst  those  were
313 Eritreans including six who had been registered as refugees  in  Sudan,
and that they were all deported.  That does  appear  to  suggest  that,  for
whatever reason, the Sudanese authorities might wish  to  prevent  Eritreans
or other foreign nationals leaving their territory unlawfully or  that  they
take exception to it.  Of course, this appellant, according to my  findings,
will have left Sudan illegally albeit  not  to  go  to  Eritrea  as  he  has
dishonestly claimed.

16.   There is, I think, a degree of  force  in  Mr Siddique's  submissions
that the Sudanese  authorities  are  likely  to  take  a  dim  view  of  the
appellant having seemingly rejected the hospitality afforded to him  by  the
authorities in Sudan by departing illegally.  I  place  that  alongside  the
evidence of  the  authorities  discriminating  against  refugees  living  in
Sudan.  I bear in mind that although the  numbers  are  small  the  Sudanese
authorities have shown themselves to  be  prepared  to  forcibly  return  to
Eritrea some persons they  have  previously  recognised  as  refugees.   The
appellant will not be able to simply sneak over the border to Sudan  from  a
neighbouring country but will be actually returned by the UK authorities as
a failed asylum seeker and so, I accept, is likely to come to the  attention
of the authorities in Sudan.

17.   Putting all of that together I have concluded that, whilst the  matter
might be finely balanced, there is a real risk on the  particular  facts  of
this case that the Sudanese authorities would forcibly return the  appellant
to Eritrea.

18.    In  the  circumstances,  in  remaking  this  decision,  I  allow  the
appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision  to  refuse  to
grant asylum. I find that he is a refugee.  I also allow the appeal, on  the
same basis and  following  the  same  reasoning,  under  Article 3  of  the
European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR).

Decision:

The appellant's appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

The appellant's appeal is allowed on human rights grounds (Article 3 of the
ECHR only).

Anonymity

I  make  no  anonymity  direction.   None  was  sought  by  the  appellant's
representative.


Signed                                                             Date   15
May 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As no fee is payable I make no fee award.



Signed:                           Date:  15 May 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway


