
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00243/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 25 September 2017                     |On 6 October 2017                 |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                                     NL
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Mohzam, Solicitor, Liyon Legal Limited
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Mace, sitting at Hatton  Cross  on  9  March
    2017) dismissing his appeal against the decision of  the  Secretary  of
    State to refuse  to  recognise  him  as  a  refugee,  or  as  otherwise
    requiring international or human rights protection.




Relevant Background

 2. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, whose date of birth  is  [  ]
    1971.  He applied for a visa to the United Kingdom on 30  August  2010,
    and his application was successful.  He  was  granted  entry  clearance
    from 9 September 2010 until 20 July 2012.  He entered  the  UK  on  his
    visa on 9 October 2010.  On 20 July 2012 he applied for leave to remain
    as  a  student,  and  the  application  was  refused.   The   appellant
    overstayed following the refusal, and on 17 November 2014 he was served
    with an IS151A notice informing him of his liability to  detention  and
    removal as an overstayer.  On 6 August  2015  the  appellant  raised  a
    claim for asylum.

 3. He said that he had rented his mother's property to  two  friends.   He
    was arrested and detained on 10 September 2009 following the arrest  of
    his two friends, who were LTTE members.  They informed the  authorities
    that he had been helping the LTTE "for payments" (Q&A 62).   Under  the
    tenancy agreement which he had negotiated with his LTTE friend Prakash,
    he was receiving 7,000 rupees per month in rent.  He had not registered
    the tenancy agreement with his  local  police  force,  as  was  legally
    required, and he was questioned about this  non-compliance  during  his
    detention.  He said that he was kept in army detention  at  an  unknown
    location until 14 September 2009, and was then taken to Welikasa Police
    Station where he was detained for a further 39 days.  He said  that  he
    was released after his brother-in-law paid a bribe.

 4. On 22 December 2015, the  Secretary  of  State  gave  her  reasons  for
    refusing to recognise the appellant as a refugee.  The  property  which
    was being rented belonged  to  his  mother  and  was  under  her  name.
    Nonetheless, although the property was in her name,  he  said  she  was
    never targeted by the authorities with regard  to  their  investigation
    into the property he rented to LTTE members.

 5. He initially stated that he had two arrest warrants issued against  him
    - one in November  2009  and  the  other  in  December  2009.   In  his
    substantive interview, he said that there were in fact  three  warrants
    issued against him.  He said that the first one was issued in September
    2009, and it detailed why he  was  wanted.  He  also  stated  that  the
    warrants were posted to his home, and that his mother had informed  him
    about them.  However, available objective information indicated that in
    Sri Lanka an arrest warrant remained with the police, with a copy being
    kept on a legal file.  There was  no  objective  evidence  that  arrest
    warrants were posted to the houses of those who were accused.

 6. It was not accepted that he was detained and released on payment  of  a
    bribe.  But, if he was, the fact that he was released from detention on
    payment of a bribe indicated that the state no longer had a genuine and
    continuing interest in him, following PT (Risk - bribery - release) Sri
    Lanka CG [2002] UKIAT 03444.  The fact that he  was  released,  on  his
    account, and was able to apply for a visa and leave Sri  Lanka  on  his
    own passport without any problems,  indicated  that  he  was  never  of
    interest to the authorities to warrant him being on a 'stop' list.

 7. The respondent cited a letter  from  the  British  High  Commission  in
    Colombo, dated 5 January 2012, for the proposition that  the  DIE  were
    notified only when a court decided to impound the suspect's passport or
    an arrest warrant was issued.  The details of such persons were  placed
    on their 'alert' or 'wanted' list within  their  database.   The  other
    matter,  which  was  rare  and  case-specific,  was  that   the   State
    Intelligence  Service  could  inform  the   immigration   officers   of
    individuals suspected of terrorist activity and those on  the  'wanted'
    list.  Again, the details of suspects would be put on the DIE database.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 8. The appellant's appeal came before Judge Mace by way of  remittal  from
    the Upper Tribunal, the previous decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    having been set aside as being vitiated by a  material  error  of  law.
    Both parties were legally represented.

 9. As the Judge noted in paragraph [16] of his  subsequent  decision,  the
    appellant relied on a series of documents which  had  purportedly  been
    obtained from the Chief Magistrates' Court in Colombo.  One of them was
    a document dated 5 October 2010, and it contained  "facts"  purportedly
    reported to the court regarding  a  suspect  (the  appellant)  who  was
    involved with terrorist activities.  It described how  security  forces
    had arrested two LTTE members.  It was  revealed  that  they  had  been
    staying  at  165  Hospital  Road,  and  the  premises  were   searched.
    Thereafter, the suspect (the appellant) was detained  on  15  September
    2009.  However, he escaped from custody on 23 October  2009.   Attempts
    to arrest him were abortive. A case was going to be filed at the  Chief
    Magistrates' Court on 6 October 2010 in order to  obtain  an  order  to
    issue a summons against him.

10. The documents from  Sri  Lanka  included  three  summonses  purportedly
    directed to the appellant, requiring him to  appear  before  the  Chief
    Magistrate on 3 November 2010, 24 November 2010 and  22  December  2010
    respectively.

11. The Judge found the appellant's  account  of  his  detention  and  ill-
    treatment in 2009 to be credible.  In relation to the claim that  there
    were extant court proceedings and that the authorities had  resurrected
    an interest in him and continued to visit his  family  home,  he  found
    this evidence  to  be  inconsistent  and  lacking  in  credibility  and
    unsupported by background information.  He did not  accept  that  there
    were any outstanding proceedings against him, or that  the  authorities
    had visited his address in the recent  past.   The  appellant  had  not
    participated in activities in the UK which would have  brought  him  to
    the attention of the authorities.  He was not active in  the  diaspora.
    His name did not appear on a 'stop' list and he would not be  perceived
    to be a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka on the basis that his name
    would appear on the 'stop' list  comprising  individuals  against  whom
    there was an extant court order or arrest  warrant.   Neither  was  his
    name likely to appear on a 'watch' list.   Accordingly,  the  appellant
    had not discharged the burden of proving that there was a real risk  or
    it reasonably to be likely that he  would  suffer  persecution  in  the
    country of return, or that he would face a real risk of serious harm on
    return.

12. Part of the Judge's reasoning was that there was nothing to support the
    existence of an arrest warrant (paragraph 21) and although the case  of
    PT was of some antiquity,  the  point  raised  in  that  case  was  not
    disputed (paragraph 23).  The background information cited in that case
    led the Tribunal to conclude that bribery-related releases  would  not,
    in the absence of some special reason,  be  likely  to  be  treated  as
    "escapes", and would not result in the  inclusion  of  the  individuals
    involved on a 'wanted' list.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

13. On  4  August  2017,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Pickup  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal for the following reasons:

    2. it is arguable that the Judge erred in fact in stating at [21]  that
       there was nothing in existence that referred to the existence  of  a
       warrant.  Page 30 of the appellant's B bundle is  a  document  which
       makes repeated reference to an arrest warrant.  It is arguable  that
       this error is material to the outcome of the decision as at [26] the
       Judge considered the appellant's credibility based on  the  evidence
       as a whole, but including consideration of the  reliability  of  the
       documents.   The  Judge   may   also   have   erred   at   [22]   in
       misunderstanding which documents were being referred to.

    3. It is also arguable that the Judge erred in law in  making  findings
       against background evidence and case law in concluding that a person
       released from detention through bribery would not be treated  as  an
       escapee.

    4. The other grounds of appeal have lesser merit.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

14. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr Mohzam, who did not appear below, developed the  case  advanced
    in the grounds of appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.   On  behalf  of  the
    respondent, Mr Tufan adhered to the  Rule  24  response  settled  by  a
    colleague opposing the appeal.

Discussion

15. The grounds of appeal are highly discursive, but I  consider  that  the
    Judge granting  permission  has  reasonably  distilled  them  into  two
    principal grounds - the first of which is that the Judge erred  in  his
    consideration  of  the  documents  purporting  to  emanate   from   the
    Magistrates' Court of Colombo.

16. The Judge is wrong to say in paragraph [21] that none of the  documents
    now produced refer to an arrest warrant, but he was right to  say  that
    no copy of any warrant had been  produced.   The  significance  of  the
    document referred to by Judge Pickup (at page 30 of the  B  bundle)  is
    that it is the last document in the sequence of  documents  purportedly
    comprising the entire case record held at the Chief Magistrates'  Court
    in  Colombo  in  respect  of  case  number  1650/2010.   However,   the
    certification to this effect is not provided by a Clerk of the Court or
    by an attorney instructed by  the  appellant.   It  is  provided  by  a
    Government-approved translator.

17. The document at page 30 purports to be a report of a hearing which took
    place at the Court on 22 December 2010.  According  to  the  record  of
    proceedings, the OIC requested an open warrant  against  the  appellant
    for his arrest.  The TID had information that the accused  had  escaped
    from the country, and was seeking to issue an  arrest  warrant  against
    him.  The Court purportedly ruled that the accused had been  supporting
    the LTTE in their activities and he had escaped from custody while  the
    investigation was pending, and the Court was hereby issuing  an  arrest
    warrant against the suspect for his arrest.

18. There is, however, no arrest warrant, as the Judge noted. This  is  not
    consistent with the claim that an arrest warrant was issued and/or that
    a warrant for the appellant's arrest is extant.

19. The Judge reasonably goes on to draw an adverse  credibility  inference
    from the lack of an arrest warrant, reasoning that if the appellant was
    able to produce three summonses, "why could he not procure a copy of an
    arrest warrant if there is one in existence?"

20.  Mr  Mohzam  submits  that  this  line  of  reasoning  is  flawed   and
    impermissible, as in the refusal letter at paragraph 10 the  respondent
    had cited a letter from the British High Commission in Colombo dated 14
    September 2010, which reported that it was difficult for the accused to
    be able to obtain a copy of his/her own arrest warrant:

         When an arrest warrant is issued, a copy is kept on the legal  file
         and the original is handed to the police.  An accused cannot  apply
         for copies of the arrest warrant to the relevant  Court.   However,
         in practice forged documents are easily obtainable  throughout  Sri
         Lanka.  Additionally, given ongoing well-documented  concerns  over
         corruption of the police, it would probably not prove difficult  to
         obtain a copy of an arrest  warrant,  although  it  would  probably
         require prior contacts within the police service.

21. I do not consider that the Judge's reasoning runs counter to this piece
    of background evidence.  If  the  Magistrates'  Court  at  Colombo  had
    issued a warrant for the appellant's arrest,  a  copy  of  the  warrant
    would have been kept on the legal file at  the  Court.   The  documents
    produced in Bundle B purported to constitute the  entire  case  record,
    and yet they did not include an arrest warrant.  The  Judge  recognised
    in paragraph [20] that it might be difficult to obtain  a  copy  of  an
    arrest warrant (as the background information would seem to  indicate).
    However, since the appellant had been able to produce  other  documents
    purportedly on the court file, such as the lengthy  police  report,  it
    was open to the Judge to find that it  was  reasonable  to  expect  the
    appellant to produce a copy of an arrest warrant, if such existed.

22. At paragraph [22], the Judge said as  follows:  "The  appellant  states
    that his brother-in-law has  obtained  these  documents  for  him.   He
    claimed asylum on 6 October 2015, some six years after he  entered  the
    United  Kingdom.   He  was  not  interviewed  until  9  December  2015.
    However, despite his claim that the summonses had been  posted  to  his
    home address, he was still not in a position to  produce  them  at  the
    interview  and  further  time  to  do  so  was  requested.   In   those
    circumstances it is not clear why  his  brother-in-law  would  need  to
    obtain them and why there would be any period of delay since presumably
    they were in the possession of the appellant's  mother.  The  appellant
    stated at the hearing that he was in contact with his mother and sister
    but did not want to expose them to the authorities so he  did  not  ask
    them to send the summonses.  I do not find that a credible  explanation
    for the posting of documents which are almost seven years old."

23. It is argued that the Judge has misunderstood  the  provenance  of  the
    documents in Bundle B, and has not taken into  account  the  fact  that
    they were all extracted from the Court file in  March  2016.   However,
    this criticism is unjustified.  At paragraph [22]  the  Judge  is  only
    referring to the summonses.  He is not referring to the other documents
    in Bundle B.  What the Judge says  about  the  summonses  is  factually
    correct.  A set of summonses was first provided in late December  2015,
    although they would have been in his mother's possession since 2010, if
    they were genuine.  So, it was open to the Judge  to  draw  an  adverse
    credibility inference from the delay in their production.

24. It is true that copies of the same summonses purportedly re-appeared as
    part of the entire case record allegedly extracted from the court  file
    on 1 March 2017.  However, supposedly  the  appellant's  brother-in-law
    obtained the documents from the court file, rather than a lawyer.   So,
    the present case is distinguishable from the facts of  PJ  (Sri  Lanka)
    [2014] EWCA Civ 1011.

25. The distinguishing feature of PJ (Sri Lanka) is that in  that  case  it
    was not reasonably contestable that the court documents  relied  on  by
    the claimant had been genuinely extracted  from  a  file  held  at  the
    relevant Magistrate's Court in Sri Lanka, as  two  independent  lawyers
    had separately verified their provenance.  Given this  starting  point,
    it was inherently implausible that the court documents were  forgeries,
    as in order  to  be  forgeries,  the  claimant  would  have  needed  to
    infiltrate forged material into court records  genuinely  held  at  the
    Magistrate's Court in question.  Hence, Fulford LJ held that the  judge
    had misdirected herself, "when she concluded that they had been falsely
    prepared, without providing any reasoning as to how the applicant could
    have infiltrated false material into the  court  records,  particularly
    since there is no suggestion that the lawyers had been involved in  any
    discreditable conduct."

26. Ground 2 is that the Judge's finding in paragraph [23] is  against  the
    background information and the Country Guidance.  In  support  of  this
    proposition,  Mr  Mohzam  relies  upon  the  expert  evidence   of   Mr
    Punethanayagam, which is recorded in an annex to  GJ  &  Others  (Post-
    civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka  CG  [2013]  UKUT  00319,  and  on  the
    following commentary on his evidence contained in the body of the Upper
    Tribunal's decision at paragraph [275]: "His evidence on the process of
    bribery was particularly useful.  We did not have  the  opportunity  of
    hearing him give oral evidence, and some of his  evidence  goes  beyond
    what he can be taken to know himself but where  his  evidence  concerns
    criminal processes in Sri Lanka, we consider  that  it  is  useful  and
    reliable.  We take particular account of his view that the  seriousness
    of any charges against an individual are not determinative of whether a
    bribe can be paid, and it is possible to leave through the airport even
    when a person is being actively sought."

27. The following passage in Mr Punethanayagam's evidence  is  also  relied
    upon: "In my opinion, it is plausible that the  detainee  was  released
    following the payment  of  a  bribe,  even  if  a  significant  adverse
    interest to the authorities.  It is unlikely the person who accepts the
    bribe would access a detainee's record and change them as  released  or
    no longer wanted.  Hence such cases are normally  recorded  as  escaped
    from  detention  in  the  database  of  the  police.   Subsequently  an
    absconder action would be commenced and the detainee's details would be
    passed to the National Intelligence Bureau."

28.  I  consider  that  the   Tribunal   endorsed   two   aspects   of   Mr
    Punethanayagam's evidence, but  not  the  crucial  third  aspect  which
    underpins the error of law challenge.  The Tribunal  did  not  find  as
    true the proposition that a person who  accepted  the  bribe  would  be
    unlikely to change the detainee's record to "released"  or  "no  longer
    wanted" or that the detainee would be normally recorded as escaped from
    detention.  Moreover,  I  consider  that  the  Tribunal's  findings  at
    paragraph [275] are at best a gloss on PT. They  do  not  constitute  a
    clear repudiation of the ratio of PT.

29. In a passage cited at paragraph 23 of  the  refusal  letter,  the  view
    taken by the Tribunal on common  sense  grounds  in  Amalathaasen  (and
    affirmed by the Tribunal in PT) was as follows:

         It seems to us that it is highly improbable to say the least that a
         police officer, releasing a man on payment of a bribe, would record
         it as an escape.  There is certainly no need  to  do  so.   If  the
         police wanted to keep an interest in him all that was necessary was
         to note that he might be of interest in the  future.   Normally  if
         someone is released on payment of a bribe or otherwise it is indeed
         because the authorities take the view there is no  good  reason  to
         detain him even if there is some involvement with  the  LTTE  at  a
         very low level.

30. On the appellant's account, his support to the LTTE was very low  level
    - only consisting in him providing rented accommodation to LTTE members
    in return for payment. As the approach of the Sri Lankan authorities is
    based on sophisticated intelligence, it was open to the Judge  to  find
    that his release on  payment  of  a  bribe  after  39  days  in  police
    detention was much more  consistent  with  him  not  being  of  ongoing
    adverse interest to the police, and hence his  release  being  recorded
    for what it was, and not being falsely recorded as an escape.

31. If it had been recorded as an escape, it would have been reasonable  to
    expect the police to have taken absconder action  immediately,  and  to
    have sought to re-arrest him.   This  indeed  was  what  the  appellant
    initially claimed happened, in both his screening interview and  asylum
    interview.  He said that arrest warrants - which he later corrected  to
    summonses - had been sent to the family home in the autumn of 2009, and
    the first of these was received in September 2009.

32. It is argued in the grounds of appeal that the Judge erred  in  law  in
    drawing an  adverse  credibility  inference  from  the  fact  that  the
    summonses eventually produced by the appellant were issued  in  October
    and November 2010, almost a year after his release from detention,  and
    "within a short period of the appellant being granted  leave  to  enter
    the United Kingdom."

33. There is no merit in  the  argument  that  the  Judge  has  engaged  in
    impermissible speculation.  The dates of the summonses are inconsistent
    with the dates which the  appellant  gave  for  the  summonses  in  his
    screening and asylum interviews, and the delay in the  summonses  being
    purportedly issued was reasonably treated by the  Judge  as  not  being
    consistent with the appellant being someone of ongoing adverse interest
    to the authorities at the time of his  release  in  October  2009,  and
    being treated as an escapee in respect of  whom  absconder  action  was
    required.

34. In summary, although the Judge made a mistake in saying that there  was
    no reference in the documents to an arrest warrant, his mistake is  not
    material.  The Judge has given adequate  and  sustainable  reasons  for
    finding that the appellant had not  made  out  his  case  that  he  was
    genuinely of ongoing adverse interest to the authorities following  his
    release from detention in October 2009, and that he did not have a well-
    founded fear of persecution on return to Sri Lanka.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  The appellant's appeal  to  the  Upper
Tribunal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date  5 October 2017


Judge Monson

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge










