
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00473/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 January 2017                           |On 20 January 2017            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                                  ra (IRAN)
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Arnela Imamovic, Counsel, instructed by TRP
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14(1) of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Procedure  Rules,  the
    appellant is granted anonymity. No report of  these  proceedings  shall
    directly or indirectly identify him or  any  member  of  their  family.
    Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of  Court
    proceedings.



 2. The appellant appeals from the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    which dismissed his appeal against the decision  of  the  Secretary  of
    State to refuse to recognise him as a religious refugee from  Iran,  on
    account of his claimed conversion to Christianity.  Although the First-
    tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction, his sur place  claim
    is  such  as  to  require  him  to  be  accorded  anonymity  for  these
    proceedings in the Upper Tribunal, irrespective of the  merits  of  the
    sur place claim.

The Reasons for Appealing

 3. The appellant applied for permission to appeal on a narrow ground.   In
    the reasons for appealing settled by his new solicitors,  they  pleaded
    that the Judge had erred in law in paragraph [29] of his  decision,  in
    finding that the appellant could  "change  his  Facebook  page".   They
    pleaded that there were two errors here:

         (a) the appellant's Facebook page is  open  and  available  to  the
         Iranian cyber police:  changing it will not eliminate any  risk  to
         the appellant arising from its existence;

         (b) the Judge appears to concede that  the  appellant  might  be  a
         Christian, but that if he is, his conviction is not so  great  that
         he would not be in a position to change his Facebook page.  This is
         an opaque distinction and renders the entire determination unsafe.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 4. On 22 June 2016  Judge  Page  granted  permission  to  appeal  for  the
    following reasons:

        The appellant has identified an arguable error that could have  made
        a material difference to the outcome.   The  judge  found  that  the
        appellant's activities in  relation  to  the  Christian  Evangelical
        church in the United Kingdom [were] designed to  support  his  claim
        for  asylum.   The  judge  did  not  find  the  appellant  credible.
        However, the judge has referred to evidence that the  appellant  has
        placed on the internet, on his Facebook page...a photograph  of  the
        appellant with a large crucifix...The second  error  argued  for  is
        that the judge appear to concede  that  the  appellant  might  be  a
        Christian.  I am not sure that is correct because the judge has  not
        found the appellant credible.  If in  any  event,  the  two  alleged
        errors are geared to the same ground of appeal  that  the  appellant
        would be at risk by reason of his Facebook page.

Relevant Background

 5. As summarised in the decision letter of 3 July  2015,  the  appellant's
    claim was that in Iran he had converted from being  a  Shia  Muslim  to
    being a Protestant Christian.  He had  attended  a  house  church.   He
    decided to  leave  Iran  after  his  neighbour  became  aware  that  he
    converted to Christianity as she came to the family home  and  saw  his
    copy of the Bible.  At the time of his substantive interview,  he  said
    that he had been attending church in the UK on a weekly basis,  but  he
    apparently did not know the name of the Church,  or  its  address.  His
    expressed fear on return was that the Iranian authorities would  arrest
    him for having converted to Christianity.

 6. The Secretary of State did not accept the appellant's core claim.  This
    was because there were asserted inconsistencies in his account  of  his
    conversion to Christianity in Iran, and also because his  ignorance  of
    basic and fundamental aspects of the Christian faith  was  inconsistent
    with him having genuinely converted to Christianity.   In  summary,  it
    was accepted that he had left Iran illegally, but it was  not  accepted
    that he had done so because he had converted from Islam to Christianity
    and his neighbour became aware of his conversion.

 7. On the issue of risk on return, consideration was given to the case law
    of SZ & JM (Christians - FS confirmed) Iran CG [2008] UKAIT 0082.  This
    stated that it must be assessed that a Christian  convert  will  be  at
    real risk of coming to  the  attention  of  the  authorities.   As  his
    conversion to Christianity has been rejected, it was not accepted  that
    he was at risk of the authorities on return to Iran.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 8. The appellant's appeal came before  Judge  Barber  sitting  at  Sheldon
    Court in Birmingham on 17  February  2016.   Mrs  Christopher,  of  the
    Immigration Advice Service appeared on behalf of the appellant, and the
    respondent was represented by a Home Office  Presenting  Officer.   Mrs
    Christopher tendered a skeleton argument setting  out  the  appellant's
    case on appeal, to which I  shall  refer  in  due  course.   The  Judge
    received oral evidence from the appellant and from Ms Susan  Harvey  of
    the  Evangelical  Church  who  informed  the  judge  about  the  church
    activities in which the appellant had been participating.

 9. In his subsequent decision, the Judge gave his  reasons  at  paragraphs
    [8]-[19]  for  finding  that  the  appellant  had  not   converted   to
    Christianity in Iran.  At paragraphs [20]-[23], the Judge addressed the
    question  of  whether  the  appellant  had  subsequently  converted  to
    Christianity following his arrival in the UK.  The Judge noted that the
    appellant attended the Evangelical Church close to where he lived,  and
    that he had  changed  his  Facebook  profile  photograph  to  show  him
    standing next to a large crucifix relating to that church.  He had also
    included in the papers  before  him  various  photographs  showing  him
    evangelising on behalf of the Christian faith.  However,  as  he  found
    that the appellant was prepared to embellish his evidence  in  relation
    to events in Iran, to the extent of even telling him "falsely" that his
    siblings had died while crossing the sea, he took his claim  to  be  an
    "active  and  faithful"  participant  in  the   Evangelical   Christian
    community with some scepticism.

10. At paragraph [22], he said that he had come to the conclusion that  the
    appellant had  probably  decided  to  attend  Ms  Harvey's  church  and
    participate  in  church  activities  "solely  with  the  intention   of
    supporting his claim to asylum".  The Judge said that he did  not  make
    this finding lightly.  But there were considerable  problems  with  his
    credibility:

        ...which I think demonstrate clearly the  appellant  is  well  aware
        that claiming to be a Christian convert is one of the possible  ways
        of securing refugee status as an Iranian national  in  the  UK.   It
        follows that I think his  actions  since  arriving  in  the  UK  and
        associating with this church have all been designed to further  that
        end.

11. The Judge addressed the issue of risk on return at paragraphs  [26]  to
    [30].  At paragraph [26], he said that given  his  above  findings  and
    considering the decision in SZ & JM  (Christians  -  FS  confirmed)  CG
    [2008] UKAIT 0082, he was satisfied that there was no risk upon  return
    to Iran.

12. At paragraph [27], he said that, having considered the guidance in  the
    earlier case of FS and Others (Iran Christian Converts) Iran CG  [2004]
    UKAIT 00303, it seemed to him that even if the appellant would wish  to
    maintain a Christian conviction upon return to Iran, he would fall into
    the category of an ordinary convert, and accordingly the actual  degree
    of risk  of  persecution  or  treatment  reaching  Article  3  was  not
    sufficient to warrant the protection of the  Refugee  or  Human  Rights
    Convention. He quoted the following passage from FS:

         The reality is that a social and economic life can  be  maintained;
         Christianity can be practised, if necessary, cautiously  at  times,
         by church attendance, association with Christians and Bible study.

13. At paragraph [29] the Judge said as follows:

       It was submitted that the current internet evidence in  relation  to
       the appellant is now sufficient to substantiate a risk  upon  return
       when AB & Others (Internet activity - state of evidence) Iran [2015]
       UKUT 00257 is taken into account.  However, as far as I can see, the
       internet evidence is the appellant's  Facebook  page.   As  will  be
       apparent from my findings of fact, I have  come  to  the  conclusion
       that  the  appellant's  activities  in  relation  to  the  Christian
       Evangelical Church in the UK have been designed to support his claim
       to asylum.  With this in mind, I can see no reasonable reason why he
       should not amend his Facebook page to get rid of the large  crucifix
       next to his photograph and  any  associated  Christian  photography.
       Given the appellant's propensity to fabricate evidence I can see  no
       reason, even if he is a Christian, that would lead me  to  the  view
       that his conviction is so great that he would not be in  a  position
       to change his Facebook page.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

14. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mrs Imamovic drew my  attention  to  various  passages  in  AB  in
    support of the proposition  that  the  Judge  had  not  given  adequate
    reasons for finding that there would be no risk  to  the  appellant  on
    account of his open Facebook page,  even  if  he  changed  his  profile
    before he returned to Iran.  She submitted  that  the  Judge  had  also
    misdirected himself on  the  relevant  considerations  as  to  risk  on
    return.  Paragraph 3.14 of the policy summary contained in the  Country
    Information and Guidance on Christians and Christian converts  in  Iran
    dated December 2015 states:

        Christians who have  converted  from  Islam  are  at  real  risk  of
        persecution in  Iran,  and  a  grant  of  asylum  is  likely  to  be
        appropriate.

15. Mrs Imamovic further submitted that the Judge appeared to concede  both
    in paragraph [29], and earlier in paragraph [24] that the appellant was
    at least an ordinary convert, and therefore  the  proposition  that  he
    should be discrete about his Christian faith  on  return  to  Iran  by,
    among other things, amending his Facebook profile, was contrary  to  HJ
    (Iran) v SSHD [2011] I AC 596.

Discussion

16. In her reasons for granting permission to appeal, Judge Page  expressed
    disagreement with the proposition that the Judge  had  found  that  the
    appellant was a half-hearted convert to Christianity who would  be,  or
    should be, content to follow  Christianity  discretely  in  Iran.   The
    contrary proposition advanced by Mrs Imamovic gains some traction  from
    the following passage in paragraph [24]  of  the  decision,  where  the
    Judge states his conclusions on the evidence:

       The appellant is now an active  participant  in  Evangelical  Church
       activities in the UK but I do not accept that this is arising out of
       any particular ecumenical conviction or arising out of any Christian
       conviction which started in Iran.  I think that any activity carried
       out in the UK for the Church has to a large extent  been  driven  by
       the appellant's desire to support his claim to asylum and  therefore
       should be considered in that light.

17. The deployment of  the  phrase  "to  a  large  extent"  introduces  the
    possibility that to a minor extent the church activities carried out in
    the UK have been driven by a genuine belief in Christianity.   However,
    the Judge's other pronouncements on the topic of the genuineness of the
    appellant's   alleged   conversion   to   Christianity   are   entirely
    unequivocal.  It should not lightly be  inferred  that  the  Judge  has
    blatantly  contradicted  himself.   I  consider  that  the  passage  in
    question is also reasonably susceptible of another interpretation which
    is compatible with  the  unequivocal  findings  stated  elsewhere.   At
    paragraph [22], the Judge refers to evidence from Ms Harvey  that  some
    one hundred Iranians attended her Church to worship on a regular basis,
    and that the Church services were conducted in Farsi.  So, if the Judge
    had in mind that the appellant was also motivated to a minor extent  by
    the benefits of social interaction with fellow Iranians, this would not
    be inconsistent with his parallel finding that the appellant  does  not
    have a genuine Christian faith.

18. Accordingly, I find that the second asserted error in  the  application
    for permission to appeal is not made out.   The entire decision is  not
    rendered unsafe by the Judge not having  made  clear  findings  on  the
    central question of whether the  appellant  is  or  is  not  a  genuine
    Christian convert.  It is tolerably clear that the Judge did  not  find
    the appellant credible in his claim to have converted to  Christianity,
    either in Iran or following his arrival in the  UK.   Accordingly,  his
    primary finding on risk on return is that set out  at  paragraph  [26],
    which mirrors what the respondent said in the decision letter.  He  was
    not a Christian convert and so, following SZ & JM, he would not  be  at
    risk on this account on his return to Iran.

19. In paragraphs [27] and [29], the Judge adopted what could be  described
    as a 'belt and braces' approach, which was to consider risk  on  return
    on the alternative basis that (contrary  to  his  primary  findings  of
    fact) the appellant was a genuine Christian convert.  This brought into
    play the Country Guidance  case  of  FS  &  Others  (Iran  -  Christian
    converts) Iran CG [2004] UKIAT 00303, an extensive passage  from  which
    is cited at paragraph 30 of Mrs Christopher's skeleton  argument.   The
    Judge quoted from this passage in paragraph [27].

20. Mrs Imamovic criticises the Judge for  drawing  a  distinction  between
    ordinary Christian converts and, "a more active convert, pastor, church
    leader, proselytiser, or Evangelist", whom  the  Tribunal  in  FS  held
    would be at real risk.  But her criticism overlooks the fact  that  the
    Judge addressed the case that was put to him by Mrs Christopher.  Also,
    the Judge was not clearly wrong to  proceed  on  the  basis  that  this
    Country Guidance case was still applicable.  The bundle  of  background
    material placed before  the  Judge  included  the  Finnish  Immigration
    Service report on Christian converts in Iran dated 21 August 2015.   On
    the topic of the risk on return  for  Christian  converts  (Appellant's
    bundle, page 201), the report says as follows:

       No research data on the return of  Christian  converts  to  Iran  is
       available, but the common perception is  that  they  will  get  into
       trouble mainly if they try to proselytise or  otherwise  make  their
       religious views public.  The state's interest is focused more on the
       public practice of religion and proselytising than on one's  private
       convictions.

21. At paragraph [29] of his decision, the Judge is addressing two  strands
    of the case that was put to him by Mrs Christopher.  The  first  strand
    is contained in paragraphs [23] and [24] of her skeleton argument.  She
    submitted that the appellant could  not  be  said  to  be  an  ordinary
    citizen who had converted to Christianity, as defined by the case of FS
    & Others.  It could be seen from his  Facebook  post  that  he  held  a
    genuine desire to share his views regarding Christianity, and  that  he
    shared his views in a very public way.  So it would be a breach of  his
    human rights to expect him to conceal his religious beliefs in order to
    preserve his life and safety on return to Iran.

22. The second strand of the appellant's case  is  contained  in  paragraph
    [32] of Mrs Christopher's skeleton argument.  She  submitted  that,  as
    part of the investigations that would be carried out by the authorities
    on the appellant's return to Iran, it was reasonably  likely  that  the
    authorities would demand of the appellant the password to his  Facebook
    account.  Mrs Christopher then goes on to cite paragraph [467] of AB as
    follows:

       The mere fact that he had been in the United Kingdom for a prolonged
       period does not lead  to  persecution.   However,  it  may  lead  to
       scrutiny and there is clear evidence  that  some  people  are  asked
       about their Internet activity  and  particular  for  their  Facebook
       password.  The act of returning someone creates a "pinch  point"  so
       the person is brought into direct contact with  the  authorities  in
       Iran who have both the time and inclination to interrogate them.  We
       think it likely they will be asked about their internet activity and
       likely if they have any internet activity for that  to  be  exposed,
       and if it is less than flattering of the Government to  lead  to  at
       the very least a real risk of persecution.

23. Given the Judge's core finding that the  appellant  is  not  a  genuine
    Christian, and that his sur place activities have been conducted in bad
    faith, it was not an error  of  law  on  his  part  to  hold  that  the
    appellant could and should amend his Facebook profile, and  delete  all
    Christian material on his Facebook account, so as to avoid the scenario
    raised by Mrs Christopher.

24. It is argued by way of appeal that  the  Judge  erred  in  law  in  not
    considering whether there was a real risk to the  appellant  on  return
    consequential upon  him  having  already  openly  proselytised  on  the
    internet.  However, Mrs Christopher did not submit  that  there  was  a
    risk per se to the appellant on return to Iran on account  of  his  sur
    place activities.  She relied on his sur place activities  as  evidence
    of him being more than an ordinary convert, not on the basis that there
    was a real risk that his sur place activities would have  already  come
    to the adverse attention of the Iranian cyber police.

25. The headnote of AB reads as follows:

       The material put before the Tribunal did not disclose  a  sufficient
       evidential basis for giving Country or  other  Guidance  upon  what,
       reliably, can be expected in terms of reception in  Iran  for  those
       returning otherwise than with a "regular" passport  in  relation  to
       whom interest may be excited  from  the  authorities  into  internet
       activity as might be revealed by an examination of blogging activity
       or a Facebook account.

26. At paragraph [453], the  Tribunal  accepted  that  some  monitoring  of
    activities outside Iran is possible and that it occurs.  But they  were
    not able to say what circumstances, if any, enhanced  or  diluted  that
    risk.  At paragraph [460], the Tribunal said:

       Overall, it is very difficult to make any  sensible  findings  about
       anything that converts a technical possibility  of  something  being
       discovered into a real risk of it being  discovered...We  find  that
       our main concern is the pinch point of return.

27. At paragraph [461], the Tribunal held that the more active  the  person
    has been on the internet, the more likely the authorities would  become
    interested and pursue  their  investigations  at  the  pinch  point  of
    return.

28. Reliance by way of appeal is placed on the fact that the appellant  has
    an open Facebook page, with the consequence that his  Facebook  profile
    showing him standing next to  a  crucifix  is  accessible  without  the
    requirement of a Facebook password.  But this does not appear  to  have
    been a point taken by Mrs Christopher. Moreover, no evidence was placed
    before the First-tier Tribunal to show that the appellant  had  thereby
    acquired a significant public  profile  as  a  Christian  proselytiser.
    Aside from information about the number of "likes"  for  various  posts
    (and it is not clear whether these posts are also open), there  was  no
    information about the total number of hits on his open  Facebook  page,
    or as to the number of his regular followers, or as to  the  ease  with
    which his profile could be accessed through the use of a search engine.
     Also, given that the appellant was not criticising the  Government  of
    Iran on his open Facebook page, it is a matter  of  speculation  as  to
    whether the contents of the appellant's Facebook page would be a matter
    of adverse interest to the Iran cyber police.  The focus of enquiry  in
    AB was on political blogging  about  which  the  Iran  authorities  are
    particularly sensitive.  AB did not purport to address the question  of
    whether there is any interest on the part of the Iranian authorities in
    monitoring the expression  of  religious  views  by  Iranians  who  are
    outside Iran.

29. Accordingly, I do not consider that the  Judge  erred  in  law  in  not
    considering of his own motion the issue of whether the appellant's open
    Facebook page had already engendered a real risk for him on  return  to
    Iran.  It was open to the Judge to proceed on the premise that the risk
    would not materialise until the pinch point of  return,  and  that  the
    appellant could reasonably take preventative  steps  to  eliminate  the
    risk.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.





Signed                              Date


Judge Monson

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

