
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00778/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7th December 2017                  |On 11th December 2017                |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER Tribunal JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

                              Mr meseret tesfay
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  secretary of state for the home departmen
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Wilkins, Counsel instructed by Ison Harrison
Limited
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwync, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by Mr Meseret Tulay against  the  decision  of  Judge
    Mensah, promulgated on the  29th  June  2017,  to  dismiss  the  appeal
    against refusal of his Protection Claim.  It  is  not  opposed  by  the
    respondent.

 2. The error of law in Judge Mensah's decision is concisely and accurately
    summarised by Judge Nightingale when granting permission to appeal:

         "There are no findings of fact made at all at paragraph 10 and  the
         mistakes as to the  appellant's  gender  and  country  of  proposed
         return  arguably  indicate  a  lack  of  scrutiny.  There   is   no
         consideration of the circumstances of the appellant's child."

 3. Given the above, I am bound to set aside the  decision  and  remit  the
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for it to make findings of fact prior
    to determining the appeal.

 4. I would add that I strongly suspect that the promulgated decision was a
    first draft that was sent in error. I  therefore  do  not  exclude  the
    possibility of the decision being remade by Judge Mensah given that she
    has already heard  the  evidence  and  the  arguments  in  the  appeal.
    However, that is ultimately a matter for the Resident Judge at Bradford
    to decide.

Notice of Decision

 5. The decision of Judge Mensah is set aside for  error  of  law  and  the
    appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.


Signed                                  Date: 8th December 2017

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

