
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  PA/00068/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 October 2018                   |On 30 October 2018                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                     L C
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Bill Criggie, of Latta & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This decision is to be read with:

      i) The respondent's decision dated  15  December  2017,  refusing  the
         appellant's claim.

     ii) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

    iii) The decision of FtT Judge McGrade, promulgated on 9 March 2018.

     iv) The appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  UT,  stated  in  the
         application for permission to appeal filed on 22 March 2018.

      v) The grant of permission by FtT Judge Grimmett, dated 9 April 2018.

     vi) The respondent's rule 24 response, dated 8 June 2018.

    vii) The appellant's rule 25 response (undated).

 2. Mr Criggie submitted further as follows:

    Ground 1, the Falun Gong claim.

      i) There were 4 elements to the judge's approach to the issue, each of
         which showed error.  (1) The judge founded on delay in  the  claim,
         but failed to deal with the appellant's explanation at paragraph 58
         of his witness statement; he did not  claim  during  his  partner's
         claim, while not in danger of being sent back.  (2)  The judge  was
         wrong  to  find  that  the  appellant  acted  opportunistically  in
         resuming the practice of Falun Gong.  He had said at  paragraph  27
         that his practice was important to him, and he would keep to it  if
         returned.  (3)   The  judge  erred  by  commenting  on  absence  of
         supporting evidence  from  other  practitioners,  which  imposed  a
         requirement for corroboration.  (4)  The judge erred in founding on
         a lack of support in his partner's evidence.  She said at paragraph
         14 of her statement that he read Falun Gong  books,  performed  the
         exercises at home, and attended meetings almost every week.

     ii) Ground 1, on those 4 points combined, required a remit.

    Ground 2, the family planning claim.

    iii) There was a particular social group of males in breach  of  policy,
         even if sterilisation rates were  lower  for  men.   There  was  an
         implication of risk  from  the  sterilisation  on  the  appellant's
         mother, being an instance of persecution of his family in the past.

    Ground 3, article 8 ECHR.

     iv) The judge  founded  upon  non-production  of  an  English  language
         certificate, when there is no requirement for one,  and  there  was
         evidence the appellant had attended English language classes.

      v) The judge said the children would  be  returning  to  China,  which
         implied he was unaware they had never been there.

     vi) If the "best interests" analysis had no  particular  outcome,  that
         should be given effect by maintaining  the  status  quo,  i.e.  the
         children's residence in the UK.

 3. In course of submissions for the respondent, attention was drawn  to  a
    letter copied at page 17 of the appellant's FtT  bundle,  where  a  PhD
    student of  Chinese  migrants  in  Glasgow  confirms  encountering  the
    appellant at a Falun Gong meeting.  Mr Criggie when replying said  that
    the judge's absence  of  reference  to  this  item  was  another  error
    supporting ground 1.

 4. I reserved my decision.

 5. On ground 1 (1) and (2), the judge gave  delay  in  claiming,  and  the
    timing of resumed Falun Gong practice no more adverse  weight  than  he
    was entitled to do.

 6. On  ground  1  (3),  the  judge  did  not  misconceive  the  law  about
    corroboration of protection claims, but noted the absence  of  evidence
    which might obviously have been forthcoming, as a judge is entitled  to
    do.

 7. There was at first sight some force in the criticism that the judge did
    not take account of the evidence of the appellant's partner  about  his
    interest in Falun Gong, ground 1 (4), but  on  closer  inspection,  the
    judge's point  was  soundly  based  on  a  specific  anomaly  in  their
    evidence.  He said he practised at home one hour every morning, but her
    account of his interest made no mention of that (paragraph 23).

 8. Judges do not have to mention every item of evidence.  The letter  from
    the PhD student did not advance  matters  significantly.   It  verified
    attendance at a Falun  Gong  group  on  one  occasion,  but  the  judge
    accepted that he was involved to that extent.

 9. The judge was entitled to find the appellant's interest in  Falun  Gong
    no more than opportunistic, and gave sound reasons for doing so.

10. Ground 1 is not upheld.

11. Mr Criggie did not press  ground  2  with  much  force.   As  Mr  Govan
    submitted, it does not appear to be covered by the grant of permission.
     There is no more in it than insistence and disagreement.  The  outcome
    in respect of family planning policy was inevitable,  applying  country
    guidance to the evidence.

12. The appellant gave evidence through an interpreter, and his case  would
    not have advanced significantly even if he had  proved  himself  to  be
    fluent in English.  The judge knew that the two  younger  children  had
    not  been  to  China.   The  oldest  child  has  gone  there  with  the
    appellant's mother.  The proposition that an evenly  balanced  case  on
    the children's interests confers a right on  them,  and  hence  on  the
    appellant, to remain here, is highly over-optimistic.  Rather, it would
    require something quite significantly to their advantage  to  turn  the
    scales.  Ground 2 shows no  error  in  resolution  of  the  case  under
    article 8, which was plainly weak.

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

14. There does not appear to be any need  for  anonymisation;  but  as  the
    matter was not addressed in the UT, the FtT's  anonymity  direction  is
    maintained.

            [pic]

            22 October 2018
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
