
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00759/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 July 2019                       |On 17 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

                             farukh Turgambayev
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Khan, Counsel instructed by David Wyld & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this appeal is Mr Farukh  Turgambayev,  a  citizen  of
    Kazakhstan who was born on 5 July 1996.  He appeals with the permission
    of the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal M A Khan dismissing his appeal against  the  decision  of
    the respondent to refuse his protection claim, dated 8 January 2019.

 2. The background to the appeal  is  as  follows.   In  October  2018  the
    appellant was issued with entry clearance to travel  to  the  UK  as  a
    visitor.  He arrived at Heathrow Terminal 4 on 13  November  2018.   He
    was questioned about his reasons for coming to the United  Kingdom  and
    he explained, in essence, that he was coming to do some sightseeing and
    to have a holiday.  Evidently the Immigration Officer was not satisfied
    that this was genuinely the case  because  the  appellant  was  refused
    entry.  On 14 November 2018 removal directions were set and  served  on
    the appellant with a view to removing him to Kazakhstan on 16  November
    2016.  On the day  of  removal,  the  appellant  claimed  asylum.   The
    following day, at his screening interview, the appellant said he was in
    fear of his life in Kazakhstan.  He said there is a criminal gang which
    used to ask him to do things for them.  If he  did  not  do  what  they
    wanted, they threatened to beat him up.  The appellant said he used  to
    act as a taxi driver for this gang but he  had  no  idea  what  he  was
    delivering.  He said the threats started in August 2017  and  continued
    until September 2018.  He also said he stopped working for the gang  in
    August 2017.

 3. The appellant's claim was processed in  the  Detained  Asylum  Casework
    system while the appellant remained in detention.  There was an attempt
    to interview him about his reasons for claiming asylum on  11  December
    2018. However, the appellant refused to answer questions, insisting  he
    wanted his solicitor to be in attendance.  Enquiries were made with the
    solicitor's firm and it transpired that the solicitor was aware of  the
    date and time of the interview but had  another  appointment.   As  the
    appellant maintained that he would not answer questions, the  interview
    was cancelled but the appellant was given five days in which  he  could
    submit further representations.  This was confirmed by  letter  to  the
    appellant's solicitor but no further representations were received.

 4. Reasons for refusing the claim were set out in a letter dated 8 January
    2019.  This was  based  on  the  very  limited  information  which  the
    appellant had provided.  Firstly, the letter noted that the reason  the
    appellant gave for fearing to return to Kazakhstan  was  not  a  reason
    recognised by the Refugee  Convention.   The  respondent  accepted  the
    appellant was a citizen of Kazakhstan. However, his account of  fearing
    a criminal gang was rejected on credibility grounds.  Even  taking  the
    case at its highest, there is a functioning police force in  Kazakhstan
    and  the  appellant  would  receive  a   sufficiency   of   protection.
    Alternatively, he had the option of relocating away from his home town,
    Shymkent, to another area  of  Kazakhstan  such  as  Taraz,  Almaty  or
    Astana.

 5. The appeal was heard by  Judge  Khan  sitting  at  Harmondsworth.   The
    appellant was represented by counsel and the appellant and two  of  his
    friends gave oral evidence.  Counsel  confirmed  that  the  appeal  was
    pursued solely on Article 3 human rights grounds.  It was  acknowledged
    that the claim fell outside the Refugee Convention  and  there  was  no
    viable Article 8 claim.  Judge Khan received a  more  detailed  account
    than had been provided to date which he summarised in paragraph  35  of
    his decision:-

         "The core of the appellant's case is that he with his two witnesses
         who came to give evidence in support of  his  claim  were  involved
         with a smuggling criminal gang smuggling items  across  the  border
         from Uzbekistan.  According to the appellant's screening  interview
         on 27/8/2017 they were to meet three drivers  from  the  Uzbekistan
         side of the border about 20 km  inside  Kyrgyzstan,  in  a  village
         named Allabukh; they were to pick up large amounts of  US  dollars.
         They were delayed getting to their  collection  point  and  in  the
         meantime the three drivers were detained on the Uzbekistan side  of
         the border.  Upon finding out his loss the leader of  the  criminal
         gang, Mr Atabek, detained the appellant  and  his  two  colleagues,
         beat them up and then released them after  two  days.   Thereafter,
         Atabek would call on them in order to warn them about speaking  out
         about the event.  An agent by the name of Aleksey arranged for them
         to leave Kazakhstan as visitors to the UK.   They  tried  to  enter
         this country as visitors  but  upon  refusal  of  entry  all  three
         claimed asylum."

 6. At paragraphs 36 to 44 of his decision, Judge  Khan  gave  reasons  for
    concluding that the appellant's account was a fabrication.  The  appeal
    was therefore dismissed.

 7. The appellant then submitted grounds seeking permission to appeal which
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Ford considered "just about arguable".
     On that basis she granted permission to  appeal  on  all  grounds.   I
    shall summarise those grounds but I would like to record  that,  in  my
    view, permission to appeal should never have been granted.

 8. Firstly, Judge Khan erred in  paragraph  35  by  stating  that  certain
    details of the claim had been provided  at  the  appellant's  screening
    interview, whereas they had not.  Secondly, in concluding in  paragraph
    36 that the appellant had used deception to immigration officials  with
    regard to his application for entry clearance and his statements to the
    Immigration Officer who interviewed him at Heathrow Airport, the  judge
    had failed to consider  the  appellant's  explanations.   Thirdly,  the
    judge's reliance on the inconsistent dates in the  screening  interview
    was erroneous.  The appellant did not say at  the  screening  interview
    that he last worked for the  gang  in  September  2018.   Fourthly,  at
    paragraph 38, relying on the appellant's failure to answer questions at
    the asylum interview, the judge  had  failed  to  have  regard  to  the
    appellant's explanations.  Fifthly, the judge failed  to  give  reasons
    for rejecting the witness evidence as incredible.  Lastly, in  reaching
    his conclusion on sufficiency of protection available to the  appellant
    the judge  had  erred  because  he  had  not  taken  into  account  the
    appellant's past persecution.

 9. The respondent then filed a Rule 24 response opposing  the  appeal  and
    arguing that the decision was well-reasoned and detailed.   Judges  are
    not required to give consideration to each  and  every  detail  of  the
    evidence  in  order  to  give  sufficient  reasons,  relying  there  on
    paragraph 14 of the Upper Tribunal's decision  in  Budhathoki  (reasons
    for decisions) [2014] UKUT 341 (IAC).

10. I heard oral submissions from the representatives as to  whether  Judge
    Khan's decision contains material errors of law such that it should  be
    set aside and remade.

11. For  the  appellant,  Mr  Khan  condensed  the  six  grounds  on  which
    permission was granted to the four points identified in paragraph 2  of
    Judge Ford's order.  In brief summary, he argued the error as  to  some
    of the information in the screening interview showed the judge was  not
    focusing his mind properly.  Secondly, delay in claiming asylum was not
    a point which should have been taken because of  the  short  timeframe.
    Thirdly, the judge failed to attach weight to the witness evidence  and
    had made no finding about the witness's evidence. Lastly, there was  no
    contradiction in relation to the dates given by the  appellant  in  his
    screening interview.

12. Ms Isherwood, for the respondent, submitted there was no material error
    of law in the decision.  I have recorded her arguments in  full  in  my
    record of the proceedings and I shall not set them out.  Mr Khan gave a
    brief reply.

13. I have carefully considered the submissions of the representatives but,
    having done so, I have concluded the decision of Judge  Khan  does  not
    contain any material error of  law  and  should  stand.   None  of  the
    grounds  disclose  a  material  error  of  law.  My  reasons  for  this
    conclusion are as follows.  I shall take them in the order  as  drafted
    in the original grounds seeking permission to appeal.

14. Ground 1 points to the error in paragraph 37 of Judge  Khan's  decision
    as to the source of the information provided by the appellant  that  he
    and his accomplices went to meet three drivers  from  Uzbekistan  in  a
    village  called  Allubakh.   The  grounds  rightly   point   out   this
    information did not emanate from the screening interview, as Judge Khan
    seems to say, but it  is  clear  the  evidence  did  emanate  from  the
    appellant and can in my view be traced to his appeal statement.

15. The error by the judge is wholly immaterial.   The  clear  meaning  and
    intent of paragraph 37 of Judge Khan's decision is  to  point  out  the
    discrepancy in the dates given by the appellant at different times.  In
    the screening interview,  the  appellant  gave  an  account  of  having
    problems in 2017.  Paragraph 36 of the reasons for refusal letter  made
    the point that it was not credible  the  appellant  would  be  able  to
    remain in Kazakhstan for over a year before leaving to come to  the  UK
    if he  was  being  threatened  by  the  gang.   In  that  context,  the
    inconsistency was potentially significant because the suspicion in  the
    mind of the judge must have been that the appellant had simply  changed
    his account to overcome this particular challenge to  his  credibility.
    The judge was perfectly entitled to take that approach and the fact  he
    wrongly attributed the source of the evidence is simply immaterial.

16. Ground 2 in effect challenges the judge's  reliance  on  the  fact  the
    appellant lied  in  his  entry  clearance  application  and  also  when
    interviewed by  the  Immigration  Officer.   Particularly,  it  was  of
    concern the appellant did not disclose the true reason he had  come  to
    the United Kingdom when given the opportunity  to  do  so  but  instead
    maintained the falsehood that he was a genuine visitor.   It  could  be
    added that, as the reasons  for  refusal  pointed  out,  the  appellant
    further delayed claiming asylum until two days after removal directions
    had been served on him and he was about to be removed.

17. The judge's treatment of this issue at paragraph 36 of his decision  is
    concise. However, it does record that the appellant said  he  had  been
    told to sign the visit visa  application  form.   In  any  event,  this
    paragraph should not be read in isolation.   At  paragraph  17  of  his
    decision, the judge recorded that the  appellant  adopted  his  witness
    statement and the judge went on to record in  considerable  detail  the
    oral evidence given by the appellant.  At paragraph 19, he recorded the
    explanation offered by the appellant  on  this  point.   When  that  is
    considered  it  cannot  conceivably  be  concluded  that  the   judge's
    reasoning failed to take these matters into account.  Ground 2  has  no
    merit.

18. Ground 3 is  simply  incorrect.  It  seeks  to  undermine  the  judge's
    analysis of the point about  inconsistent  dates  in  paragraph  37  by
    suggesting the judge  incorrectly  recorded  that  the  appellant  last
    worked for the gang in  2017.   However,  that  is  precisely  what  is
    recorded towards the end of the handwritten  note  of  the  appellant's
    answer to question 4.1 of the  screening  interview.   I  have  already
    explained why I  consider  the  judge  was  entitled  to  rely  on  the
    inconsistent dates  given.   In  paragraph  37  Judge  Khan  notes  the
    explanation  offered  that  the  interpreter  made  a  mistake  at  the
    screening interview.  However, he rejected that explanation  because  a
    correction had  not  been  made  earlier.   I  see  no  error  in  that
    reasoning.

19. Ground 4 concerns the failure of the judge to consider the  explanation
    provided by the appellant for not answering questions at his interview.
     Again, the judge's conclusions are concisely  expressed  in  paragraph
    38. However, the judge does state that the appellant said  he  did  not
    want to be interviewed because his representatives were not present and
    could not attend on the day.   As  far  as  I  can  see,  that  is  the
    explanation which the appellant has  relied  on.   It  follows  it  was
    considered and therefore this ground does not  disclose  any  error  of
    law.

20. Ground 5 argues the judge failed to give any reasons for rejecting  the
    witness evidence.  I note that the witnesses called were  also  seeking
    asylum claiming to be the other two members of the  three-person  group
    sent by the gang to receive the consignment  of  smuggled  US  currency
    from the Uzbeks.  Again,  closer  analysis  of  Judge  Khan's  decision
    reveals that it does contain adequate reasons.   At  paragraph  39,  he
    noted that he did not find it credible the appellant or  his  witnesses
    would be blamed by the gang given the delivery was intercepted  by  the
    Uzbek authorities.  In other words, he reasoned that the  loss  of  the
    money  was  not  reasonably  likely  to  have  been   viewed   as   the
    responsibility of the appellant  or  the  witnesses,  as  all  of  them
    claimed, and at paragraph 40 he noted it  was  not  credible  that  the
    appellant and the witnesses failed to  report  their  problems  to  the
    police.

21. Again, the decision must  be  read  as  a  whole.  When  recording  the
    evidence of the witnesses given in cross-examination, it came to  light
    that approximately half  of  each  of  their  written  statements  were
    identical.  The judge  was  plainly  entitled  to  consider  that  this
    undermined the usefulness of the statements and the credibility of  the
    witnesses, or at least diminished the weight that  could  be  given  to
    their evidence, because they had clearly colluded in order to give  the
    same account. There is no material error in this approach.

22. At this point, I note the judge considered the claim at its highest  in
    case he was wrong in  rejecting  the  appellant's  credibility  and  he
    concluded that the appellant could relocate internally  in  Kazakhstan.
    Such a conclusion would be sufficient  to  defeat  the  claim  even  if
    grounds 1 to 5 had thrown up errors by the judge because they could not
    have  been  material  errors.  The  judge  rejected   the   appellant's
    opposition to the suggestion that he could relocate  internally,  which
    was that he would be traced by the gang if he registered in a new area,
    because there was no evidence that the gang would be able to trace him.
     There is no error in that approach.

23. Ground 6 seeks to challenge  the  judge's  finding  on  sufficiency  of
    protection.  I find this odd because I cannot see the judge  made  one.
    At paragraph 44 he concluded that  the  appellant  had  fabricated  his
    claim and in the following paragraphs he explained the appellant  could
    return safely to Kazakhstan because he was not at a real risk of  harm.
    In paragraph 41 he did note that there was no evidence that the  police
    force throughout Kazakhstan is wholly corrupt. Then, at  paragraph  34,
    he confirmed he had taken into account the background evidence.  It has
    not been explained to me therefore how it could be  argued  Judge  Khan
    erred in his consideration of sufficiency of protection.  Ground 6  has
    no merit either.

Notice of Decision

24. For these reasons the appellant's appeal is dismissed and the  decision
    of Judge Khan dismissing his appeal shall stand.


Signed                                  Date 10 July 2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Froom





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

This is a fee exempt appeal.


Signed                                  Date 10 July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Froom

