
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00789/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4th December 2019                 |On 18th December 2019                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                                    M R M
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Harris of Counsel, instructed by Longfellow
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant was born on 26th June 1982 and is a  citizen  of  Malawi.
    She resided in the United Kingdom between 2005 and  August  2008  as  a
    working holidaymaker.  She returned to the UK  illegally  in  September
    2008.  She made a protection claim on 20th January 2016.

2.   On 16th January 2019 the respondent made a decision that the  appellant
    was  neither  a  refugee  nor  otherwise  in  need   of   international
    protection.

3.   The appellant sought to appeal  against  that  decision,  which  appeal
    came before Designated Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  McCarthy  for
    hearing on 2nd April 2019.

4.   The basis of the claim, as presented, was that the appellant  had  been
    born with physical abnormalities which were taken by her community  and
    family to indicate that she was a witch and involved in witchcraft.  It
    is the case as advanced upon her behalf that she was ill-treated whilst
    in Malawi and would be ill-treated were she to return.

5.   The Judge  accepted  that  the  nature  of  her  claim  fell  within  a
    particular social group such as to  raise  the  issue  of  asylum.   He
    nevertheless concluded that the appellant lacked credibility as to that
    claim and thus her claim for asylum was dismissed.

6.   The appellant sought to challenge that decision and  permission  to  do
    so was granted by  the  Upper  Tribunal,  on  the  basis  that  certain
    findings of fact adverse to her credibility  ought  not  to  have  been
    given the significance which they were.

7.   Thus the matter comes before me to determine the matter.

8.   Following prior discussion between the parties, Mr  Mills  most  fairly
    indicated that it had come  to  his  attention  that  there  were  many
    documents, particularly from family members that had not been presented
    to the Judge or formed part of the asylum process.

9.   What seems to have  happened  is  that  the  appellant  was  considered
    through the National Referral Mechanism (NRM) as  to  whether  she  had
    been a victim of trafficking.  The NRM decided on 9th October 2018 that
    she was such a victim and had accepted that  aspect  of  her  claim  as
    being true.  It would  seem  that  the  documents  in  issue  had  been
    presented to the NRM.

10.  For some reason, however, those documents had not found  their  way  to
    the Tribunal.  That was of utmost significance in terms of  credibility
    because  of  what  the  Judge  had  said  at  paragraph   25   of   the
    determination, namely this:-

         "Although the appellant admits to being in contact with her parents
         and siblings  in  Malawi,  she  has  not  obtained  from  them  any
         statements or other evidence to substantiate her  accounts.   There
         is no separate account about the removal of extra  fingers.   There
         are no school records or evidence  the  appellant  was  ill-treated
         when at school.  I note the appellant was never  asked  to  provide
         supporting documents and recall that corroboration is not  required
         in asylum cases.  Nevertheless, the  fact  the  appellant  has  not
         sought to obtain supporting documents weakens her case."

11.   It  would  seem  that  those  very  documents  had  been  obtained  in
    significant  number  but  had  not  been  presented  to  the  Tribunal,
    notwithstanding that they were before the NRM.

12.  Both parties submit to me that, in  those  circumstances,  the  adverse
    comment made by the Judge, although he was perfectly entitled  to  make
    it upon the facts as then presented,  was  not  in  fact  fair  by  due
    process, given that it was not the fault of the  appellant  that  those
    documents having been obtained, did  not  find  their  way  before  the
    Judge.

13.  The absence of such documents, it is submitted by Mr Mills  and  indeed
    by Ms Harris, serves  fundamentally  to  undermine  the  assessment  of
    credibility.

14.  There would seem to be  two  aspects  to  the  matter  so  far  as  the
    appellant was concerned.  The first was whether she  was  a  victim  of
    trafficking into the United Kingdom and secondly whether  she  was  the
    victim of community disapproval when in Malawi.

15.  If it were to be established that the appellant was credible as to  her
    account of her treatment by the community in Malawi, the question would
    then arise as to whether or not she could safely return.   Because  the
    Judge had dismissed her claim as  incredible  the  aspect  of  internal
    relocation had not been considered.

16.  In all the circumstances,  I  find  that  there  has  been  a  material
    unfairness in the procedure.  The omission of significant documents may
    well have  had  a  significant  outcome  in  the  determination  as  to
    credibility.

17.  In those circumstances the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    is to be set aside for there to be a rehearing of the claim before  the
    First-tier  Tribunal.   Mr  Mills  has  undertaken  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent to submit a full bundle of  documents  to  the  Tribunal  to
    include those that were previously omitted.  Ms Harris has agreed  that
    there is likely to be further evidence that is presented.

18.  It seems to me that the crucial issues which fall to be  determined  in
    this case is firstly whether or not the appellant's  claim  for  asylum
    and/or protection was a credible one  given  her  past  experiences  in
    Malawi.  If so whether there is any risk to her upon return.

19.   There  is  of  course  the  wider  aspect,  given  the   findings   of
    trafficking, as to whether looking at the matter overall Article  8  is
    engaged and whether it is reasonable and/or proportionate to expect the
    appellant to return.

20.  In terms of the issue as to whether there is a proper basis for  asylum
    to be claimed I preserve the  findings  of  the  Immigration  Judge  in
    paragraphs 17 and 18.  It will be for the respondent to show  cause  at
    the hearing why those paragraphs should not have been preserved.

Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed to the extent that the  decision
is set aside to be remade by the First-tier Tribunal.  In the light of  such
arguments and evidence as shall be presented.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed        [pic]                          Date 13 December 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

