
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/00592/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                  |             Decision Promulgated    |
|On 4 May 2017                     |             On 16 May 2017          |
|                                  |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                                  Miss S I
                        (ANONYMITY   DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr D Byrne (Counsel) instructed by Latta & Co,
solicitors
For the Respondent:        Ms M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008, precluding publication of  any  information  regarding
the proceedings which would be likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
identify the appellant, preserving the anonymity order made  by  the  first-
tier tribunal.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Farrelly promulgated on 15 March 2017,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal.





Background


3. The Appellant was born on 16 January 1986 and is a national of  Iran.  On
10 January 2017 the Secretary of State refused  the  Appellant's  protection
claim.


The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Farrelly ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and  on  4  April  2017  Judge  M  J
Gillespie granted permission to appeal stating inter alia

      I consider that there is arguable force in  each  of  the  three  main
      grounds of appeal proposed: that the learned Judge made a  finding  of
      fact adverse to the appellant  after  having  refused  an  adjournment
      requested to enable her to prove that fact; that he failed to  address
      the question whether her Christian attendance and observation  in  the
      United Kingdom, even if not genuine, might nevertheless expose her  to
      risk of harm in Iran as an apostate; and that he failed to address  at
      all  the  question  of  how  public   Facebook   postings   concerning
      Christianity which would be reasonably likely to come to the attention
      of the authorities in Iran and might expose her a real risk of harm in
      Iran.

The Hearing

5. (a) Before starting his submissions, Mr Byrne sought  leave  to  add  two
supplementary grounds of appeal. He conceded that there is no  provision  in
the procedure rules for broadening the scope of permission  to  appeal  once
it is granted, however Ms O'Brien for  the  respondent  took  the  pragmatic
approach that the suggested supplementary  grounds  of  appeal  are  nothing
more than re-wording of the grounds upon  which  permission  to  appeal  has
been granted. It was agreed that I should exercise a degree of  latitude  in
listening to the arguments in support of the grounds of appeal.

(b) Mr Byrne moved the grounds of  appeal.   He  took  me  to  [11]  of  the
decision, where Judge records that an application was made  to  adjourn  the
hearing  for  production  of  a  medical  report.  The  Judge  refused   the
application to adjourn because

      I did not see how it would assist in assessing the truth of the claim

 Mr Byrne then took me to [39]  of  the  decision.  In  the  final  sentence
there, the Judge finds

      There is no evidence to support her claim that she had  cancer  rather
      than an overactive thyroid nor is there is any evidence that her state
      defies medical science.

Relying on the case of Hamden v SSHD 2016 CSIH  57,  Mr  Byrne  reminded  me
that  the test to be applied is  one  of  fairness.  He  told  me  that  the
decision demonstrates that having refused the opportunity to set out one  of
the fundamental parts of the appellant's claim, the Judge  makes  a  finding
that the appellant  has  not  established  the  nature  and  extent  of  her
illness, nor the fact of recovery from illness,  nor  the  reason  for  that
recovery. He told me that [39] is  an  adverse  credibility  findings  which
stems from the refusal of the adjournment. He told me that  the  refusal  of
the adjournment unfairly disadvantaged the appellant. He  told  me  that  at
[44] the Judge himself identified this particular aspect of the  appellant's
case as "significant".

(c) Mr Byrne turned his attention to the second ground of  appeal  and  told
me that inadequate consideration has  been  given  to  the  appellant's  sur
place activities. He told me that at [17] the Judge records various part  of
the appellant's case (that she has attended an evangelical Christian  church
in the UK and that she has used her Facebook page to publicly  proclaim  her
conversion to Christianity). He told me that the Judge  failed  to  consider
the principles in Danian v SSHD [1999] INLR 533.

(d) Mr Byrne turned  his  attention  to  the  evidence  of  the  appellant's
Facebook activity. He referred me to AB  and  Others  (Internet  activity  -
state of evidence) Iran [2015] UKUT 0257 (IAC). He told me  that  inadequate
consideration had been given by the Judge to the "pinch point" of return  at
Tehran airport, where, according to AB, the  appellant's  internet  activity
would be scrutinised. He told me that the facts of this case and  the  ratio
of AB can only lead to the conclusion that there is a risk to the  appellant
on return. He told me that none of those factors  have  been  considered  by
the Judge.

(e) Mr Byrne told me that the decision is fatally flawed by material  errors
of law. He urged me to set the decision aside and to remit this case to  the
First-tier to consider of new.

6. (a) Ms O'Brien relied on  the  rule  24  notice  and  told  me  that  the
decision does not contain errors of law, material or otherwise. She told  me
that the application to adjourn was made on the basis that a medical  report
would be produced indicating that the appellant had  a  miraculous  recovery
from illness. She told me that at [11] the Judge clearly stated his  reasons
for  refusing  the  adjournment  requested,  and  that  those  reasons   are
sustainable. She told me that having considered and refused the  adjournment
request, the Judge carefully considered each strand  of  evidence  including
the appellant's evidence about her medical history. She told  me  that  what
is said at [39] must  be  considered  in  the  context  of  the  credibility
findings at [30] to [45] of the decision.

(b) Ms O'Brien told me that the grounds of  appeal  relating  to  sur  place
activities and risk on return created by Facebook and internet activity  are
not matters which were placed before the First-tier. She referred me to  the
six-page skeleton argument and the  key  passage  index  and  told  me  that
neither document even hints at sur place activities  or  internet  activity.
She told me that the Judge could  only  deal  with  the  evidence  that  was
presented to him, and could not make findings of fact on matters  which  are
not Wednesbury obvious.

(c) Ms O'Brien urged me to dismiss the appeal is  allowed  the  decision  to
stand.

Analysis

7. The 2014 Procedure Rules Rule 4(3)(h) empowers the Tribunal to adjourn  a
hearing. Rule 2 sets out the overriding objectives  under  the  Rules  which
the Tribunal "must seek to give effect to" when exercising any  power  under
the Rules. The overriding objective is deal with cases  fairly  and  justly.
This is defined as including

       (a) dealing with the case in ways  which  are  proportionate  to  the
      importance of the case, the complexity of the issues, the  anticipated
      costs and the resources of  the  parties  and  of  the  Tribunal;  (b)
      avoiding  unnecessary  formality  and  seeking  flexibility   in   the
      proceedings; (c) ensuring, so far as is practicable, that the  parties
      are able to participate  fully  in  the  proceedings;  (d)  using  any
      special expertise of the Tribunal effectively; (e) avoiding  delay  so
      far as compatible with proper consideration of the issues.

8. In Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC)  it  was  held
that if a Tribunal  refuses  to  accede  to  an  adjournment  request,  such
decision could, in principle, be  erroneous  in  law  in  several  respects:
these include a failure to take into account  all  material  considerations;
permitting  immaterial  considerations  to  intrude;   denying   the   party
concerned a fair hearing; failing to apply  the  correct  test;  and  acting
irrationally.  In practice, in most cases the question will be  whether  the
refusal deprived the affected party of his right to a fair  hearing.   Where
an adjournment refusal is challenged on fairness grounds,  it  is  important
to recognise that the question for the Upper Tribunal  is  not  whether  the
FtT acted reasonably.  Rather, the test to be applied is that  of  fairness:
was there any deprivation of the affected party's right to a fair hearing?

9. Ms O'Brien is correct to say that the Judge  makes  careful  findings  of
credibility between [30] and [45] of the decision, but  at  [44]  the  Judge
clearly states that the aspects that he has considered to that point in  his
decision  are  significant.  One  of  those  significant  aspects   of   the
appellant's case relates to her health, and to her belief that she  has  had
a miraculous recovery from serious illness.

10. At [39] the judge clearly find that there is no evidence to support  the
appellant's claim that she had cancer, and that her recovery defies  medical
science. At [11] the Judge records that the application to  adjourn  related
to a medical report and a  miracle  cure.  On  the  one  hand,  the  Judge's
decision to refuse an application to adjourn (even though made late  in  the
day) prevented the appellant from leading evidence about illness  and  cure,
on the other, the Judge finds that he has  no  evidence  about  illness  and
cure - both of which are significant factors in the appellant case.

11. It is clear that the Judge viewed the account of  illness  and  cure  as
one part of the appellant's case which determined her  overall  credibility.
If that evidence had been before the Judge  there  the  might  have  been  a
different outcome. The appellant offered to produce that  evidence  but  was
not able to do so. In her solicitors' letter of 24 February 2017 (which  set
out the application to adjourn) it is said that the  appellant  had  seen  a
specialist within the fortnight leading to 20 February 2017 and  blood  test
results were awaited.

12.  The  Judge  correctly  identified  that  one  crucial  aspect  of   the
appellant's case centred on medical evidence  ([39]  of  the  decision).  It
also  appears  that  medical  evidence  could  have  been  available  if  an
adjournment had been granted. Nwaigwe tells me that a failure to  take  into
account all material considerations is a material error  of  law.  Balancing
[11] and [39] of the decision against the decision as a whole, I  find  that
the decision is tainted by a material error of law.

13. The remaining grounds of appeal relates  to  sur  place  activities  and
risk on return created by internet activity in the UK. Mr Byrne  is  correct
to refer me to both Danian v SSHD  [1999]  INLR  533  and    AB  and  Others
(Internet activity -  state  of  evidence)  Iran  [2015]  UKUT  0257  (IAC).
Reference to the skeleton argument, the key passage index,  the  appellant's
377 page bundle and (what I can read of) the record of proceedings  supports
Miss O'Brien's position that no submissions were made driving at  sur  place
activities and risk on return from internet blogging. The  Judge  cannot  be
criticised for restricting his findings  to  the  evidence  and  submissions
placed before him.

14.  I have found that there is a material error of law. I set the  decision
aside. It will be for the appellant and those advising her to  consider  how
the case is pled when it is heard again by the First-tier.

15. I have already found  a  material  error  of  law  in  the  fact-finding
process carried out by the First-tier in  the  decision  promulgated  on  15
March 2017. I therefore find  that  I  cannot  substitute  my  own  decision
because of the extent of the fact-finding exercise required to reach a  just
decision in this appeal.


Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

16. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

   (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other  opportunity  for  that  party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or



   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

17. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
a new fact finding exercise is required.  None of the findings of  fact  are
to stand and a complete re hearing is necessary.

18. I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Glasgow  to  be
heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Farrelly.

Decision

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors
of law.

20. I set aside the Judge's decision  promulgated  on  15  March  2017.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.


Signed                Paul Doyle
  Date 8 May 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

