
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00269/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 July 2019                       |On 24 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                                     K G
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Lester of Luqmani Thompson & Partners.
For the Respondent:    Ms Jones, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of the Ivory Coast born on 30 December 1975.
     He appealed against the decision of the respondent on 6 December  2018
    to refuse his protection and  human  rights  claim.   His  appeal  came
    before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal S Meah and Judge of  the  First
    tier Tribunal Bibi ("the panel") who, in a decision promulgated  on  26
    February 2019, dismissed his appeal on protection grounds, allowing his
    appeal on Article 3 medical grounds.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted, out of time, by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge S P J Buchanan in the following terms:

         "...

         3. The Grounds of Appeal [GOA]  contend  that  the  FTTJs  arguably
         erred  because  they  "[failed]  to  consider  relevant   evidence,
         [failed] to make material  findings/give  appropriate  reasons  and
         [failed] to take the  correct  approach  to  an  Istanbul  Protocol
         compliant medico-legal report (as per KV (Sri Lanka) v SSHD  [2019]
         UKSC 10)

         4. As contended in  GOA,  in  assessing  "Medical  Circumstances  -
         article 3 claim", the FTTJS carefully considered  the  medico-legal
         report from Dr Benjamin Robinson of the Helen Bamber Foundation. It
         is noted at [34]: "the report includes a detailed consideration  of
         the appellant's scars alongside his explanation of how  these  were
         caused is considered with possible alternative explanations.  (sic)
         ... We can place reliance upon his report." At [35] the  expert  is
         noted to have reported "The scar is typical of this kind  of  wound
         (as described and attributed by the appellant):  and  at  [36]  the
         expert is noted to have reported "the scar ... [is] typical of  the
         scars which would be caused by surgery for a hernia as described by
         the appellant following the blows to his abdomen".

         5. As contended in the GOA, in the assessment of the  asylum  claim
         at [13]-[30] there is no mention of  consideration  of  the  report
         from Dr  Robinson;  which  as  discussed  above  includes  evidence
         supportive  of  the  appellant's  claims.  Although  there   is   a
         discussion of medical records at [25] within the reasons given  for
         dismissing the  asylum/humanitarian  protection  claims,  there  is
         nothing said about the detailed report from Dr Robinson.

         6. For these reasons, I conclude that it is arguable  by  reference
         to the Grounds of Appeal that there may have been error of  law  in
         the Decision as identified in the application. I  grant  permission
         to appeal."

 3. Hence the matter came before me.

 4. Ms Jones confirmed that the appellant had  been  granted  three  years'
    discretionary leave to remain in the light of the panel's decision that
    the respondent's decision had placed the UK in breach of Article  3  on
    medical grounds.

 5. At the outset of the hearing I indicated to the parties that, as in the
    grant of permission, I had been unable to identify any reference to  Dr
    Robinson's expert  medical  report  in  the  panel's  analysis  of  the
    credibility of the appellant for the purpose of deciding his protection
    appeal.  Both representatives agreed that was the case. Ms Jones agreed
    that the panel had not rejected the expert evidence in  that  analysis;
    she accepted the panel had been required to undertake a fuller analysis
    because Dr Robinson's report had been accepted in the analysis  of  the
    appellant's Article 3 claim.

 6. Mr Lester, for the appellant, adopted his detailed  skeleton  argument.
    In summary,  the  appellant  had  relied,  before  the  panel,  on  the
    comprehensive medical  report  of  Dr  Robinson  of  the  Helen  Bamber
    Association  which  corroborated  his  account  of  ill-treatment   and
    persecution and provided a medical explanation for the  inconsistencies
    in his account. Despite its clear relevance, the panel did not refer to
    the report in its decision to dismiss the protection  elements  of  the
    appeal. This was despite placing reliance on the expert's  evidence  in
    the analysis of the Article 3 medical claim.  Mr Lester submitted  that
    the  panel's  failure  to  consider  the  report  in  relation  to  the
    protection  element  of  the  appeal  was  a  clear   error   of   law.
    Alternatively, if the panel did not consider the report in that respect
    but decided to place no weight on it, it  was  required  to  make  that
    decision explicitly and to give reasons for so doing, given  the  clear
    materiality of the report.

 7. Mr Lester also applied to amend the grounds  of  appeal  to  include  a
    submission that the panel had  failed  to  have  regard  to  the  Joint
    Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010: Child,  vulnerable  adult  and
    sensitive appellant guidance in the  analysis  of  credibility  and  to
    record that this had been done.  Ms Jones told me  the  respondent  did
    not object to the  appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  being  amended  to
    include this additional submission. I allowed  the  appellant  to  make
    that amendment, it being in the interests of justice to do so and there
    being no prejudice to the respondent as a result.

 8. For the respondent, Ms Jones submitted there was a brief  reference  at
    [16]  to  the  existence  of  "medical  evidence"  submitted  for   the
    appellant. This brief reference could be  cross-referred  to  paragraph
    141 of the report itself which referred to a significant  inconsistency
    in the appellant's evidence. She noted the panel's credibility findings
    at [19]-[22] which accorded with the expert's  evidence  at  [141]  and
    [142] of his report.  She  submitted  that  [19]-[21]  related  to  the
    reliability of documentary evidence. These  were  not,  she  submitted,
    explained by his trauma or characteristics or disorder. She referred to
    the adverse finding at [21] regarding the police court summons as being
    unexplained by the report or trauma. She submitted that the  panel  had
    appropriately taken issue as regards  the  translation  of  documentary
    evidence; the expert had not  been  in  a  position  to  take  a  view.
    Similarly, at [22] the panel had made an adverse finding as regards the
    picture  of  a  banner,  that  picture  having  been  produced  by  the
    appellant. Ms Jones noted the panel had concerns about the  content  of
    the picture; those concerns could not be explained by  the  appellant's
    mental health. This was  also  the  case  as  regards  the  appellant's
    documents which were analysed at  [23],  [24]  and  [27].  Indeed,  the
    expert accepted this, in part,  at  [147]  of  his  report.   Ms  Jones
    submitted  the  panel  was  entitled  to  make  findings   which   were
    independent of the medical evidence and  what  the  appellant  believed
    subjectively or objectively. In summary she submitted that the findings
    of the panel as regards the reliability  of  the  documentary  evidence
    could stand irrespective of the content of the expert report.

Discussion

 9. The appellant's skeleton argument before  the  panel  acknowledged  the
    existence of a previous appeal determination  which  was  the  starting
    point for the panel's analysis  of  the  evidence  (Devaseelan  v  SSHD
    [2002] UKIAT). The skeleton argument identified the  existence  of  new
    evidence, including that of  Dr  Robinson  as  being  relevant  to  the
    appellant's renewed protection claim. It was  submitted  that  the  new
    evidence,  including  the  scarring  and  psychiatric  evidence  of  Dr
    Robinson, warranted departure from the previous Judge's findings.  Thus
    the existence of this expert evidence was a live issue to be  addressed
    and taken into account in the  panel's  assessment  of  the  appeal  on
    protection grounds.

10. Dr Robinson's report noted the scarring of the appellant and  concluded
    inter alia that a scar on the appellant's leg was typical of the  cause
    attributed to it by the appellant, namely a stab wound to the foot.  Dr
    Robinson also concluded that the scar on the  appellant's  abdomen  was
    typical of scars caused by surgery for a hernia  as  described  by  the
    appellant following blows to the abdomen.  Dr Robinson  also  diagnosed
    the appellant with post-traumatic stress disorder  ("PTSD")  and  major
    depression.  He reported inter alia at [176] that the appellant  was  a
    "highly vulnerable man, depressed, traumatised ...". Dr Robinson refers
    to the appellant as being "mistrustful of authorities, and afraid".  He
    concludes at [179] that there is "a coherent clinical picture which  is
    plausible from a medical, psychiatric and psychodynamic  (i.e.  causal)
    point of view".  This report is compliant with  the  Istanbul  Protocol
    and with the Presidential Practice Directions updated  on  18  December
    2018. It warranted consideration in  the  context  of  the  appellant's
    protection appeal.

11. Either the panel did  not  consider  this  report  in  the  context  of
    protection or it considered it and rejected it in that context  (albeit
    it was accepted in the context of the appellant's Article 3 appeal).

12. I am mindful that the panel  (albeit  in  the  first  person  singular)
    referred at [9] to having taken into account the appellant's documents;
    in that context the panel referred to "a medical report from the  Helen
    Bamber Foundation dated 12 July 2018". In fact the report  is  dated  4
    July 2018. The panel also noted the report of  Dr  Robinson  under  the
    heading "The hearing" in the context of the decision that the appellant
    should not give oral evidence; he attended the hearing accompanied by a
    support worker from the Helen Bamber Foundation.  Reference is made  in
    the panel decision to the expert opinion of Dr Robinson as regards  the
    appellant's   vulnerability.    The   panel   noted   the   appellant's
    representative's  submission  that  the  hearing  should   proceed   on
    submissions only given the appellant's vulnerability.

13. There is a passing reference to Dr  Robinson's  report,  in  connection
    with the protection decision, at [17] which summarises the  submissions
    made for the appellant to the panel.

14. I am mindful that these references, taken together  with  the  detailed
    analysis of the report in connection with the Article 3 claim, indicate
    that the panel was well aware  of  the  existence  and  content  of  Dr
    Robinson's report. However, I am unable to draw an inference from these
    references, that the panel had regard to  the  expert  evidence  of  Dr
    Robinson when assessing the credibility of the appellant's  account  of
    the events which led him to seek protection.  Nor am I able to find, in
    the absence of any analysis in relation to the protection  issue,  that
    the panel decided the expert's report merited no evidential weight.  It
    is clear from the subsequent  Article  3  findings,  which  are  almost
    wholly based on the evidence  of  Dr  Robinson,  that  the  panel  gave
    considerable  weight  to  this  expert's  professionalism,  skill   and
    expertise. They found his expert evidence to be reliable as regards the
    appellant's diagnosis.  The panel concluded the  report  was  compliant
    with the Istanbul Protocol (at [34]).  It noted Dr Robinson  "carefully
    considers each scar  on  the  appellant's  body  and  categorises  them
    according to the usual definitions, and  considers  alternative  causes
    including self-infliction. We can place reliance upon this report".  In
    the face of this  finding,  it  cannot  be  said  that  the  panel  had
    considered the report in connection with the protection claim  and  had
    rejected it. To have done so would have been wholly  inconsistent  with
    the later  Article  3  findings.  Furthermore,  there  is  no  explicit
    rejection of Dr Robinson's opinion as regards the protection  claim  or
    any reasons for it.

15. I draw the almost inevitable conclusion that the panel simply failed to
    have regard to the existence of Dr Robinson's report  when  considering
    the credibility of the appellant's  account  of  past  persecution  and
    indeed his appeal on protection grounds generally.

16. Ms Jones argued vigorously that this failure would not have a  material
    impact on the outcome of the appeal on protection  grounds  because  of
    numerous  inconsistencies  in  the  documentary  evidence  which   were
    unexplained by  the  expert  evidence.  I  am  unable  to  accept  that
    submission.   There are various instances in the panel's assessment  of
    the documentary  evidence  when  they  have  rejected  the  appellant's
    account. By way of example, at [22] the panel considers the appellant's
    account that his mother had found a blood-stained banner on  the  front
    of the family house in  September-October  2017.   A  picture  of  this
    banner had been produced. The panel found the face in the  picture  did
    not resemble the appellant's face; "at best it is a generic hand  drawn
    picture of a face which is not of great quality and not a  high-quality
    artistic picture of the appellant, and it I was not clear whose face it
    was on the banner." The panel went on to state  "We  have  no  credible
    evidence before us which demonstrates who is responsible for making and
    sending the banner to his mother's address".  In assessing the  quality
    of this evidence, the panel  failed  to  have  regard  to  the  medical
    evidence as regards the ability of the appellant  to  give  a  coherent
    explanation for the panel's concerns.

17. The panel refers at [23] to photographs of a burnt-out building.  It is
    concerned that the  appellant  has  not  provided  any  evidence  which
    identifies that this was his residence in the  Ivory  Coast.  Thus  the
    panel has drawn an adverse inference from that failure  without  taking
    into account the psychiatric evidence which is that  the  appellant  is
    prone to relapse if reminded of events in  the  Ivory  Coast.  Arguably
    this could explain why such evidence has not been provided.  Similarly,
    the panel  is  critical  that  the  appellant  has  failed  to  provide
    verification of his having  used  a  PO  box  in  his  entry  clearance
    application.  It is critical of the failure of the appellant to provide
    "additional evidence". Again there is no consideration  of  the  expert
    evidence which has some relevance to the ability of  the  appellant  to
    engage in such activities in  the  light  of  his  mental  health.   In
    passing I note the panel states it cannot "accept  the  oral  testimony
    alone on this crucial point given our doubts about his credibility  and
    the veracity of the overall claim": this is despite the fact  that  the
    appellant did not give oral evidence at the hearing.  Furthermore,  the
    panel's misgivings about the veracity of the claim were formed  in  the
    absence of consideration  of  the  medical  evidence  which  is  highly
    relevant in an analysis of the  reliability  of  his  account  of  past
    events in the Ivory Coast.

18. The panel finds it surprising, at [26], that the appellant  had  failed
    to refer earlier to having been sexually assaulted  and  raped.  It  is
    noted that "he has had ample opportunity to raise this  and  failed  to
    mention this in his screening/asylum  interview  and  at  his  previous
    appeal hearing hence this seriously undermines  his  credibility".   Dr
    Robinson's evidence at [128] of his  report  is  that  the  appellant's
    symptoms "did not fully emerge after the attack in the  Cote  d'Ivoire,
    but only after the surgery in the UK. This  is  an  entirely  medically
    plausible sequence of events and would suggest that [the appellant]  is
    not exaggerating his symptoms. Were that the case then one might expect
    him to describe the onset of symptoms  soon  repressed,  but  a  second
    event which reminds the patient of the first, causes a  re-experiencing
    of the first event which is in itself traumatic."  This observation  by
    Dr Robinson could have  explained  the  failure  of  the  appellant  to
    disclose sexual trauma earlier yet has not been taken into  account  by
    the panel in its assessment of the reliability of the claim that he had
    been sexually assaulted and raped.

19. Dr Robinson deals specifically in his report with the appellant  having
    withheld information from the Home Office. He concludes at [136] of his
    report that the appellant has "a form of hypervigilance  (Criterion  D)
    in the PTSD criteria. Thus, in sum, [the appellant] has before withheld
    information from the Home Office due to his  PTSD  which  prevents  him
    stating facts which, because of his mental health problems, he  wrongly
    fears will led to his own harm or the harm of others."  He goes  on  to
    state at [140] that the appellant's "PTSD  is  severely  impairing  his
    ability to trust".  This is highly relevant to the  panel's  assessment
    of his credibility yet has not been taken into account by the panel.

20. While Dr Robinson has not addressed all the  discrepancies  which  were
    identified by the Home Office or indeed those of concern to the  panel,
    his evidence as to the appellant's vulnerability and the impact of  his
    mental health issues on his ability to function warranted consideration
    throughout the assessment of the credibility of the account.   Even  if
    no weight were placed  on  the  appellant's  documents,  as  the  panel
    decided, it was incumbent on the panel to assess the evidence  overall,
    both documentary and witness,  in  the  light  of  the  expert  medical
    evidence as regards his complex psychiatric and personality  conditions
    and disorders.

21. The appellant is undeniably highly vulnerable. Despite this, the  panel
    did  not  apply,  in  the  assessment  of  the  evidence  overall,  the
    vulnerable witness guidance contrary to AM (Afghanistan) v  SSHD  &  Or
    [2017] EWCA Civ 1123. This too is an error of law,  particularly  given
    the panel's reliance  on  Dr  Robinson's  conclusions  insofar  as  the
    Article 3 medical claim was concerned.

22. In summary, I am satisfied that the failure to  take  into  account  Dr
    Robinson's expert opinion in the assessment of the credibility  of  the
    appellant's account is a material error of law. Had it been taken  into
    account, the outcome might  have  been  different  notwithstanding  the
    earlier refusal of his asylum claim and the guidance in Devaseelan.

23. I reserved my decision at the hearing  but  indicated  to  the  parties
    that, if I found one or material error of law, my  inclination  was  to
    remake the decision. I invited submissions on the issue.

24. Mr Lester told me he had recently taken over  conduct  of  this  matter
    from another organisation. He had not  drafted  the  skeleton  argument
    which had  been  before  the  panel  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  He
    confirmed it was unlikely the appellant would be called  to  give  oral
    evidence were the matter to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  but
    observed that medical conditions could change  and  he  was  unsure  on
    this.  Mr Lester submitted that it was clear from Dr Robinson's account
    that the appellant's ill health impacted adversely on  his  ability  to
    obtain further evidence, a failure for which he had been criticised  by
    the First-tier Tribunal. The appellant's ill-health  impacted  also  on
    his  ability  to  give  a  coherent  account.   He   wanted   to   take
    instructions, if  possible,  from  the  appellant  and  to  make  fresh
    submissions in support of the  appellant's  protection  appeal,  rather
    than relying  on  the  skeleton  argument  of  the  appellant's  former
    representatives. He was not in a position to make submissions before me
    on the substantive issues and would not be in such a position for  some
    time due to the  appellant's  mental  health  condition.   He  did  not
    consider it would be appropriate to rely  on  the  submissions  of  the
    appellant's  previous  representatives  alone;  he   had   noted   some
    deficiencies in the conduct of the case and he considered it was in the
    best interests of the appellant,  who  was  very  vulnerable,  for  the
    matter  to  be  decided  afresh  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the
    protection issue. He would then be able to take instructions  from  the
    appellant in advance of the hearing. That may take some time given  his
    vulnerability.

25. Ms Jones agreed that,  in  the  light  of  these  submissions  for  the
    appellant, the matter should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for
    a proper analysis of the evidence relating to the protection claim;  it
    should be taken in the round with the remaining evidence, including the
    documentary evidence and any additional evidence  which  the  appellant
    adduced in support of his protection claim.

26. I was  persuaded  by  Mr  Lester,  in  the  light  of  the  appellant's
    vulnerability and the change of representative, to remit this matter to
    the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

Decision

27. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved material
    errors on points of law.   The  panel's  decision  on  the  appellant's
    appeal on asylum and humanitarian protection grounds is set aside.  The
    findings pursuant to Article 3, on health grounds, at [31] to  [41]  of
    the panel's decision are preserved, as is the panel's decision that the
    appeal is allowed on  Article 3 health grounds.

28. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal,  to  be  dealt  with
    afresh, pursuant to Section 12(2)(b)(i)  of  the  Tribunal  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice Statement 7.2(v),  before  any  judge
    aside from FTTJ S Meah and FTTJ Bibi.

29. Given the nature of this appeal, the appellant is entitled to anonymity
    in these proceedings.

A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
 Dated: 17 July 2019




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
 Dated: 17 July 2019

                                 DIRECTIONS


 1. Any further documentary and/or witness evidence relied upon  by  either
    party is to be filed with the Tribunal and served upon the other  party
    by no later than 28 days before the date of the hearing  in  the  First
    Tier Tribunal.


 2. The appeal is listed at Taylor House with  a  time  estimate  of  three
    hours to be heard at 10.00 am on ............................

 3. No interpreter is required.






A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
 Dated: 17 July 2019
