
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00018/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 January 2017                            |On 24 January 2017            |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     nsk
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Lane, instructed by Migrant Legal Project
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Background

 2. The appellant is a Sikh and citizen of Afghanistan who was  born  on  1
    January 1974.  He arrived in the  United  Kingdom  with  his  wife  and
    children on 20 August 2015 and claimed asylum.  On  16  December  2015,
    the Secretary of State  refused  the  appellant's  claims  for  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and Art 8 of the ECHR.

 3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    sent on 27 July 2016, Judge Page dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  on
    all grounds.

 4. The appellant sought permission to appeal.   Permission  was  initially
    refused by the First-tier Tribunal but on 21 September 2016  the  Upper
    Tribunal (UTJ Kopieczek) granted the appellant permission to appeal.

 5. On 30 September 2016, the Secretary of State filed  a  rule  24  notice
    seeking to uphold the judge's decision.

The Appellant's Claim

 6. The appellant claims that he worked in a market in  Kabul  as  a  money
    changer.  He began the business in 2001 with the help  of  his  father.
    He worked exchanging US dollars and Afghan  currency.   In  July  2015,
    five men (whom he knew) came to his  house  and  said  that  they  were
    working for "Jihad".  They told the appellant that they wanted all  his
    money, his house and land.  They told him to change his faith to  Islam
    and that they would find another wife for him.  They gave him a week to
    "get  everything  together".   They  said  they  would  decapitate  his
    children and that they would kill him and his wife if he did not do  as
    they asked.

 7. The appellant returned to work in the market and after a  few  days  he
    collected 50,000 US dollars from the bigger money  changing  shops  who
    looked after it for him.  He went to the Gurdwara and  told  them  what
    had happened and they helped him to leave  by  introducing  him  to  an
    agent.  The appellant and his family left Afghanistan before the  seven
    days he had been given passed.  He did not report  the  matter  to  the
    police because they are "not very good".  With the aid of an agent, the
    appellant and his family travelled from Kabul  to  Pakistan  and  then,
    following a number of airplane flights, arrived in the UK  and  claimed
    asylum.

The Judge's Decision

 8. Judge Page rejected the appellant's account.  Although he accepted that
    the appellant and his family were Sikhs from Afghanistan,  he  did  not
    accept that the appellant had been the subject  of  extortion  by  five
    Jihadists as he claimed.  In any event, the appellant could  internally
    relocate within Kabul.   Further,  as  a  returning  Sikh,  whilst  the
    appellant and his family might face difficulties,  their  circumstances
    on return did not amount to persecution or serious ill-treatment.

 9. In support of his claim, the appellant relied upon a report provided by
    Dr Antonio Giustozzi, a recognised expert in  respect  of  the  region.
    That report in fact consisted of a report-back by a researcher whom  Dr
    Giustozzi asked  to  make  enquiries  both  at  the  market  where  the
    appellant claimed to work and also from "AS",  a  leader  of  the  Sikh
    community in Afghanistan and who lived in Kabul.

10. As a result of those enquiries, Dr Giustozzi reported that:

         "7.  The traders in Shahzada  remembered  [the  appellant]  as  the
             owner of a money changer shop there, but  were  not  aware  of
             what drove him away.

         8.   [AS] indicated that he remembered [the appellant] as the owner
             of a money changer shop and as the victim of extortion.   [The
             appellant] was threatened by a group of people and was  forced
             to pay them money: he reported the fact to [AS]."

11. Judge Page dealt  with  Dr  Giustozzi's  evidence  in  paras  18-19  as
    follows:

         "18. The appellant, through his representatives, have instructed Dr
             Antonio Giustozzi, to seek  confirmation  as  to  whether  the
             facts related to them by the appellant could be  confirmed  by
             local  sources  or  not.   Dr  Giustozzi  is  an   expert   on
             Afghanistan with many sources available to him in Afghanistan.
              He forwarded the details of the appellant's  old  address  in
             Kabul to  these  sources,  to  a  researcher  called  [SN],  a
             journalist  based  in  Kabul.   [SN]  sought  to  confirm  the
             authenticity, or otherwise,  of  the  appellant's  claim  with
             regard to the threats and extortion to which he claimed he was
             a victim.  For this purpose [SN] visited Shahzada  Market  and
             enquired with local traders about the appellant.  The  traders
             in Shahzada remembered the appellant 'as the owner of a  money
             changers shop there', but were not aware of what the appellant
             said had driven  him  away.   However,  another  person  there
             called [AS] indicated to this journalist  that  he  remembered
             the appellant as the owner of a money changer shop and as 'the
             victim of extortion'.  He said the appellant was threatened by
             a group of people and was forced to pay the  money,  something
             he reported to [AS].

         19.  In the appellant's witness statement, however, at paragraph 24
             the appellant said that he did not tell people in  the  market
             what had happened because he thought that if  he  told  people
             what had happened it would make the situation worse.   It  was
             the appellant's evidence that he  did  not  actually  pay  any
             money to these people and he was told that he had to.  It  was
             also the appellant's evidence that he did  not  have  a  shop.
             His father had a shop but he had to shut because  of  security
             problems and the  appellant  started  his  business  in  2011,
             working from a desk in the market not  a  shop.   This  report
             does not, in my judgment, amount to expertise.   It  has  been
             relied on as an 'expert report' but it is  only  a  record  of
             what Dr Giustozzi's enquiry of this journalist revealed.  I do
             not  doubt  that  Dr  Giustozzi  is  a  renowned   expert   on
             Afghanistan, or that  he  has  this  contact.   If  [AS],  who
             apparently is the leader of the Sikh community in  Afghanistan
             and resident in Kabul on 5 April 2016, had detailed  knowledge
             of the appellant's claimed problems there it is  curious  that
             he has not reported that it was necessary for the appellant to
             flee  Afghanistan.    There   is   renowned   lawlessness   in
             Afghanistan and  it  must  be  inevitable  those  with  'money
             changer shops' be at risk of criminals seeking to extort money
             from them.  This evidence is not  expertise.   Neither  is  it
             conclusive evidence that the events that the appellant claimed
             actually happened to him and not his father, who  did  have  a
             shop  and  suffered  problems  according  to  the  appellant's
             witness statement.  I am asked by Counsel for the appellant to
             give significant weight  to  the  sources  in  Kabul  that  Dr
             Giustozzi has used.  I take this evidence as my starting point
             in  assessing  credibility.   After  considering  all  of  the
             evidence of the appellant, his asylum  interview  records  and
             the submissions made by Counsel of the appellant  Mr  Lane,  I
             reach the following conclusions."

12. At para 20, the judge set out a perfectly proper self-direction  as  to
    the standard and burden of proof.   Then,  at  paras  21-22  the  judge
    identified a number of aspects of the appellant's account which led him
    to make an adverse finding as follows:

         "21. The appellant's story did not have the ring of  truth  to  it.
             According to the objective evidence in the appellant's  bundle
             at page B50, 36% of the population of Afghanistan earned below
             25 US dollars per month.   The  appellant  has  claimed  after
             ceasing to work in his father's  currency  exchange  shop  and
             starting on his own in a desk in  the  market  he  managed  to
             accumulate over four years the sum of  50,000  US  dollars  in
             cash, a sum accumulated and held with  four  currency  traders
             who held this money for him as a favour charging  him  nothing
             for the service.  The 50,000 US  dollars  that  the  appellant
             claimed to have accumulated was used to bring  his  family  to
             the United Kingdom, accumulated after the appellant  had  been
             able to meet all of his household expenses.  This amount would
             be the equivalent of 1,041 US dollars per month over the  four
             year period  that  the  appellant  claimed  to  have  been  in
             business in this way.  Yet having accessed all of  this  money
             in such an open place the appellant experienced  no  problems,
             he said, until these five men that he worked with came to  his
             house to tell him that his  money  and  his  home  was  to  be
             forfeit in these claimed circumstances.  The appellant had  no
             previous problems with these five men, all of whom were  known
             to him.  I do not find it credible that  this  incident  would
             have happened with such spontaneity and the appellant given  a
             week to meet their demands.  The appellant did not report this
             to the police or seek the protection of any  agency.   On  his
             account he lived normally for the next few days going  to  the
             market each day, collecting the 50,000  dollars  that  he  was
             owed, living at home throughout, before leaving for  Pakistan.
             I do not find it credible that the appellant would  have  been
             able to leave 50,000 US dollars with four people,  using  them
             as a bank, with nothing required in return.

         22.  The incident when the five men were alleged  to  have  entered
             his home in mid-July 2015 to demand that he gave them  all  of
             his money and his house was not credible because the appellant
             knew who these people were, because he had worked  with  them.
             Yet on the appellant's account three of the men covered  their
             faces for some unknown reason.  It is not credible that  three
             of these five people that he knew  would  have  covered  their
             faces.  These five men, according to  the  appellant's  asylum
             interview, worked with him for two years in the money exchange
             in Sherzad  Market.   Their  behaviour  before  this  incident
             caused the appellant no concern, it is not credible that  they
             would have behaved in this spontaneous  way,  demanding  money
             for Jihad, promising the appellant that  if  he  converted  to
             Islam they would give  him  a  new  wife  and  wives  for  his
             children.  It is not credible they then gave  him  a  week  to
             consider his answer.  A week that facilitated his preparations
             to leave the country.  I can safely discount  any  possibility
             of this having happened in this way.  The appellant could  not
             make up his mind during his asylum interview  whether  he  had
             left Afghanistan fifteen-twenty days  after  the  incident  or
             three-four days later.  In any event he had  no  problems,  on
             the basis of this story, in Afghanistan immediately before  he
             left when he was living at home and going to the  market  each
             day."

13. Judge Page, accordingly, dismissed the appeal on asylum grounds.

Discussion

14. Mr Lane, who represented the  appellant  relied  upon  the  grounds  of
    appeal which challenged the judge's approach to the evidence  in  paras
    18-19 and then in paras 21-22.

    Paras 18-19

15. First, Mr Lane submitted that the judge had  failed  to  give  positive
    weight to Dr Giustozzi's evidence, even though it was  not  his  expert
    opinion, but rather evidence reported through his  reliable  researcher
    in Kabul.   Mr  Lane  submitted  that  Dr  Giustozzi's  researcher  was
    independent and that, despite any minor inconsistencies, the report was
    supportive of the appellant's claim and the judge, in stating  that  he
    took it as his "starting point  in  assessing  credibility",  had  then
    failed to do so.

16. Secondly, he submitted  that  Judge  Page  had  wrongly  identified  an
    inconsistency between  the  evidence  of  AS  and  the  appellant  when
    concluding that, although the appellant claimed not to have told anyone
    in the market what had happened, AS was aware that  the  appellant  had
    been threatened.  Mr Lane submitted that AS was not from the market but
    rather the Gurdwara whom the appellant had  told  about  his  problems.
    Further, Mr Lane submitted that the fact that AS was not said  to  have
    acknowledged that the appellant had fled was  based  on  an  assumption
    that he had a detailed knowledge of the appellant's circumstances.

17. Thirdly, the judge had been wrong to rely on a semantic point that  the
    appellant had claimed to work from a "desk" in the market whilst AS was
    reported to say that he had a money changer "shop".   Mr  Lane  pointed
    out that in his witness statement at  paras  11-17  (at  A2-A3  of  the
    bundle)  the  appellant  referred  to  his  "shop".   As  regards   the
    discrepancy between the appellant's account that he had  not  paid  any
    money and AS's reported evidence that the appellant had been "forced to
    pay them the money" that was a minor inconsistency.

18. I do not accept Mr Lane's submissions.

19. Although Dr Giustozzi is an expert, his report does  not,  as  Mr  Lane
    acknowledged, contain expert opinion  in  support  of  the  appellant's
    claim.   Instead,  it  contains   a   third-party's   report   of   his
    investigations.  The judge clearly recognised that in para  19  of  his
    determination.  Subject to its reliability, such evidence  is  relevant
    but it is a matter for the judge as to what weight  to  place  upon  it
    given the circumstances in which it was obtained.  Here, it is clear to
    me that the  judge  did  give  the  evidence  proper  consideration  in
    assessing the credibility of the appellant's claim.  The evidence  was,
    however,  not  wholly  consistent  with  the  appellant's  claim.    In
    particular, as the judge pointed out, AS reported  that  the  appellant
    had told him that he had been forced to pay  money  to  the  five  men.
    That was not the appellant's claim.  His claim was that he did not  pay
    them the money and used it in order to travel to the UK.  Further, AS's
    evidence  did  not  support  the  appellant's  claim  in  two  material
    respects.  It made no reference to the fact that the appellant had been
    threatened by Jihadists and told to convert  from  his  Sikh  religion.
    Also, it made no reference to the fact  that  the  appellant  had  been
    forced to flee Afghanistan  as  a  result  of  the  threats.   Mr  Lane
    submitted that the judge should not have taken  any  omission  in  AS's
    evidence into account as it was based on an assumption that  AS  had  a
    detailed knowledge.  However, the appellant's own case was that he went
    to the Gurdwara -  and  AS  is  a  leader  of  the  Sikh  community  in
    Afghanistan based in Kabul - and he told them  what  had  happened  and
    that they had helped him to leave by introducing him to an  agent  (see
    para 25 of his witness statement).  The judge was, in my view, entitled
    to take into account, in assessing what weight to give to the  evidence
    from AS, that omission.  The evidence was  further  undermined  by  the
    failure of AS (a religious leader) to refer to what was, after  all,  a
    core part of the appellant's claim that he was subject to threats  from
    religious extremists seeking his conversion to Islam.

20. Whilst the appellant had referred to his having a "shop" in the market,
    he also referred to the fact, in his oral evidence, that he was working
    from a "desk" in the market.  There was, in my  judgment,  an  internal
    discrepancy in the appellant's own evidence and  also  between  it  and
    that of AS.  The discrepancy cannot be wholly explained away simply  as
    a "semantic" point. Reading the appellant's witness statement  when  he
    refers to his having a "shop", he refers to the "bigger shops" near the
    market from whom he obtained daily rates of exchange and some  of  whom
    held his money.  There is no suggestion that the  "bigger  shops"  were
    based in the market at "desks".  On the  basis  of  the  evidence,  the
    judge was entitled to view the appellant's evidence  as  containing  an
    internal discrepancy and also being discrepant of that of AS.

21. Overall, the judge's assessment of Dr Giustozzi's evidence was,  in  my
    judgment, entirely fair and balanced even if the judge  overlooked  the
    fact that AS was not a person at the market when the  judge  took  into
    account that the appellant had said he  had  not  told  anyone  in  the
    market what had happened.   I do not accept Mr Lane's  submission  that
    the judge fails to give proper weight to Dr Giustozzi's  evidence.   He
    clearly did not disregard it but, as he said, took it into  account  as
    his "starting point" in assessing credibility.

    Paras 21-22

22. In respect of paras 21-22, Mr Lane submitted that the judge had  placed
    too much weight on the plausibility of the appellant's account  and  he
    referred me to the decision of the Court of Appeal in HK v SSHD  [2006]
    EWCA Civ 1037 which identified the potential dangers of doing so.

23. Mr Lane submitted that the judge's plausibility points were not related
    to any internal or external inconsistencies.  Mr Lane accepted, in  his
    submissions, that a judge  could  rely  upon  the  plausibility  of  an
    individual's claim when, if mixed with  inconsistencies  identified  in
    the evidence, it could add to the judge's reasons.  Here,  however,  Mr
    Lane submitted there was no basis for the judge's  view:  that  he  had
    been able to earn the 50,000 US dollars, had  experienced  no  problems
    earlier with the men, that the extortion had been spontaneous  but  the
    appellant had been given a week  to  meet  the  demands,  that  it  was
    unlikely that other businesses would hold his money for  him,  that  he
    was able to go to the market after being threatened, and  that  it  was
    unlikely that three of the five men would cover their faces  when  they
    were known to him.

24. It is not necessarily impermissible for a judge to rely in his  or  her
    reasoning on an aspect of an appellant's account as being  implausible.
    Mr Lane acknowledged that.  In Y v SSHD [2006] EWCA  Civ  1223,  having
    cited HK, Keene LJ (with whom Ward and Carnwath  LJJ  agreed)  accepted
    this at [26])

             "None of this, however, means that [a judge]  is  required  to
             take at face  value  an  account  of  facts  proffered  by  an
             appellant,  no  matter  how  contrary  to  common  sense   and
             experience of human behaviour the account may be. The decision
             maker is not expected to suspend his own judgment, nor does Mr
             Singh contend that he should.  In  appropriate  cases,  he  is
             entitled to find that an account of events is  so  far-fetched
             and contrary to reason as to be incapable of belief."

25. But, there are dangers in doing so as was recognised by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in HK particularly where a  particular  cultural  context  (with
    which a judge may not be familiar) is not taken into  account.   In  Y,
    having considered HK, Keene LJ identified the dangers (at [27]):

             "A  decision  maker  is  entitled  to  regard  an  account  as
             incredible by such standards, but he must take care not to  do
             so merely because it would  not  seem  reasonable  if  it  had
             happened in this country. In essence, he must look through the
             spectacles provided by the information he has about conditions
             in the country in question."

26. Where a judge has recourse to reasoning which, expressly or implicitly,
    doubts the plausibility or possibility of the events  occurring  as  in
    individual claims, in the absence of other evidence such  as  documents
    to substantiate that reasoning, the judge runs the risk that his or her
    conclusion is simply speculation or a purported commonsense  conclusion
    which does not stand  up  to  objective  scrutiny.   But,  as  Mr  Lane
    acknowledged, the implausibility of an individual's  account  may  form
    part of the reasoning leading a judge to reject the appellant's account
    as true.   A  judge  must  always  bear  in  mind  that  sometimes  the
    implausible happens.  The more features of an appellant's account  that
    are implausible, the more likely it is  that  the  appellant's  account
    cannot stand up to scrutiny as true.

27. Here, Judge Page identified a number  of  aspects  of  the  appellant's
    account which, in effect, he considered to be  implausible.   His  view
    that it was implausible that the appellant could  amass  an  income  of
    50,000 US dollars over a four-year period working as  a  money  changer
    was not  a  view  reached  in  the  absence  of  supporting  background
    evidence.   It  took  into  account  that  36%  of  the  population  of
    Afghanistan earned below 25 US dollars per month.  The context, on  the
    appellant's evidence, was that he  ran  a  "small  business"  which  he
    contrasted with the "bigger" businesses running "bigger" money exchange
    shops.  The judge's view that  this  core  aspect  of  the  appellant's
    account was implausible was properly open to him given  the  background
    evidence.  It was not irrational or perverse.

28. Further, the appellant's evidence was that he knew the five  men  whom,
    he claimed, came to his house and threatened him and his  family.   The
    appellant's evidence was that he knew them  from  the  market  and  had
    known them for about two years.  They had bought and sold currency like
    him and sometimes they had borrowed money from each other (see para  17
    of the appellant's witness statement).  In my judgment, Judge Page  was
    entitled to take into account that, in the light of this, some  of  the
    men (but not all of them) would cover their faces.   The  point  is  an
    obvious and reasonable on, that they were all known  to  the  appellant
    and what was the point of them or some of them covering their faces.

29. Whilst some of the other reasons given by the judge in paras 21 and  22
    relied on by Mr Lane may be less driven by cogent common-sense, overall
    the judge's reasons, including the points properly made by the judge in
    respect of Dr Giustozzi's evidence, were in  my  judgment  adequate  to
    sustain the judge's adverse credibility finding.

30. Looking at the judge's reasons as a whole,  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    judge was entitled to reach his adverse credibility  finding.   Despite
    any shortcomings, the judge gave sufficient  and  adequate  reasons  to
    found his adverse credibility  finding.   The  finding  itself  is  not
    perverse or irrational in the light of the evidence before the judge.

31. In my judgment, the appellant has failed to establish a material  error
    of law and that the judge's decision should, as a consequence,  be  set
    aside.

32. In the light of this, the appellant's challenge to the judge's  finding
    that internal relocation was viable does not arise as the appellant has
    failed to establish he would be at risk on return in his home area.

Decision

33. For the above reasons, the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal did not involve the making of a material
    error of law.  The First-tier Tribunal's decision, therefore, stands.

34. Accordingly, the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.




                                                                      Signed




                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
