
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00182/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 7 November 2016                        |On 21 November 2016               |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                             chaveskie crossley
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Bobb, instructed by Aylish Alexander Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant, a citizen of Jamaica born on 15 July 1994, now  aged  20
    years old, appeals, with permission, against a decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Rowlands who on 28th July 2016 dismissed the appellant's
    appeal against a decision of the Secretary of State dated 17th December
    2015, refusing the appellant's protection and human rights  claim.  The
    appellant  claimed  his  deportation  to  Jamaica  would   breach   his
    Convention, Humanitarian Protection and Human Rights

 2. The appellant had arrived in the United Kingdom as a  visitor  in  2002
    with his grandmother.  His application for indefinite leave  to  remain
    was refused and he became appeal rights exhausted on 6 June 2008.  On 4
    May 2011 he  was  issued  with  a  warning  letter  about  his  conduct
    following a decision not to pursue deportation at that time  after  his
    series of criminal convictions (including theft and robbery) and breach
    of a Supervision Order for non compliance,  as a juvenile.  On  13  May
    2011  he  submitted  a  human  rights  application  and   was   granted
    discretionary leave to remain until 12 May 2014 but in the  intervening
    period, on 28 January 2014, he was convicted of attempted  robbery  and
    sentenced at Isleworth Crown Court on 20th March 2014 to two and a half
    years'  imprisonment.   He  appealed  neither  the  sentence  nor   the
    conviction

 3. On 6 October 2014 a decision was made  to  issue  a  deportation  order
    under Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.  By virtue  of  Section
    32(4) of the UK Borders Act the appellant's removal  was  conducive  to
    the public good for the purposes of Section 3(5)(a) of the  Immigration
    Act 1971.  His immigration history and human rights were considered but
    it was recorded that there was significant public interest in deporting
    him and he had failed to show  any  very  compelling  circumstances  to
    outweigh the public interest. That decision was certified under Section
    94B (he could  only  appeal  from  outside  the  United  Kingdom).  The
    appellant issued judicial review proceedings and on 18th February  2015
    the appellant asserted that owing to his sexual orientation  as  a  gay
    man he could not be returned to Jamaica.  The subsequent decision  from
    the Secretary of State dated 17th December 2015 is that  which  is  the
    subject of this appeal.

 4. First-tier Tribunal Judge Rowlands heard the appellant's appeal  on  28
    July 2016, at which the  appellant  was  not  present,  and  the  judge
    dismissed his appeal on asylum grounds, humanitarian protection grounds
    and on human rights grounds.  Permission to appeal was filed on various
    grounds  and  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Baker  who
    identified that it was arguable that in not adjourning the hearing such
    that the unrepresented appellant could attend the hearing, there was  a
    material error of law.

 5. Those grounds of appeal, submitted by the  appellant,  identified  that
    between August 2008 and June 2012 the appellant amassed  a  substantial
    criminal record as a juvenile although no deportation action was  taken
    against him for any of  those  convictions,  which  ranged  from  going
    equipped to steal to robbery.  The  index  offence  for  which  he  was
    sentenced to two years and six months imprisonment on 20 March 2014 was
    for attempted robbery.

 6. The grounds for permission to appeal are as follows:

         (i)  The appellant was not at the appeal hearing and neither was he
         represented.  He was in detention at Harmondsworth but notified the
         Tribunal he felt  unwell.   The  judge  considered  adjourning  the
         hearing but concluded because he had been informed by the detention
         centre healthcare staff  that  the  appellant  was  deemed  fit  to
         attend, the judge did not adjourn the hearing.  The  appellant  had
         previously attended hearings and, on the morning  of  the  hearing,
         the judge received a letter  from  the  appellant's  representative
         notifying  the  Tribunal  they  were  no  longer  acting  for   the
         appellant.

         It was  submitted  in  the  circumstances  the  judge  should  have
         adjourned  the  hearing  so  that  the  appellant  was   given   an
         opportunity to make representations at his hearing.  It was not his
         fault that his  former  representatives  chose  not  to  attend  to
         represent the appellant and having done so  at  the  eleventh  hour
         gave   the   appellant   no   opportunity   to   seek   alternative
         representation.  It was not clear how the health staff  could  have
         concluded with only a brief examination that the appellant was  fit
         to attend and furthermore the appellant was prescribed Paracetamol.
          The telephone  call  from  the  healthcare  professional  was  not
         adequate and could not conclusively prove the appellant was fit  to
         attend the hearing.

         Clearly in the decision the judge took issue with the fact that the
         appellant had  not  given  oral  evidence  and  this  is  noted  at
         paragraph 6 and  at  paragraph  24  where  the  judge  specifically
         remarked that he had not been presented with any oral evidence.

         (ii) The second ground was that excessive weight was given  to  the
         appellant's criminal record as a child which was an error  of  law.
         The vast majority of the appellant's crimes  were  committed  as  a
         juvenile.

         (iii)    The third ground was that there were perverse findings  in
         relation to the issue  of  the  appellant  being  gay  and  it  was
         submitted that the judge had considered five letters, one from  the
         appellant, two from his girlfriend, Ms Sheila Harriott and two from
         his grandmother and one from Mr Danny Hughes.  It was noted by  the
         judge that Ms Harriott described the appellant as her 'other  half'
         and the judge regarded this to be inconsistent with  the  appellant
         to be gay but he had not considered  that  he  was  bisexual.   The
         judge  failed  to  consider  whether  it  was  reasonable  for  the
         appellant to have hidden the fact that he was gay for a substantial
         portion of his life, particularly the social stigma attached to his
         homosexuality.

         (iv) The fourth ground was based on  the  premise  that  there  was
         speculation on the part of the judge.  The judge took the view that
         NGOs could support the appellant in Jamaica and he  was  a  single,
         healthy adult male who would be able to try and find himself  work.
         It was submitted there was no evidence before the judge to  support
         that finding and no consideration of whether the appellant would be
         destitute on return to Jamaica.

         (v)  The fifth ground was on the basis of the  credibility  of  the
         appellant.  The judge noted that this was a late claim  to  be  gay
         but had failed to take into account that the reason  for  the  late
         claim was the social stigma.

Conclusions

 7. I have taken into account the representations made  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant by Mr Bobb and by Mr Duffy.  The appellant did not attend the
    hearing before me.  I was urged by Mr Bobb to note the  fact  that  the
    appellant had previously attended the hearing and had  an  interest  in
    his appeal.  There needed to be anxious scrutiny.

 8. Mr Duffy submitted that the second and third ground of appeal were mere
    disagreements  with  the  judge's  findings.   Paracetamol  was  not  a
    significant medication and a stomach ache would not  prevent  him  from
    coming to court.  There was no medical evidence as to how he would have
    been affected.  It would be for a medical practitioner  to  assess  the
    appellant and as to whether he was well or not.

 9. I am not persuaded that there is any error of law in this decision.  In
    relation to ground (i)  the test as  to  whether  there  should  be  an
    adjournment  is  on  the  basis  of  unfairness.   The  principles  are
    encapsulated in Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC)
    and as the headnote identifies

         'Where an adjournment refusal is challenged on fairness grounds, it
         is important to recognise that the question for the Upper  Tribunal
         is not whether the FtT acted reasonably.  Rather, the  test  to  be
         applied is that of fairness:  was  there  any  deprivation  of  the
         affected party's right to a fair hearing? See  SH  (Afghanistan)  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1284'.

    The judge at paragraphs [3]-[5] recorded clearly that he addressed  the
    issue of an adjournment and turned his attention to the  appellant  not
    being  in  attendance  at  the  hearing;   the  judge   set   out   the
    circumstances and his reasoning,

         [3]  "Despite being in custody the appellant  did  not  attend  the
         hearing.  I was informed that a telephone message had been received
         from his grandmother to say that  he  was  ill  and  would  not  be
         attending.  I was also notified by a healthcare  professional  from
         the detention centre that he had been examined and was  deemed  fit
         to attend court.  In view of  this  I  considered  his  refusal  to
         attend court to be a deliberate attempt to  avoid  the  proceedings
         and decided to proceed in his absence.

         [4]  I was aware that the hearing had first been listed on 2  March
         2016 but did not proceed because of the  volume  of  papers  served
         close to the date of the hearing.  It was then listed  for  12  May
         2016, jointly at the request of the respondent and  the  appellant.
         The hearing listed for 12 May was  further  adjourned  because  the
         appellant said that he had not been able to obtain a solicitor.  It
         was  therefore  adjourned  to  30  June  to  allow  him  to  enable
         representation.  On the morning of the hearing a  letter  had  been
         received from Duncan Lewis Solicitors to say that  they  no  longer
         acted.

         [5]  As the appellant was not present at the  hearing  I  satisfied
         myself that he received all of the documentation submitted in  this
         case which was rather lengthy bearing in mind it was a nexus case".



10. On the file there is a letter from Duncan  Lewis  Solicitors  dated  30
    June 2016, which is on the date of the hearing itself, but the  content
    of that letter was as follows:

         "We write in relation to  the  above  matter  and  further  to  our
         telephone conversation this morning.  We wish to inform  the  court
         that we have ceased representing the appellant since March 2016 and
         the appellant has been aware of our position since that time.

         The  appellant  has  been  advised  about  our  position   and   he
         understands the reason behind our decision.  The appellant had also
         been advised to seek alternative representation.

         Kindly bring this information to the attention of  the  court.   We
         apologise for not bringing this  to  the  attention  of  the  court
         earlier."

11. It is clear to me that the appellant had full notice that  the  hearing
    of 12 May 2016 was adjourned following the withdrawal of  Duncan  Lewis
    Solicitors from representation as early as March 2016.   It  was  clear
    that the appellant had been notified by Duncan Lewis Solicitors that he
    should seek alternative representation and had failed to do  so.   This
    is not an appellant unused to the judicial system.  He has had at least
    two sets of solicitors since 2015 and is  not  unfamiliar  with  giving
    instructions.  The appellant had had ample time, at least  two  months,
    prior to the  hearing  on  30th  June  2016,  to  instruct  alternative
    solicitors and the judge cannot be criticised for the  failure  of  the
    appellant to instruct any further representation.  The  appellant  also
    had ample time to submit a written statement.

12. The judge clearly took  into  account  that  there  had  been  previous
    adjournments and rather than proceed in the absence of any  information
    took note that he had been notified by a healthcare  professional  from
    the detention centre that the appellant had indeed  been  examined  and
    was  deemed  fit  to  attend  court.   That  the  appellant  was  given
    Paracetamol does not indicate, as the grounds argue, that he was  unfit
    to attend court. The judge  took  into  account  the  circumstances  in
    relation to the adjournment including the fact that a previous  hearing
    had been adjourned for the appellant  to  obtain  representation.   The
    judge had  been  informed  by  the  health  care  professional  at  the
    detention centre that the appellant was fit to attend court and did not
    merely exercise his own judgment as to the fitness of the appellant  to
    attend. Indeed there is a note on file which would appear to have  been
    faxed to the court in the form of a Healthcare Staff Report dated  30th
    June 2016 (the date of the hearing) confirming that the  appellant  had
    been examined and 'all was normal'. It was open to the  judge  to  take
    the view that he did, particularly bearing in mind the  representations
    made by the health care professional. That  the  appellant  was  issued
    with  Paracetamol  is  not  indicative  one  way  or  another  of   the
    appellant's complaint.

13. The findings of the judge were based on the written statements made  by
    the witnesses and the  interviews  given  by  the  appellant,  who  was
    clearly able to put his account and in the circumstances there  can  be
    no unfairness to the  appellant.   His  asylum  interview  (July  2015)
    confirmed that he first became aware that he was gay when he was  about
    12 (AIR q14) and as he stayed with his gay  uncle  he  thought  it  was
    'normal' and that he discussed his sexuality with his  uncle  who  told
    him to be who he wanted (AIR q17).  This is far from considering  it  a
    social stigma.   Indeed his uncle had advised him to be who  he  wanted
    and accepted him  for  what  he  was.   The  appellant  in  his  asylum
    interview claims that he is homosexual - not that he is bisexual, as he
    now claims, and in his interview stated he had never been with a  woman
    (AIR q27).  That said, the  judge  at  paragraph  18  to  21  made  the
    following findings:

         "18. In support of his overall claim in a letter  in  2014  he  had
             said that he had a girlfriend called Sahnella Harriott who was
             a UK citizen who he loved very much and that they  were  still
             together.  This was not consistent with his claim to have been
             a gay man.  Around about the same time there had also  been  a
             letter received from Miss Harriott claiming that the Appellant
             was her other half and that they wanted to be together so they
             could support each other in striving their goals.  Again  this
             letter was inconsistent with his claim to have been a gay  man
             who had never been in a relationship with a woman.

         19.  It was noted that she had also  written  a  second  letter  in
             which she says that he had come  out  to  her  as  homosexual.
             This is of  course  totally  inconsistent  with  the  previous
             information supplied by her.  There was some doubt as  to  the
             genuineness of the 2 letters bearing in mind their  dissimilar
             signatures.

         20.  Consideration had also been given to 2  letters  purported  to
             come from his grandmother Sheila Hinds.  In one prior  to  his
             asylum claim there was no  reference  to  his  sexuality  even
             though he claimed to have been aware of his sexuality from the
             age of 12 whilst in the other, coincidentally dated after  his
             asylum claim, she expressed the view that he was a closet  gay
             man and that she had been informed by his girlfriend they  had
             never engaged in sexual intercourse.  She also said  that  she
             had never seen him with a girlfriend which  again  is  totally
             inconsistent with the claim that he had been in a relationship
             with Miss Harriott.  There was also extensive mention  in  the
             grandmother's letter of a relationship between him and  a  man
             called Tom, this is a person who had never been named  by  the
             Appellant as being anyone  significant  in  his  relationship.
             Again there was some  doubt  as  to  the  genuineness  of  the
             letters bearing in mind that the  handwriting  was  completely
             different in both.

         21.  Finally there was a letter purporting to be from Danny Hughes,
             a person who he said he had no contact with  any  longer,  who
             had supplied a letter a  month  after  he  said  that  in  his
             interview and this casts doubt on  the  credibility  of  those
             letters.   The inconsistency of the grandmother talking  about
             Tom and him talking about  Danny  also  further  casts  doubt.
             Generally of these matters led the Respondent to believe  that
             he wasn't telling the truth about his sexuality and that  this
             was merely a last minute attempt to frustrate his removal."

14. The judge found his claim to be gay to be fundamentally  undermined  by
    the written statements and that was specifically noted.  As such ground
    (iii), that the judge made  perverse  findings  on  the  issue  of  the
    appellant being gay, is misconceived.  The judge noted at paragraph  17
    that the appellant first claimed to know he was gay when he was 12  but
    failed to make any declaration until January 2015 which  was  after  he
    had been served with a deportation order and after an emergency  travel
    documentation was agreed.  Specifically the judge noted that,  when  in
    November 2010, he was asked to provide reasons why  he  should  not  be
    deported, despite being aware of his sexuality at the time, he made  no
    mention of it.

15. Although the grounds maintain that there was social  stigma  inhibiting
    him, that cannot be the case as it was the appellant's  case  that  his
    grandmother knew and his girlfriend knew  and  yet  he  was  not  in  a
    position to claim that he was gay until January 2015.  There can be  no
    element of perversity in the judge's findings.   The  judge's  findings
    are clear, cogent and well made.

16. As the judge found at [25]

         'The appellant has been unable to explain why he has  waited  until
         the last  minute  before  making  his  claim.   He  has  had  ample
         opportunity to make this statement earlier.  He has, in  fact  made
         human rights claims and some representations about his  deportation
         before and never ever mentioned his sexuality. Indeed he has in the
         past claimed to have been in a  heterosexual  relationship  with  a
         woman who, at the time called him her 'other  half'  and  gave  the
         impression that they were in a relationship.   She  now  says  that
         they were not really and that she has been truthful.  She is wholly
         unreliable'.

    And further at [27]

         'The appellant's grandmother has  supposedly  provided  2  letters.
         Setting aside the issue of their authenticity, the contents of  the
         letter do nothing to support his claim.  She  describes  him  as  a
         'closet gay' clearly indicating that she suspects he is gay but  no
         more and goes on to describe his relationship  with  a  man  called
         Tom, someone the appellant has never mentioned.   No  only  do  the
         letters not support his claim they actually undermine it'.

17. The fact is that the judge found that the appellant had never mentioned
    his sexuality previously to 2015, and that would include whether he was
    homosexual or indeed bisexual. In his screening interview in June  2015
    he asserted he was gay, not bisexual, and a sworn statement by his then
    solicitor on file dated 17th February 2015 and  submitted  in  judicial
    review proceedings confirmed that the  appellant  claimed  in  February
    2015 that he was homosexual not that he  was  bisexual.   That  he  was
    bisexual was not how the claim  was  put  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.

18. With regard to ground (ii) it is not arguable that excessive weight was
    given to the appellant's criminal record as a child.  It is clear  that
    the appellant was convicted on 28 January 2014, as an adult at the  age
    of 19 years, of attempted robbery and  sentenced  to  two  and  a  half
    years' imprisonment which he did not appeal.  As a result there was  an
    automatic deportation order made against the  appellant  and  both  the
    Immigration Rules and the statutory context,  namely  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, Section 117C, make it clear  that  the
    deportation of a foreign criminal  is  in  the  public  interest.   The
    appellant was noted also to have an appalling criminal history  and  to
    be heavily involved in gang culture over the period whilst he has  been
    in the community and indeed in custody.  Specifically the  judge  noted
    that paragraph 398 of the  Immigration  Rules  states  that  where  the
    public interest requires deportation it can only be where there  is  an
    exception to that, that it can apply, and critically  the  judge  found
    that there was no exception to be applied in this case.  The  appellant
    showed no compelling circumstances.  Repeated caselaw has confirmed the
    weight  to  be  given  to  the  public  interest  in  relation  to  the
    deportation of foreign criminals.

19. The challenge, at (iv), to the findings of the judge on the grounds  of
    speculation as to whether the appellant  could  support  and  fend  for
    himself and return to Jamaica are without any merit.   It  is  for  the
    appellant to prove his case and he  had  ample  opportunity  to  submit
    written documentation and/or present himself at the hearing if he chose
    to do so.  He did not.  The judge took into account  all  the  relevant
    evidence and clearly made a decision that the appellant  was  a  young,
    healthy single adult male who would be able to  try  and  find  himself
    some work and support himself in Jamaica.

20. The judge gave a rounded assessment of the appellant's  ability  to  be
    able to reintegrate in Jamaica.  The appellant had had  ample  time  to
    submit  more  than  a  bald  assertion  that  he  would  be  unable  to
    reintegrate in Jamaica and the  judge  had  specifically  rejected  his
    claim to be homosexual and therefore at risk on return.  The  appellant
    had lived in Jamaica and it is an English speaking country with NGOs to
    support his integration as indicated by  the  judge,  and  it  was  not
    unreasonable to conclude the appellant would  be  able,  as  a  healthy
    adult to obtain work and support himself. That conclusion by the  judge
    cannot be attacked on the grounds of speculation. It was an  assessment
    which the judge was entitled to make.

21. Turning to ground (v), I will not repeat my observations above  on  the
    point of social stigma, save to note that  the  judge  gave  clear  and
    detailed reasons why he rejected the credibility of the  appellant  and
    the grounds seem to argue that because the appellant  was  involved  in
    gangs he was not able to reveal his sexuality.  That is clearly at odds
    with the evidence in relation his disclosure to his girlfriend  and  to
    advance that the judge should have taken into account  his  involvement
    with gangs as a reason,  in view of the evidence and the  other witness
    statements, is not realistic and without merit.

22. The documentary evidence and history  of  the  appellant  severely  and
    fundamentally undermined the appellant's claim and no material error of
    law has been established.

Notice of Decision

I find no error in the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Rowlands  and
the decision shall stand.


Signed

Helen Rimington
Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
