
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00540/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29th November 2019                |On 6th December 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

                                    'HC'
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The secretary of State for the Home department
                                                                  Respondent

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of  his  family.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the appellant:         Mr P Georget, Counsel, instructed by Polpitya &
Co Solicitors
For the respondent:        Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

These are the approved record of the decision and written reasons which
were given orally at the end of the hearing on 29 November 2019.

Introduction

This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge A J M Baldwin (the 'FtT'), promulgated on 14 June 2019, by
which he dismissed the appellant's appeal against the respondent's refusal
on 7 January 2019 of his protection and human rights claims.  The
respondent's decision had in turn refused the appellant's application for
leave to remain, on the basis that the respondent did not accept the
appellant was gay; or that he had suffered problems from members of his
family, two of whom were said to be high profile (his father was a local
Imam and his uncle worked for the Algerian presidency); or that he had been
blackmailed with a visual recording of having sex with another man; or that
he suffered problems with his family on account of being an atheist, in the
context of having a devout Muslim family.  In the alternative, the
respondent concluded that it would be reasonable to expect the appellant
relocate away from Algiers where his family lived.  For the same reasons,
the respondent rejected the appellant's claims by reference to articles 2
and 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights ('ECHR'), and also by
reference to article 8, on the basis that there was no family life in the
United Kingdom claimed and there would not be very significant obstacles to
his integration in Algeria, his country of origin.

The FtT's decision

While the FtT found that the appellant was gay, he was not impressed by
various aspects of the appellant's evidence, including that the appellant
had failed to claim to be gay during the asylum screening interview, and
that this had not been referred to for a further six months afterwards,
despite the appellant claiming to be willing to report matters to the
Algerian police in connection with the threat of blackmail against him.  In
that context, the FtT found that the appellant would be discrete about his
sexuality for reasons unconnected with threats of persecution, as he was
initially discrete in the UK.  The appellant's discretion was as a result
of personal choice rather than because of a well-founded fear of
persecution.  The FtT also did not regard as plausible the appellant's
claim to have gone to the Algerian police in relation to a recorded footage
of him in engaging in homosexual sex.  The FtT further concluded that the
appellant's father and uncle would not have the ability between them to
locate him throughout Algeria and noting the appellant's recent stays in
various locations, that he would be able to relocate in Algeria, without it
being unduly harsh.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

The appellant lodged grounds of appeal which are that the FtT had erred in
making the finding of fact that the appellant had failed to refer to his
sexuality until 6 months after the screening interview.  In fact, the day
after the FtT hearing, it came to light that the appellant's previous
solicitors had submitted a statement of additional grounds only 16 days
after the screening interview, which had been provided to the respondent
and which had not been included in the respondent's bundle, which expressly
referred to being gay.  This evidence was sent to the FtT prior to the FtT
reaching his decision on 14 June 2019.  This was relevant to the
appellant's credibility.  The grounds also assert that the FtT had failed
to consider adequately the hostile reaction of the appellant's family; or
how he could internally relocate, particularly if he were living as an
openly gay man.  The FtT had also failed to consider the fact that the
appellant was a model in Algeria, and so of high media profile, which might
be material to the assessment of risk and undue harshness of relocation.
The FtT had also made no finding on the appellant's lack of religious
belief and his family being strict Muslims.  Finally, it was said that the
FtT had failed to consider the appellant's relationship with his current
partner and whether it amounted to family life in the UK.

First-tier Tribunal Judge Landes granted permission on 14 October 2019.
She regarded it as arguable that the FtT had erred in finding when the
appellant had first stated that he was gay to the respondent; this was
arguably material as it went to the appellant's credibility.  This also in
turn impacted on the finding as to whether the appellant would be discrete
out of choice, as opposed to fear, which in turn impacted on the viability
of internal relocation.  She also regarded as arguable the FtT had failed
to consider the appellant's high-profile status as a result of having been
a model, and the appellant's relationship with his partner.  Whilst she
regarded the criticisms of the FtT's assessment of the risk from the
appellant's family as having less merit, she did not limit the scope of her
grant of permission.

The hearing before me

The appellant's submissions

Mr Georget, on behalf of the appellant, argued that at [28], the FtT had
referred to the appellant's failure to refer to his sexuality for six
months after the screening interview; and it was now no longer disputed
that the appellant had revealed that he was gay, to the respondent, far
earlier.  The factual error ran as a thread throughout the evidence and it
was not possible to unpick the adverse findings on credibility from that
error.  In expanding on the submission, at [28], the FtT noted that to have
failed to record his claim to be gay at the interview would amount to a
very serious failure on the part of the interpreter and on the part of the
appellant's solicitor.  The FtT recorded that the appellant's assertion
that he had mentioned that he was gay had not been put to his former
representatives, to allow them to comment, which would be a significant
failure in the sequence of the events 'if the appellant is to be believed'.
 The FtT continued:

"I simply do not believe the appellant in his assertions about this and
this is unhelpful to his credibility for two reasons.  Firstly, it
represents a significant [my emphasis] omission in setting out the core of
his claim at screening and, secondly, it indicated the appellant is
prepared to try and mislead, as other aspects of his evidence also make
clear.  He also invited me to consider that in a country where
homosexuality is widely condemned and where its practice is a criminal
offence, he went on to the local police station to enlist their support in
trying to stop his partner using a DVD of him having sex with another man.
This, I find, makes no sense at all, even if he were friends with some of
them."

Mr Georget submitted that the adverse finding on credibility then impacted
on the FtT's consideration of the viability of internal relocation, as his
assertions regarding the high-profile status of his relatives and his own
social media profile were also damaged.  The FtT's consideration of
internal relocation had been brief (at [29]) and inadequately reasoned,
noting that the evidence before the FtT, in particular the paragraph 2.53
of the Country Policy and Information Note or 'CPIN' at page [66] of the
appellant's bundle had regarded the question of internal relocation as a
complex one, requiring detailed assessment.

Mr Georget also submitted that consideration of the appellant's family life
was brief and inadequate, at [30] of the Decision.

The respondent's submissions

In response, Mr Melvin asked me to consider, by reference to the Rule 24
response, that the evidence pointed to the appellant being openly gay in
Algeria; having friends who are gay people in Algeria, and so the impact on
the one issue which focussed on the Upper Tribunal permission about when he
had disclosed that he was gay in the UK, did not infect the overall
credibility findings.  This was in particular in the context of his
inability to provide any evidence about his father, an Imam being a high-
ranking official, noting that he was still in dialogue with female
relatives, and if he had been openly gay in Algeria, he had not suggested
that he had been persecuted by state authorities.  The issue of being a
model had not been substantively raised and whilst atheism had been dealt
with in the original refusal decision, it was not raised in the grounds of
appeal to the FtT or identified as an issue by the FtT as the basis of an
appeal.

Discussion and Conclusions

The FtT had made a finding that the appellant had not disclosed to the
respondent that he was gay until 6 months after the screening interview,
when the evidence available to the FtT before he reached his decision was
clear that the appellant had disclosed this no later than 16 days after his
screening interview, when his former solicitors provided a statement of
additional evidence.  While I accept that there will be cases where an
appellant's credibility in one regard will not impact on findings in
relation to other disputed issues, it was clear in my view, not least
because of the passage already outlined by Mr Georget, that the FtT's
perception of the appellant's failure to disclose that he was gay to the
respondent for some 6 months after the screening interview did
significantly impact on the FtT's assessment of the appellant's
credibility. The FtT regarded it as going to the core of his explanation of
his claim during the screening interview and it also suggested, in the
FtT's view, that the appellant was prepared to try and mislead him.  The
FtT went on to link this to the appellant's allegation about the
circulation of a DVD involving the appellant.  I also accept that the
appellant's credibility was directly relevant to the profile of the
appellant's father and uncle; which would then necessarily in turn impact
on his ability to relocate internally, away from Algiers, where his family
had lived.

Whilst the appellant's family life and his claimed fear of persecution on
the basis of being atheist may not have featured largely in the appeal,
nevertheless the FtT's decision did contain an error of law at its heart,
in the FtT's assessment of the appellant's credibility, which is key to the
protection claim.  The FtT's decision is therefore unsafe and must be set
aside.

With reference to paragraph 7.2 of the Practice Direction and the necessary
fact-finding, this is a case that has to be remitted to the First-tier
Tribunal for a rehearing.  In doing so, I expressly preserve the FtT's
finding that the appellant is gay as claimed, but without preservation of
any other findings.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law  and
I set it aside.

I remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a rehearing.

Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  rehearing,  with
the preserved finding that the appellant is gay.

The remitted appeal shall not be heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge  A  J  M
Baldwin.

The anonymity directions continue to apply.



Signed J Keith                  Date:  4 December 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith



