

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                Appeal
Number: PA/00152/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 22 November 2017                           |On 19 December 2017          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY

                                   Between

                                   MS M N
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Bandegani
For the Respondent:    Mr Nath


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Kenya born in 1963.  She appeals against
      a decision of the respondent made on 20 December 2016  to  refuse  her
      claim for asylum.

   2. The basis of her claim is that she was a former member of the  Mungiki
      sect who defected after she had been tortured and subjected to  female
      genital mutilation ('FGM').  If returned she would  face  mistreatment
      by the Mungiki and gender based violence as a lone woman.


   3. The respondent accepted that the appellant had been subjected  to  FGM
      but not that this was carried out by  the  Mungiki  or  that  she  was
      tortured by them.


    4. She appealed.


            First tier hearing


   5. Following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 9 June 2017 Judge of the First-
      Tier  NMK  Lawrence  dismissed  the  appeal  on  asylum,  humanitarian
      protection and human rights grounds.


   6. The appellant did not give evidence.  The appeal was determined on the
      basis of oral submissions and several bundles lodged on behalf of  the
      appellant.


   7. Having noted that the starting point was a previous determination made
      in 2014, his findings are at paragraph [15]ff.  In summary, the  judge
      noted several differences in her written accounts and those  given  to
      various psychiatrists  and  psychologists  who  submitted  reports  in
      respect of her claim to  have  been  raped,  tortured  and  forced  to
      undergo FGM.


   8. The judge noted the opinion of a doctor that such  discrepancies  were
      the result of the 'significant dissociative disorder' brought about by
      the trauma she suffered during the circumcision ceremony.   The  judge
      rejected that opinion for the reasons he gave at [24].


   9. He then (at [26]) went on to reject  the  psychological  problems  the
      appellant claims to suffer because 'the accounts  she  gives  are  not
      independently verifiable'.  He added '[T]here  is  nothing  preventing
      the appellant from complaining of  symptoms  which  are  self-serving.
      Psychologists and psychiatrists do not have the task  of  scrutinising
      the accounts given by the "patients" in the same  way  as  a  decision
      maker in the IAC has to'.


  10. The judge concluded in respect of the asylum claim  that  her  account
      was a fabrication. If she was the victim of FGM  it  was  not  in  the
      manner claimed [27].


  11. He then went on to  consider  and  dismiss  the  claim  on  Article  8
      grounds.


  12. The appellant sought permission to appeal which was refused;  however,
      on reapplication to the Upper Tribunal permission was  granted  on  15
      September 2017.


      Error of law hearing


  13. At the error of law hearing before me Mr Bandegani made three  points.
      First, the judge did not determine the claim in  the  context  of  the
      country information that was before him.  Second,  the  appellant  has
      been subject to FGM and, as such, is a vulnerable adult.  However, the
      judge failed to consider or apply  the  'Joint  Presidential  Guidance
      Note (No 2) of 2010: Child, vulnerable adult and  sensitive  appellant
      guidance'.  Third, the judge's dismissal of the  psychiatric  evidence
      as being of no value because it was based on what the  appellant  told
      the doctors was not the correct approach to  the  assessment  of  such
      evidence.


  14. Mr Nath's response was simply to rely on the rule  24  reply,  namely,
      that the judge directed himself appropriately, and made findings which
      were open to him on the evidence looked at  in  the  round.   Further,
      although no reference had been made to the presidential  guidance,  he
      had, as the rule 24 reply put it, 'dealt head on with the issue of the
      appellant being a vulnerable witness'.


      Consideration


  15. I considered that the decision showed material error of law.   On  the
      first ground, as Mr Bandegani  noted,  the  judge  made  no  reference
      whatsoever to the considerable background material  which  was  before
      him (appellant's bundle - Section D - pages 271-395).   Such  included
      an expert country report by Professor  Nasong'o,  a  country  guidance
      case and several background reports.


  16. Credibility findings can only  really  be  made  on  the  basis  of  a
      complete understanding of the entire picture placing a claim into  the
      context of the background information regarding the country of origin.
       In failing to engage with the background  material  as  part  of  the
      credibility assessment the judge erred.


  17. On the second  issue  as  indicated  it  was  not  disputed  that  the
      appellant has been subjected to FGM (refusal letter para 32)  although
      it is not accepted that such was at the hands of the Mungiki.  It  was
      also accepted that she has been diagnosed as  displaying  symptoms  of
      PTSD (para 32).  As such in terms of the Joint  Presidential  Guidance
      Note she is a 'vulnerable adult'.  Unfortunately, (and contrary to the
      assertion in the rule  24  notice)  there  is  no  indication  in  the
      decision that the judge was alert to  that  matter  and  the  possible
      consequences in  respect  of  the  carrying  out  of  the  credibility
      assessment (see para [13]-[15] of the Guidance) and AM (Afghanistan) v
      SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1123 (particularly at [30]).   I  find  that  the
      judge's failure to follow the guidance was also a  material  error  of
      law.


  18. Finally, on the issue of the assessment  of  psychiatric/psychological
      evidence, the judge's  dismissal  of  these  because  the  appellant's
      claimed  problems  are  based  on  the  account  she   gave   to   the
      professionals and  are  not  independently  verifiable,  was  not  the
      correct approach.  Whilst the overall assessment of credibility is for
      the  Tribunal,  such  reports   may   involve   assessments   of   the
      compatibility of  the  appellant's  account  with  physical  marks  or
      symptoms, or mental condition (see  JL  (medical  reports-credibility)
      China [2013] UKUT 145). Even where medical experts rely heavily on the
      account given by the person concerned that does not mean their reports
      lack or lose their status as  independent  evidence  although  it  may
      reduce very considerably the weight that  can  be  attached  to  them.
      There were several psychiatric/psychological reports before the judge.
      The professionals engaged in the appeal state that their opinions  are
      based  not  just  on  what  the  appellant  told  them  but  on  their
      qualifications, experience,  expertise,  observations  and  diagnostic
      assessment tools (see e.g. Dr Walsh's report  (21  December  2015)  at
      para [70]).


  19. In failing to give adequate consideration  to  material  evidence  the
      judge further erred.



Notice of Decision

  20. The making of the decision of the  First-Tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.   The  decision  is  set  aside.
      None of the findings are to stand.

  21. The appeal is remitted to the First-Tier Tribunal  to  be  dealt  with
      afresh, pursuant to section 12(2)(b)(i) of the  Tribunals  Courts  and
      Enforcement Act 2017 and Practice Statement 7.2 before any judge apart
      from Judge NMK Lawrence.


Anonymity

 The First tier Tribunal did not make an  anonymity  order.  As  the  asylum
appeal is to be reheard I will make such an order to preserve the  positions
of the parties until the appeal is decided.  Unless  or  until  a  court  or
tribunal directs otherwise, no report of these  proceedings  shall  directly
or indirectly identify the appellant or  any  member  of  her  family.  This
order applies to the appellant and to  the  respondent.  Failure  to  comply
with this order may lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                             Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway

