
                                    [pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00120/2020 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype for business          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 13 January 2021               |On 27 January 2021                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     A I
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C. Holmes, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
appellant
For the Respondent:    Ms R. Pettersen, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction:


      1. The appellant, a citizen of Iraq, appeals with  permission  against
         the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Rose)  (hereinafter
         referred to as the "FtTJ") who dismissed his protection  and  human
         rights appeal in a decision promulgated on the 28 February 2020.


      2. I make a  direction  regarding  anonymity  under  Rule  14  of  the
         Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal  Rules)  Rules  2008  as  the
         proceedings relate to the  circumstances  of  a  protection  claim.
         Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise  the
         appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him. This  direction  applies
         both to the appellant and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
         with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Background:

      3. The basis of the appellant's claim is set out  in  the  papers  and
         also  summarised  succinctly  in   the  decision  of  the  FtTJ  at
         paragraph 2.

      4. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq. The basis of his claim was that
         he had a well-founded fear of persecution in Iraq on the  basis  of
         his membership  of  a  particular  social  group  (a  victim  or  a
         potential  victim  of  an  honour  crime  having   had   a   sexual
         relationship with K, the wife of a high-ranking member of the PUK).

      5. The appellant was born in a village in Tuz  -Khurmatu  in  Salah-al
         Din and lived there with members of his family until October 2017.

      6. The appellant and his family members left the area due to ISIS  and
         went to live in X in Kurdistan (in the area of Sulaymaniyah)  where
         the appellant had a paternal uncle.

      7. Whilst there the appellant claims that he began a relationship with
         K who was the wife of a high-ranking member of the PUK. They  began
         their  relationship  having  met  on  Facebook  in  July  2018  and
         thereafter had a sexual relationship. The  appellant  claimed  that
         she would collect him in her car from his place of  work  and  they
         would meet in an orchard owned by her husband.

      8. It is said that they were in regular  contact  from  25  July  2018
         until two days before he left Iraq on 1 September  2018.  They  met
         approximately 7 to 8 times face-to-face.

      9. It is claimed that K's husband found out about the affair  and  the
         appellant was informed by K that he should leave Iraq  because  her
         husband had threatened to kill him.

     10. The appellant left Iraq on 1  September  2018  and  entered  Turkey
         illegally where he stayed for approximately three weeks leaving  on
         24 September 2018. He travelled by lorry and boat  and  arrived  in
         Italy where he was fingerprinted on  28  September  2018  and  then
         travelled to France.

     11. The appellant claimed asylum on 22 November 2018.

     12. In a decision letter dated 20 December 2019 the respondent  refused
         his protection and human rights claim. The decision letter accepted
         that he was a national of Iraq and was of Kurdish ethnicity but for
         the reasons set out at paragraphs 31 - 49, the respondent  rejected
         his account that he been involved in a sexual relationship  with  K
         or that he had been the subject of any threats made by her husband.
         The decision letter set out a number  of  issues  relating  to  the
         appellant's credibility and the inconsistency  of  his  claim.  The
         respondent considered his return to Iraq and  that  his  claim  was
         that he feared a return to Kurdistan. For the reasons  set  out  at
         paragraphs 56 - 87 the respondent considered that he would be  able
         to return to Iraq and obtain the relevant documentation in order to
         return to his  home  area  or  in  the  alternative  to  internally
         relocate to another area in Iraq.

     13. The appellant appealed that decision, and it came before the FtT on
         12 February 2020.

     14. In a  decision  promulgated  on  the  28  February  2020  the  FtTJ
         dismissed his appeal. The FtTJ did not find that the appellant  had
         given a credible account for the reasons set out at paragraphs 16 -
         20 and at paragraphs 22  -  23  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
         appellant by engaging the Red Cross could obtain documents from his
         family to enable him to return.

     15. Permission to appeal was sought on  behalf  of  the  appellant  and
         permission was granted by FtTJ Boyes  on 28 April 2020 on grounds 2
         and 3 and upon renewal, UTJ Jackson granted permission on ground 1.

The Hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

     16.  In the light of the present need to take precautions  against  the
         spread of Covid-19, and the overriding objective expressed  in  the
         Procedure Rules, directions were sent out to the parties  that  the
         provisional  view  was that it would be  appropriate  to  determine
         whether the decision involved the making of an error on a point  of
         law without a hearing. Following further directions the appeal  was
         listed as a remote hearing.

     17. The hearing took place on 13 January 2021, by means  of  Skype  for
         Business. which has been consented to and not objected  to  by  the
         parties. A face-to-face hearing was not held  because  it  was  not
         practicable, and both parties  agreed  that  all  issues  could  be
         determined in a remote hearing. Therefore, the Tribunal listed  the
         hearing to enable oral submissions to  be  given  by  each  of  the
         parties.

     18. The advocates attended remotely. There  were  no  issues  regarding
         sound, and  no  substantial  technical  problems  were  encountered
         during the hearing and I am satisfied both advocates were  able  to
         make their respective cases by the chosen means.

     19. Mr Holmes, on behalf of  the  appellant  relied  upon  the  written
         grounds of appeal. There  were  also  further  written  submissions
         dated 17 December 2020. There was  a  rule  24  response  dated  14
         September 2020.

     20. I also heard oral submission from the advocates, and I am  grateful
         for their assistance and their clear oral submissions.




    Decision on error of law:

     21. It  was accepted on behalf of the respondent by Ms Pettersen at the
         hearing that the  grounds  advanced  on  behalf  of  the  appellant
         demonstrate the making of an error on a point of law  and  that  as
         the grounds challenge the adequacy of reasoning in relation to  the
         events that the appellant claimed to have occurred in Iraq and also
         when dealing with the issue of documentation and  return  to  Iraq,
         that the decision should be set aside and remitted to the FtT for a
         rehearing afresh.

     22. In view of  the  agreement  reached  by  the  parties  it  is  only
         necessary for me to set out in brief terms why I  agree  with  that
         approach and why the decision of the FtTJ discloses the  making  of
         an error on a point of law.

     23. The grounds settled by Mr Holmes, who was Counsel before  the  FtT,
         challenge the adequacy of reasons given by the FtTJ  for  rejecting
         the appellant's account and  within  that  challenge  asserts  that
         there was a mistake  of  fact  underpinning  paragraph  20  of  the
         judge's decision.

     24. Dealing with the mistake of fact, the grounds refer to the decision
         at paragraph 20. It reads as follows:

         "I also found the appellant to be evasive in how he  answered  some
         of the questions put to him by the presenting officer, particularly
         about how he was informed that his life was at risk. Given that, on
         his account, he was picked up  from  work,  informed  of  what  had
         happened and then had to hide before leaving  Iraq,  I  would  have
         expected him to be able to say what happened on  his  last  day  at
         work, but he was unable to."

     25.  It is submitted on behalf of the appellant that it did not  appear
         from  Counsel's  record  of  proceedings  that  the  appellant  was
         questioned on either how he was informed that his life was at  risk
         or about what had happened on his last day at work.

     26. It is plain from reading the grant of permission that the  Tribunal
         file did not contain a record of proceedings. That being  the  case
         Counsel has provided his typed and contemporaneous  record  of  the
         questions asked and the evidence given and also there is  a  short,
         typed copy of an extract entitled "cross-examination" was  sent  on
         behalf of the respondent on 14 September 2020.

     27. I have had the opportunity of reading both of those documents. When
         looking at the typed record produced  by  Mr  Holmes  there  was  a
         reference to the last day of work and the appellant not being  able
         to remember the exact date. In the  extract  from  the  respondent,
         which is a much shorter extract, there is reference  to  "last  day
         left work last time you attended work? The reply was "in month 813,
         14, 15". The next question appears to  be  "before  or  after  last
         conversation with girlfriend? Reply recorded "I have done that with
         you, my girlfriend and I left.".

     28. As can be seen from those two extracts, it is entirely unclear what
         evidence the FtTJ was  referring  to  in  his  factual  finding  at
         paragraph 20. It is also wholly unclear in my judgement as  to  why
         the FtTJ found the appellant  to  be  "evasive".  As  Ms  Pettersen
         observed it is usual when making such a  finding  to  set  out  the
         questions  that  were  posed  alongside  the   answers   given   to
         demonstrate why that evidence was not credible  or  believable.  As
         the grounds set out, it is not possible to discern  from  paragraph
         20 why the judge disbelieved the appellant and in  particular  what
         questions the judge had in mind at paragraph 20 of his decision and
         secondly, which  of  the  appellant's  responses  was  said  to  be
         "evasive". I agree with that submission and  I  am  satisfied  that
         there is no  particularisation  of  the  evidence  to  support  the
         findings made at paragraph 20.

     29. The advocates agree that paragraph 20 provides no understanding  of
         the evidence or why the judge had reached the  conclusion  that  he
         had been "evasive"  concerning  two  particular  areas-how  he  was
         informed that his life was at risk or what happened on the last day
         at work. In my view this was not a mistake of fact as  set  out  in
         the grounds but is more properly characterised as  the  failure  to
         give reasons by reference to the evidence to support the assessment
         made.

     30. Dealing with the other grounds, it is  accepted  by  the  advocates
         that the FtTJ failed to give adequate  reasons  for  rejecting  the
         appellant's core account as to the events that  occurred  in  Iraq.
         Beyond the finding at paragraph 20 as set out above, the judge  set
         out his factual findings at paragraphs 16- 19. At paragraphs  16  -
         18 the judge found that the appellant had been inconsistent in  his
         account as to why he left Iraq given the evidence in his  screening
         interview and his later account. As Ms Pettersen accepted  even  if
         that were a finding open to the judge to make, there were no  other
         findings made beyond that expressed at paragraph 19 where the judge
         found the appellant's account of  being  collected  by  K  was  not
         credible because it would put the appellant at risk.  She  accepted
         that the findings were inadequate as the grounds submitted and that
         the FtTJ did not engage with the core aspects  of  the  appellant's
         account and give adequate reasons as  to  why  he  disbelieved  the
         account given.

     31. As to the final ground, Mr Holmes  submitted  that  the  judge  had
         failed to apply the country guidance decisions when considering the
         issues of return and the documentation. As can  be  seen  from  the
         decision the FtTJ addressed this in a short paragraph at [23] where
         the judge appeared to suggest that as the appellant's family was in
         Iran they could  assist  in  obtaining  replacement  documentation.
         However, no factual findings were made by the FtTJ as to where  the
         appellant originated from and his "home area" nor did he  make  any
         factual findings as to the circumstances in which  the  appellant's
         family were said  to  have  left  Iraq  nor  whether  in  fact  the
         appellant was in contact with his family  members  or  whether  the
         judge had rejected his account of  not  being  in  touch  with  his
         family members. Furthermore as Mr Holmes sets out in  his  grounds,
         the judge made no factual findings as to how it  was  said  in  the
         light of the country guidance how the appellant would  be  able  to
         redocument himself.

     32. The obligation on a Tribunal  is  to  give  reasons  in  sufficient
         detail to show the principles on which the Tribunal has  acted  and
         the reasons that have led to the  decision.  When  looking  at  the
         decision reached on this particular appeal,  both  advocates  agree
         that there was inadequacy of reasoning for the reasons set  out  in
         the grounds. This  is  a  protection  claim  and  required  anxious
         scrutiny and therefore as  a  result  of  the  error  of  law,  the
         decision cannot stand.


     33. Consequently, I am satisfied that it has been demonstrated that the
         decision of the FtTJ did involve the making of an error on a point
         of law and that the decision should be set aside.

     34. I have therefore considered whether it  should  be  remade  in  the
         Upper Tribunal or remitted to the FtT for  a  further  hearing.  In
         reaching that decision I have given careful  consideration  to  the
         Joint Practice Statement  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  Upper
         Tribunal concerning the disposal of appeals in this Tribunal.

              "[7.2]  The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to
             proceed to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case
             to the First-tier Tribunal, unless the Upper Tribunal is
             satisfied that:-


                  (a)  the effect of the error has been to deprive a party
                  before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other
                  opportunity for that party's case to be put to and
                  considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

                  (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding
                  which is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal
                  to be re-made is such that, having regard to the
                  overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit
                  the case to the First-tier Tribunal."

     35. Both advocates submit that the venue for hearing the appeal should
         be the FtT. I have considered their submissions in the light of the
         practice statement recited above. As it  will be necessary for the
         appellant  to give evidence and  to deal with the evidential
         issues, further fact-finding will be necessary alongside the
         analysis of risk on return in the light of the relevant  evidence,
         and in my judgement the best course and consistent with the
         overriding objective is for it to be remitted to the FtT for a
         further hearing.

     36. For those reasons, I am satisfied that  it  has  been  demonstrated
         that the decision of the FtTJ did involve the making of an error on
         a point of law and that  the  decision  should  be  set  aside  and
         remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of  an  error
on a point of law and therefore the decision of the FtT shall be set  aside.
 It will be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
Dated 14 January 2021


                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days if  the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

3. Where the person  making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5  working  days
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days if  the  notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.

6. The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing  on  the  covering
letter or covering email

