

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00915/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|on 15th March 2019                    |On 1st April 2019              |
|                                      |                               |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                                     HM
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr A Caskie, Advocate, instructed by Livingstone
Brown, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This appeal is against a decision by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
      Debra Clapham dismissing an appeal on protection and human rights
      grounds.  Permission to appeal was granted by the First-tier Tribunal.

   2. The appellant is a national of Egypt.  He claims to be at risk there
      on grounds relating to religion or political opinion.  His evidence is
      that he is a member of the Muslim Brotherhood and has been detained on
      one occasion by the Egyptian authorities.

   3. For the purpose of the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal a medical
      report was obtained from a consultant psychiatrist.  At his
      examination the appellant described to the psychiatrist "a number of
      complex beliefs of a historical, mythological nature that could well
      be delusional".  The psychiatrist expressed a strong suspicion that
      the appellant suffers from a mental disorder.  This was "likely to be
      a psychotic illness with or without a trauma-related diagnosis as
      well.  The psychiatrist, however, acknowledged that he had limited
      information, having examined the appellant only once and having no
      paperwork relating to the "asylum review".

   4. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal heard the appellant give evidence
      at some length about his beliefs, which are described in the
      application for permission to appeal as "atypical".  In the judge's
      findings, at paragraph 105, she stated that the medical report showed
      "no diagnosis of any mental illness."

   5. Permission to appeal was sought on four main grounds.  The first of
      these was that the judge erred by not treating the appellant as a
      vulnerable witness and following the Joint Presidential Guidance Note
      No 2 of 2010 on children and vulnerable adults.  It was not necessary
      to have a medical diagnosis before treating the appellant as a
      vulnerable witness.  Had the judge followed this guidance some of the
      perceived inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence might have been
      explained.

   6. The second ground was that the judge failed to have proper regard to
      the psychiatric evidence.  Although there was no diagnosis of a mental
      health disorder the judge should have had regard to the content of the
      report in making a holistic assessment of credibility.

   7. Thirdly it is contended that the judge made no finding as to any
      religious faith held by the appellant and, in particular, whether his
      atypical beliefs were genuine and whether because of them the
      appellant might be treated as an apostate.  Fourthly, although the
      judge heard evidence from the appellant's wife, it is contended that
      the judge made no credibility finding in respect of her evidence.
      This was said to be a material error because her evidence was that the
      appellant actively sought to "spread" his beliefs to others.

   8. At the hearing before me there was a lengthy discussion of the
      significance of the psychiatric report for the hearing before the
      First-tier Tribunal.  Mr Caskie submitted that the strong suspicion of
      mental disorder should have alerted the judge to treat the appellant
      as a vulnerable person.  By not doing so the hearing was rendered
      unfair.  The judge did not make findings on whether the appellant's
      atypical beliefs were genuine and whether he would broadcast these in
      Egypt, which in her evidence the appellant's wife said he would.  The
      appeal required to be reheard at a fair hearing where proper
      consideration would be given to the appellant's vulnerability.

   9. Mr Govan submitted that the judge was clearly aware of the terms of
      the psychiatric report, which was based on very limited information.
      In this regard Mr Govan referred to JL (medical reports credibility)
      [2013] UKUT 145.  Mr Govan submitted that at paragraphs 105-109 the
      judge made findings on the appellant's beliefs and about his behaviour
      when he had been in Egypt.  If the evidence was such that the judge
      could not draw conclusions about the appellant's beliefs she was
      entitled to say so.  The judge looked at the evidence both of the
      appellant and of his wife and there was no material error in not
      making a distinct finding as to the credibility of the appellant's
      wife's evidence.  This was addressed at paragraphs 107 and 112 of the
      decision.

  10. I informed the parties that I would reserve my decision on the issue
      of whether the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal erred in law.

Discussion
  11. I will begin my consideration by stating that even if the Judge of the
      First-tier Tribunal erred by not expressly treating the appellant as a
      vulnerable person, I do not consider there was any unfairness in the
      conduct of the hearing.  The judge allowed the appellant to give his
      evidence and explain his beliefs at some length.  As Mr Caskie
      submitted, where the alleged vulnerability of the appellant would have
      been more relevant would have been in the assessment of his evidence
      and, in particular, in having full regard to any supporting evidence.

  12. It was Mr Govan's submission that the evidence was such that the judge
      was unable to make findings on some issues.  For example, at paragraph
      106 the judge said she was unable to ascertain what the appellant
      believed, although she noted he maintained he is a Muslim.  At
      paragraph 113 she expressed doubts about whether the appellant was a
      member of the Muslim Brotherhood or of the Justice Party.  Although
      the judge expressed her uncertainty about these matters, in doing so I
      am not satisfied that she had regard to all the evidence which was
      available to her.

  13. In addition, at paragraph 106 the judge questioned whether the
      appellant "will actually be taken seriously if indeed he holds these
      beliefs".  This is not the question the judge should have been
      addressing.  Instead she should have asked whether the appellant would
      face a real risk of persecution or serious harm in Egypt because of
      his beliefs if these were genuinely held and publicly professed.

  14. Of, course, it was important to consider how the appellant would
      behave in Egypt.  At paragraph 107 the judge referred to the appellant
      when he was studying in the UK having been warned by his father not to
      return to Egypt.  The appellant returned anyway and married and
      obtained employment.  The judge seems to have referred to this as
      indicating an inconsistency in the appellant's evidence rather than
      relying upon it as showing the appellant would be able to live safely
      in Egypt.  It casts very little light about what might happen to the
      appellant in future were he to return to Egypt and indeed it seems the
      judge did not intend to rely on this evidence for this purpose.  It
      again illustrates though the extent to which the judge based her
      decision upon the appellant's evidence without giving adequate
      consideration to the evidence of his wife, to the details of the
      psychiatric report, and to the country information.

  15. If the judge did not consider the appellant's evidence to be reliable
      it was all the more important for her to look at other evidence which
      might cast light upon the issues before her.  I refer here principally
      to the evidence of the appellant's wife and the psychiatric report as
      well as any country information which was before her.  It was not
      enough for the judge to conclude that she could not make findings on
      certain issues when she failed to have regard to all the evidence
      before her.

  16. For example, at paragraph 82 of the decision the judge recorded the
      appellant's wife's evidence that he was a member of the Muslim
      Brotherhood and, at paragraph 78, that he was in danger from the
      Muslim Brotherhood because he had left the party.  The judge recorded
      at paragraph 76 his wife's evidence that the appellant was "arguing"
      until he left Egypt.  He would go out and express his beliefs.
      Although he did not mean to, he was putting his wife's and children's
      lives at stake by doing this.  At paragraph 8 of the psychiatric
      report the appellant is recorded as saying he could not keep the
      information originating from his beliefs to himself.  In her findings
      the judge either ignores this evidence or dismisses it cursorily
      without adequate reasoning.

  17. I consider that the judge erred in her analysis of the issues she had
      to decide and in her failure to make properly supported findings based
      upon all the evidence before her.  In particular, in considering
      whether the appellant's beliefs were genuinely held and would be
      publicly professed, the judge failed to have proper regard to the
      appellant's wife's evidence and to the details of the psychiatric
      report.  The judge did not take into account the appellant's wife's
      evidence on the appellant's alleged membership of the Muslim
      Brotherhood.  The judge did not make an adequately reasoned finding on
      the credibility of the appellant's wife's evidence.  Given the unusual
      nature of this appeal and the apparent difficulty in relying upon the
      appellant's own evidence, all these errors are material.

  18. Because of the errors set out in the preceding paragraph the findings
      made by the judge are unsafe and cannot be relied upon.  The proper
      course is for the appeal to be reheard.  In view of the degree of fact-
      finding required it is appropriate to remit the appeal to the First-
      tier Tribunal, in terms of paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statement.
       The appeal is remitted to be reheard before a differently constituted
      tribunal with no findings preserved.


Conclusions

  19. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the
      making of an error on a point of law.

  20. The decision is set aside.

  21. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be reheard before
      a differently constituted tribunal with no findings preserved.



Anonymity
The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not make a direction for
anonymity.  In order to preserve the positions of the parties until the
appeal is finally decided, I make a direction in the following terms.
Unless or until a court or tribunal directs otherwise no report of these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant or any
member of his family.  This direction applies to the appellant and the
respondent.  Any failure to comply with this direction may give rise to
contempt of court proceedings.




M E Deans
                                 27th March 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
