
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00865/2019
                                                               PA/00867/2019
                                                               PA/00869/2019
                                                               PA/00871/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 22 July 2019                      |On 26 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                                     MM
                                     HM
                                     HK
                                     UK
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms A Childs, instructed by Rashid & Rashid
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269), I make an anonymity  direction.  Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the appellant or any member of her family.

 2. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Behan promulgated 21.5.19, dismissing her appeal against
    the decision of the Secretary of State, dated 14.1.19,  to  refuse  her
    protection and human rights claim, with husband  and  two  children  as
    dependents.

 3. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Parkes  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    17.6.19. Thus the matter came  before  me  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  on
    22.7.19

Error of Law

 4. In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such as to require it to be set aside. It is not sufficient that  there
    be an  identifiable  error  of  law,  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  can
    intervene the alleged error must material to the outcome of the appeal.

 5. Judge Behan entirely rejected the  factual  basis  of  the  appellant's
    claim. The claim was to the effect that she had been abducted and raped
    and, when this resulted in pregnancy, terminated  it  with  an  illegal
    abortion. The judge neither accepted she was in fear  of  the  man  who
    allegedly raped and later allegedly threatened her, nor  that  she  had
    any well-founded fear of persecution or was at any real risk of serious
    harm, or prosecution or other mistreatment by the authorities or  other
    non-state actors in Pakistan for having had an illegal abortion.

 6. It is relevant to note, as Ms  Childs  conceded,  the  grounds  do  not
    challenge any of the above or indeed any factual findings of the First-
    tier Tribunal and thus those findings must stand as made.  Nevertheless
    she attempted to suggest that there had been no  findings  against  the
    appellant that she had had an illegal termination of pregnancy and thus
    that this was relevant to the circumstances on return. I do not  accept
    such a conclusion can be read into the decision. It  follows  that  the
    appellant and her family members will be returned to  Pakistan  on  the
    basis that her factual claim has been  rejected  in  its  entirety.  Ms
    Childs also relied on the acceptance by the judge  that  the  appellant
    suffered  from  mental  health  challenges.   However,   I   note   the
    unchallenged finding that depression and anxiety arose from  events  in
    the UK and that there was no risk of suicide. There is  ample  evidence
    that appropriate treatment for mental health  issues  is  available  in
    Pakistan.

 7. The sole ground of appeal is that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  failed
    to consider the private and family life rights of the appellant and her
    family outside the Rules, pursuant to article 8 ECHR. It  is  correctly
    pleaded out that the decision makes no direct reference  to  article  8
    and it is pleaded that this is a material error of law.

 8. Mr Tufan accepted there  was  no  specific  article  8  assessment  but
    pointed to the best interests considerations at [55]  of  the  decision
    and that the matters referred to at [56] were relevant to the article 8
    claim.

 9. Judge Parkes granted permission to appeal on  the  basis  that  it  was
    arguable that the judge erred in not considering article 8  or  section
    117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.  However,  I
    find that the the grounds are generic, focusing on the  absence  of  an
    article 8 assessment, and fail to identify in  what  specific  way  the
    appeal could or should have been allowed on human rights  grounds  when
    the entire factual basis of the claim had been rejected.

10. Having previously visited the UK on a visit visa in 2012, the appellant
    returned, entering from Ireland, and claimed asylum  in  January  2015.
    She failed to attend for interview and absconded, as a result of  which
    her claim was deemed to have been withdrawn in February  2016.  Further
    submission were then lodged in  May  2017,  resulting  in  the  refusal
    decision (RFR) of 14.1.19.

11. The appellant claims a family life in the UK with her partner  and  two
    children. Clearly, she has a poor immigration history. Neither she  nor
    any member of her family has any lawful immigration status in  the  UK;
    they are all nationals of  Pakistan.  It  is  clear  that  neither  the
    appellant nor any member of her family could meet the  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules with respect to private and/or family life  under
    Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE and it was not contended before  me  to
    the contrary. Whilst Ms Childs sought to rely on the  claimed  abortion
    and mental health issues,  given  the  complete  and  now  unchallenged
    rejection of the factual basis of  claim,  I  am  satisfied  there  was
    certainly no basis upon which she could succeed on the  basis  of  very
    significant obstacles  to  integration.  As  stated  above,  the  judge
    accepted  that  the   appellant   is   depressed   and   anxious   but,
    unsurprisingly, rejected any real risk of suicide. The medical evidence
    was to the effect that the main cause of her mental health  issues  was
    an alleged series of distressing events that occurred in the UK.  There
    was insufficient evidence that the high threshold  of  article  3  ECHR
    could be met, even if taking the evidence of her health issues  at  its
    highest and it would be difficult to  see  how  this  factor  could  be
    sufficient to engage article 8 ECHR. There was  no  evidence  that  the
    appellant would not be able to access appropriate treatment  on  return
    to Pakistan.

12. The judge accepted at [55] of the  decision  that  it  was  likely  the
    children's best interests were to remain in the UK,  "because  this  is
    clearly  where  their  parents  wish  to  be  and  removal  will  cause
    disruption and stress to the children's  main  carers."  Neither  child
    meets the 7-year threshold of paragraph 276ADE  so  the  reasonableness
    test does not apply. However, in relation to reasonableness  and  their
    best interests pursuant to   Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and
    Immigration Act 2009, the judge found that as  the  children  are  both
    still very young they will have the support of their parents  and  each
    other returning as a family unit and with  little  difficulty  will  be
    able to adapt to living in Pakistan so that it was reasonable to expect
    them to return to Pakistan with their parents.

13. I accept that the decision contains little that could be identified  as
    an assessment of private and family life article  8  ECHR  outside  the
    Rules. However, following the decision of the Supreme Court  in  R  (on
    the applications of Agyarko and Ikuga) v Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2017] UKSC 11 it was for the  appellant  to  establish
    that there  were  sufficiently  compelling  circumstances  to  justify,
    exceptionally, granting Leave to Remain outside the Rules on the  basis
    that removal to Pakistan  would  be  unjustifiably  harsh.  I  can  see
    nothing on the facts of this case that could be regarded as even coming
    close to  compelling  circumstances.  The  appellant  and  her  partner
    obvious wish to remain and settle in the UK but they have never had any
    entitlement or legitimate expectation of being able to do so. They have
    never had any lawful status in the UK and  pursuant  to  the  statutory
    considerations  required  under  section  117B  of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 the judge would have had to  take  into
    account that maintenance  of  immigration  control  is  in  the  public
    interest and there is no evidence that  the  appellant  is  financially
    independent or that she spoke English. Little weight is to be given  to
    private  life  developed  in  the  UK  whilst  immigration  status  was
    precarious and/or unlawful. Similarly, little weight is to be given  to
    family life with  a  partner  developed  where  immigration  status  is
    unlawful. The children are not qualifying  children  so  the  issue  of
    reasonableness of removal does not arise. In any event, on the basis of
    KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53, the assessment of best interests and where
    the children should go to would have to be made in  the  light  of  the
    real world facts that neither parent has any basis to remain in the  UK
    and thus it would  be  reasonable  to  expect  the  young  children  to
    accompany them.

14. I accept that the  decision  contained  no  proportionality  assessment
    outside the Rules. However, it has to be borne in mind that  the  Rules
    are the Secretary of State's response to private and family life claims
    and have been held to be proportionate. On the facts of this case there
    can be no doubt that even if the judge  had  gone  on  to  specifically
    address the R (Razgar) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2004] UKHKL 27 stepped approach, weighing the private and family  life
    rights of the appellant and  her  family  members  against  the  strong
    public interest in their removal to Pakistan, the inevitable conclusion
    would have been that the decision was entirely  proportionate  and  not
    disproportionate to private and family  life  rights.  In  the  generic
    recitation of  case  law,  the  entirely  inadequate  grounds  fail  to
    identify any relevant factors that could reasonably have resulted in  a
    properly self-directing First-tier Tribunal Judge to allow  the  appeal
    on article 8 grounds, or put another way to conclude  other  than  that
    the appeal had to be dismissed on human rights grounds.

15. Thus whilst there may have been an error in failing to address  private
    and family life more fully within the decision, on the particular facts
    of this case the error is not material. This is a case  that  had  very
    clearly no  prospect  of  success  on  human  rights  grounds.  In  the
    circumstances it would  serve  no  useful  purpose  to  set  aside  the
    decision to be remade on human rights grounds, as the dismissal of  the
    appeal would be the inevitable consequence.

Decision

16. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should
    be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.

     Signed   DMW Pickup

         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated

