





UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00932/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 28 September 2016                |On: 28 October 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before
                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between
                               Ms B (aka E A)
                          anonymity direction made
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms H Masood, counsel (instructed by Synthesis
                    Chambers Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            Decision and Reasons

 1. I continue the anonymity direction made. This direction is to remain in
    place unless and until this Tribunal or any  other  appropriate  Court,
    directs otherwise. As such,  no  report  of  these  proceedings  shall,
    directly or indirectly, identify the respondent or any  member  of  her
    family. Failure to  comply  with  this  direction  could  amount  to  a
    contempt of court.


 2. The appellant is a national of Pakistan, born on 11 February 1982.  She
    appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing her appeal on all grounds.


 3. The appellant came to the UK as a  visitor  in  August  2011.  She  was
    granted leave to enter until 6  January  2012.  In  November  2012  she
    applied for asylum. Her claim was rejected and her appeal was dismissed
    by the First-tier Tribunal on 26 February 2013.


 4. Further representations were made resulting in a new decision directing
    her removal. Her appeal against that  decision  was  dismissed  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal in a determination dated 2 July 2014.


 5. Permission to appeal against both determinations was refused.


 6. She then applied for asylum on 24 November 2015.  She claimed  to  fear
    her husband, Mr IA, and his family, who disputed the paternity  of  her
    eldest child, contending that  a  neighbour,  Mr  BM,  is  the  child's
    father. She also claimed that her two younger children were fathered in
    the UK by Mr MA, who is not her husband.  She  is  now  estranged  from
    him.


 7.  The  Judge  directed  herself  in  accordance  with  the  guidance  in
    Devaseelam v SSHD [2002] UKIAT 0072 and MJ (Singh) v  Belgium;  Tanveer
    Ahmed (Unaffected) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 00253. She  stated  at  [20]
    with regard to the first determination, dated 26  February  2013,  that
    she "... [took] the following to have been found and settled":


      a) In February 2013, the appellant's claim (disputed paternity of  her
         first child, her husband's refusal  to  undergo  a  DNA  test,  the
         attempt by her in laws to kill her first child,  the  complaint  to
         the police about her in laws' ill treatment, the lodging of an  FIR
         against her by her  brother  in  law  and  her  account  of  events
         following the departure from her in laws' home) lacked  credibility
         in all material respects;


      b) The appellant's account of key aspects of her  claim  was  peppered
         with contradictions and inconsistencies;


      c) The appellant had failed to establish the core facts of her claim.


 8. In relation to the second determination, she stated at  [21]  that  her
    representative in effect suggested that it  had  been  tainted  by  the
    first. The First-tier Judge had additional  evidence  post  dating  the
    first determination. That included photographs of a burned  house  said
    to have belonged to B in the FIR at page 138 of the appellant's bundle,
    an FIR dated 17 May 2013, B's report of an attack on his  house  on  17
    May 2013, an arrest warrant dated 22 and 28 May 2013, a letter  to  the
    appellant from Mr N dated 25 June 2013 and a statement  from  Bishop  A
    dated 28 May 2013.


 9. The Judge was not satisfied that there is an evidential basis  for  her
    to go behind the findings set out in  the  second  determination  which
    held that the new evidence did not answer the  fundamental  credibility
    issues in the appellant's claim. It was implausible that  her  in  laws
    would pursue a vendetta against her five years after 2008. There was no
    corroborative evidence that the photographs showed B's house,  and  the
    appellant had not adequately explained why she delayed leaving Pakistan
    from 2008 until August 2011.


10. She also found insofar as the asylum claim was concerned, that none  of
    the documentary evidence filed in her bundle in the current appeal  was
    not available to one or both of the Tribunals  hearing  the  first  and
    second determinations.


11. She had regard to more recent documents in the bundle, including an FIR
    dated 3 May 2015 from the sibling of BM complaining that BM was shot on
    3 May 2015 by Mr AR and Mr Z due to a past relationship  between  Mr  M
    and the appellant. The FIR states that the assailant threatened to kill
    the  appellant.  She  found  that  the  implication  is  that  the  FIR
    complainant, Mr NM, is the friend who has been sending documents to the
    appellant from Pakistan.


12. She also had regard to a report from Rana Hospital dated 3, 4 and 5 May
    2015 which was largely illegible. There was also an undated letter from
    the Anwar Memorial Church.


13. There was no documentary evidence showing that the person who  attended
    at Rana Hospital in May 2015 was a neighbour of  the  appellant's  when
    she lived with her husband  in  Pakistan.  It  was  unlikely  that  the
    appellant's brothers in law, AR and Z would, on 3 May 2015, have voiced
    an intention to shoot her having not seen her since 8 July 2008.


14. The Judge was not satisfied that  any  of  the  new  documents  provide
    reliable evidence supporting  the  appellant's  account.  She  was  not
    satisfied that the appellant had been threatened by the family  of  her
    husband or that they intend her harm - [25].


15. At the hearing on 2 July 2014, the appellant stated that she met Mr  MA
    the father of her second child in the UK, and  started  a  relationship
    with him on 10 September 2011. Her last contact with him was in January
    2012 when he deserted her as she refused to terminate her pregnancy and
    had given birth to their child on 2 August 2012.


16. The appellant stated that Mr MA was the father of her third child  born
    in the UK on 14 January 2015. She stated that they  had  met  again  in
    March 2014, lived together for a few weeks and  then  parted  in  April
    2014 and that her third child  was  conceived  in  approximately  March
    2014. She said in cross examination that she had not told the  Tribunal
    in 2014 that she met Mr MA again and was pregnant by him  since  no-one
    asked  her.  The  Judge  found  that  her  failure  to   disclose   the
    circumstances indicated a lack of candour on her part.


17. The Judge stated at [27] that there is documentary evidence which would
    be consistent with MA having had a  continuing  relationship  with  the
    appellant after she says they separated in September  2011  and  before
    she said they were reunited in March 2014. In particular he is named as
    her next of kin in the pregnancy notes recorded  on  27  January  2012,
    with an indication consistent with them both living at 117 Stone  Road.
    He is also named as her next of kin, again with the  same  address,  in
    relation to the A&E visit on 3 February 2012.


18. The Judge noted at [28] that the presenting officer suggested MA is the
    appellant's husband and that all three of her children  have  the  same
    father. The appellant has denied that claim. She has been asked in  the
    past about the absence of DNA evidence to show  the  paternity  of  her
    children. She stated that she had been willing to  participate  in  DNA
    testing 'but her husband was not'. She was asked during  her  interview
    whether she had evidence to prove that  her  daughters  have  different
    fathers. She was also asked again about DNA evidence to show whether or
    not her three children have the same father. She said she did not  have
    any such evidence.


19. The birth certificate of her oldest daughter names her father as Mr IA.
    The birth certificates for her two UK  born  children  do  not  include
    their father's details. The two UK born children have  taken  the  last
    names of 'Ahmad and Ahmed' [29].


20. The Judge was not satisfied that any of the appellant's three  children
    was fathered by a man other than her husband.  She  was  not  satisfied
    that the paternity of any of her three children has  been  in  dispute.
    She was also not satisfied that the  appellant's  three  children  have
    different fathers - [30].


21. There  was  no  evidence  to  show  the  identity,  current  residence,
    nationality or immigration status of MA. Given the evidence that he was
    the appellant's intimate partner in 2011 and  again  in  2014  and  the
    evidence indicating the relationship continuing  between  them  between
    2011 and 2014 and the socially conservative mores of Pakistan, she  was
    not satisfied that  theirs  was  a  series  of  two  relatively  casual
    encounters  of  comparatively  short  duration,  each  leading  to  the
    conception of a child. She was not satisfied that the appellant  is  no
    longer in a relationship with the father of her children. She was  also
    not satisfied that the appellant would have to return to Pakistan as  a
    lone woman with children [31].


22. She accordingly found that the  appellant  would  not  be  at  risk  of
    persecution as a lone woman with illegitimate children.


23. With regard to family/private life, she noted that the child N came  to
    the UK with her in August 2010. The other children were born in the UK.
    The appellant and her children are Pakistani nationals. None has  lived
    in the UK for seven years or more. There is nothing  to  indicate  that
    any of the children has a British father or  a  father  with  leave  to
    enter or remain in the UK. There is no evidence that the appellant  has
    a partner who is a British national, present  or  settled  here,  or  a
    person with refugee or humanitarian protection status.


24. The appellant did not qualify under Appendix FM. None of  the  children
    qualified under the Rules for leave to remain on the basis  of  private
    life - [36-38].


25. The Judge then considered their claims under Article 8. It was  in  the
    best interests that the three children  remained  with  the  appellant.
    Decisions were made in 2014 to remove them from the UK.  Their  appeals
    were also dismissed in the second  determination.  Her  three  children
    were named as her dependants in her 2015 asylum application.


26. The appellant's current evidence was that she was  not  in  a  personal
    relationship with a partner or spouse.


27. The Judge was not satisfied that either  of  the  appellant's  UK  born
    children has established any  meaningful  contact  outside  the  family
    group. A is now 3 years and 11 months old, and the younger daughter, A,
    is 1 year and 6  months  old.  Neither  had  established  private  life
    calling for protection under Article 8.


28. N is in Year 3 at her primary school. She is developing spoken  English
    but is not yet reading or writing English. The appellant had a need for
    an interpreter not only at the hearing but for medical appointments. It
    is likely that N's first language is Urdu. Although N's education is an
    element of a private life,  given  her  age,  first  language  and  the
    relatively short time she has spent in education in the UK,  the  Judge
    was not satisfied that it would have a significant impact on  her  were
    she to return to Pakistan with her mother and siblings.


29. The  proposed  interference  was  accordingly  'lawful,  justified  and
    proportionate' [44].


30. On 30 August 2016, First-tier Tribunal Judge Page granted the appellant
    permission to appeal. Counsel  had  settled  her  application  and  had
    identified arguable errors  of  law.  It  was  argued  that  the  Judge
    misapplied the approach to be taken with  the  earlier  findings  under
    Devalseelan and treated herself as bound  by  the  first  determination
    Judge's findings of fact. The case of Devaseelam  stood  only  for  the
    proposition that the decision of the first Judge  formed  the  starting
    point of the second determination. It  was  contended  that  the  Judge
    merely slavishly followed what had been said before.  That  constituted
    an arguable error.


31. On behalf of the appellant Ms Masood submitted that the Judge erred  in
    her treatment of the first determination and the manner  in  which  she
    applied the guidance in Devaseelam and Djebbar v SSHD [2004]  EWCA  Civ
    804. The Judge failed independently to decide the  appeal  on  its  own
    individual  merits.  The  guidance  was  expressly  subject   to   this
    overriding principle.


32. She submitted that the first claim was rejected in 2013,  primarily  on
    the basis of documents. The second determination in 2014 simply  relied
    on what the Judge in the first determination had said.


33. The appellant had contended before the Judge that the difficulties  for
    her stemmed from the first determination. That decision had  been  very
    short and scantily reasoned, based on a reading of  the  FIR  that  was
    probably not justified. Although it was the starting  position  of  the
    previous determination there  was  no  independent  assessment  of  her
    credibility. She had submitted many more documents since the  date  and
    provided  further  and  better  explanations  in  evidence  about  what
    happened in Pakistan and why she is at risk.


34. Ms Masood referred to the Court of  Appeal's  decision  in  SSHD  v  AF
    [2008] EWCA Civ 117 to  the  effect  that  previous  findings  are  not
    "binding" as is often incorrectly submitted. She referred to  paragraph
    [45] of that decision. The principle relied on is not  a  principle  of
    res judicata or an issue of estoppel. That being  so,  the  Court  held
    that it is not appropriate to speak of  findings  of  the  Judge  at  a
    hearing under an earlier order as being "binding". This is the language
    of issue estoppel.


35. AF also raised the question of what is  to  be  binding.  Is  it  every
    conclusion of fact and if not, what is it? There was no doubt in  these
    circumstances that the secretary of state conceded that it was wrong to
    treat the earlier findings as "binding." If they are not "binding" then
    how should they be taken into account?


36. Ms Masood submitted that  the  Judge  erred  in  her  approach  to  the
    previous findings and to credibility in general. The  Judge  noted  the
    contention that it had been unfair for the mistake regarding the  first
    FIR to have the serious consequences it does for the appellant's  claim
    and the assessment of her credibility.


37. With regard to that contention the Judge stated that in her  view  this
    was no more than an attempt to challenge the first determination. There
    was no new evidence about the FIR. There was nothing to show  that  any
    steps had been taken since the first determination  to  ascertain  what
    dates are recorded at the police station in the original  documentation
    or to obtain evidence authenticating the FIR. There was  no  evidential
    basis for  her  to  go  behind  the  findings  set  out  in  the  first
    determination.


38. Ms Masood referred to the original FIR. The original box 6 of  the  FIR
    is dated 12 July 2008. The date in translation  was  given  as  8  July
    2008. It was clear from other dates that the report was dated  11  July
    2008.


39. The appellant had stated in evidence that the date must be mistaken. Ms
    Masood stated that she had recently discovered the date on the original
    document.


40. Quite apart from this however, she adopted counsel's submission  before
    the First-tier Tribunal that this mistake was in  any  event  "a  minor
    matter."


41. Ms Masood also submitted that the Judge erred in her  approach  to  the
    first determination. She found at the outset that  "the  following  was
    found and settled." She had already stated at [19] that  the  assertion
    that this had been a minor matter which should not have  been  regarded
    as significant as it was in  the  first  determination  was  merely  an
    attempt to challenge the first determination.


42. Ms Masood submitted that the Judge erred in  her  approach  in  stating
    that the first determination  was  to  be  taken  to  have  "found  and
    settled" the matters set out at [20]. That was not the starting  point.
    In effect the Judge was accepting that that decision  had  been  beyond
    reproach without any proper consideration of  the  mistake  relied  on.
    Accordingly, her subsequent findings  at  [24-25]  were  coloured  with
    regard to her view of the other documents.


43. With regard to the second ground of appeal regarding the risk on return
    as a lone female, Ms Masood submitted that a significant plank  of  the
    appellant's case was that whatever was  said  in  respect  of  risk  of
    return due to threats from her husband's family in Pakistan, she would,
    if removed, have to live there in a new and unfamiliar area as  a  lone
    woman with three children from different fathers. She  referred  to  SA
    (lone women - ostracism) Pakistan [2016] UKUT 0067, which was drawn  to
    the Judge's attention at [10].


44. She referred to the suggestion by the presenting officer that  MA,  the
    appellant's ex- partner in the UK, was the appellant's husband - [28]


45. There had however, never been any suggestion that  they  were  married.
    The Judge did not make any findings about this. The  birth  certificate
    showed that the father's name is IA. There has never been any challenge
    to that Pakistani birth certificate.


46. The name of the  appellant's  UK  partner,  MA,  appeared  on  numerous
    documents relating to the appellant and her UK born children. Some were
    referred to by the Judge, for example at [27].


47. It is plain that two of the children were fathered by a man in the  UK,
    named MA. It  is  equally  clear  that  it  had  never  been  suggested
    otherwise that the appellant did not marry MA.


48. Ms Masood referred to paragraph [31] of the decision  where  the  Judge
    stated that she was not satisfied that  the  appellant  would  have  to
    return to Pakistan as a lone woman with children. She  reiterated  that
    it had never been suggested that the appellant's  husband  is  MA.  She
    thus asked: With whom would the appellant be returning?  There  was  no
    finding about this. The suggestion made by the presenting  officer  was
    left "hanging" and undecided.


49. The finding that the appellant would return to Pakistan  with  someone,
    presumably a man and presumably her husband - whoever  in  the  Judge's
    view that is - was, she submitted, evidentially unsupported and  lacked
    coherency.  It is thus highly unsatisfactory that  the  Judge  did  not
    make any finding with whom  she  would  be  returning.  The  Judge  has
    accordingly not properly addressed the real risk on return.


50. She submitted that Judge Sullivan's conclusion was based on little more
    than "guessing."


51. On behalf of  the  respondent,  Mr  Whitwell  relied  on  the  Rule  24
    submissions. With regard to Ground 1, he submitted that the  Judge  has
    given detailed and adequate consideration to the submissions  regarding
    the first FIR. She "self directed" herself as to the relevant case law.
    It  is  clear  from  paragraph  [19]  that  she   treated   the   first
    determination as the starting point and concluded  that  there  was  no
    adequate evidence to go beyond its findings.


52. Having considered the second determination, she noted that there was no
    adequate basis for departing  from  the  adverse  credibility  findings
    outlined in the first determination as the additional evidence did  not
    address the fundamental credibility concerns.


53.  The  Judge  reached  reasoned  and  sustainable   findings   on   this
    documentation including a discrepancy outlined at paragraph [24(c)].


54. With regard to Ground 2, there is a finding that IA and MA are the same
    person. He referred to [27] where documentary evidence  was  consistent
    with MA having had a continuing relationship with the  appellant  after
    she said that they separated in September 2011 and before the appellant
    claimed that they were reunited in March 2014. There is also  reference
    to being named as the next of kin. On the face of it  he  is  therefore
    stating that he is her next of kin. He referred to question 133 at  the
    interview where the appellant when asked whether she had  any  evidence
    to prove that her daughters had different fathers other than the  birth
    certificate replied that she did not have any evidence apart  from  the
    certificates.


    Assessment


55. Although it is  contended  that  the  Judge's  approach  to  the  first
    determination was incorrect as she stated at the outset that  she  took
    the matters set out at [20a-c] to have been found and settled, she  had
    in  fact  had  regard  to  the  submission  relating  to  the  evidence
    concerning the alleged "genuine mistake" which was only a minor matter.




56. The appellant was represented by different counsel. It was only at  the
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal that  Ms  Masood  contended  for  the
    first time that the date on the original translated  document  differed
    from that contained in the translation. That assertion had  never  been
    made to the First-tier Tribunal Judge.


57. With regard to the second ground, the appellant had contended  that  if
    returned she would have to live in Pakistan in  a  new  and  unfamiliar
    area as a  lone  woman  with  three  children,  whom  she  claimed  had
    different fathers.


58. Mr Whitwell has accepted that the Judge had in fact found that  IA  and
    MA are one and the same. He submitted that there was a proper basis for
    that conclusion.


59. However, the source of this asserted finding was based  on  suggestions
    made by the presenting officer. The Judge went on to state that she was
    "not satisfied" that  the  appellant's  three  children  had  different
    fathers [30].


60. She also stated that there  was  no  evidence  to  show  the  identity,
    current residence, nationality or immigration status of MA. She  stated
    that "... Given the evidence  that  he  was  the  appellant's  intimate
    partner  in  2011  and  again  in  2014,  the  evidence  indicating   a
    relationship continuing between them between 2011  and  2014,  and  the
    socially conservative mores of Pakistan ..." she was not satisfied that
    theirs  was  a  series  of  two   relatively   casual   encounters   of
    comparatively short duration each leading to the birth of a child.  She
    was not satisfied that the appellant is no longer in  the  relationship
    with the father of her children. She was also not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant would have to  return  to  Pakistan  as  a  lone  woman  with
    children - [31].


61. It is not clear whether the First-tier Judge found that the appellant's
    husband was in the UK at the date of conception of the appellant's  two
    UK born children. Nor was there  sufficient  evidence  to  justify  the
    conclusion that MA and IA are the same person.  The  appellant  herself
    denied that assertion. Although there was no DNA evidence  produced  as
    to the  paternity  of  the  children,  the  birth  certificate  of  the
    appellant's  oldest  daughter  named  IA  as  her  father.  The   birth
    certificates for her two UK born children did not include their fathers
    or the fathers' details. The two UK born children have taken  the  last
    names "Ahmad and Ahmed" [29].


62. The appellant had contended that a significant  component  relating  to
    her risk of return related to the threats from her husband's family  in
    Pakistan.


63. The name of the appellant's UK partner whom she gave as MA, appeared on
    numerous documents relating  to  the  appellant  and  to  her  UK  born
    children. It had never been suggested that the  appellant  had  married
    MA.


64. I find, as submitted,  that  the  suggestion  made  by  the  presenting
    officer that MA is the appellant's husband and that all three  children
    have the same father was left hanging and remains undecided.


65. I am accordingly satisfied that her finding that  the  appellant  would
    return to  Pakistan  with  someone,  presumably  a  man,  possibly  her
    husband,  whoever  in  the  Judge's  view  that  is,  was   vague   and
    evidentially unsupported.


66. I accordingly find that in making her decision the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge made an error of law such as to require the decision  to  be  set
    aside and the appeal determined afresh.


67. Ms Masood submitted without  opposition  that  if  I  arrived  at  that
    conclusion, the appeal should be remitted to be  heard  afresh  and  de
    novo by a different Judge of the First-tier Tribunal.


68. I accept that is the  appropriate  course  in  the  circumstances.  The
    parties will in due course be notified of a fresh hearing  date  before
    the First-tier Tribunal and the appellant's solicitors are  at  liberty
    to apply to that  Tribunal  for  further  case  management  directions,
    should that become necessary.


    Notice of Decision


    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and the decision is set aside. The appeal to the Upper  Tribunal
    is allowed to the extent that the appeal is remitted to the  First-tier
    Tribunal, Hatton Cross, to be determined afresh by a different Judge of
    that Tribunal.


    Anonymity direction continued.






    Signed                              Date 22 October 2016


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer

