
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00277/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 7 November 2016                        |On 15 December 2016               |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                            muhammad gulam arshad
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION Not MaDE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Malik, Counsel instructed by Blackstone Law
Associates
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who was born on 9 June 1980.  He
    is now aged 36 and  he  appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Freer in a determination that was promulgated on 28 July
    2016 following a hearing at Taylor House a few days before.

 2. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 2 February 2012 and  was
    granted leave to remain as a family visitor.  That means  that  he  has
    been in the United Kingdom for some four  and  a  half  years.   It  is
    significant to mention that immigration history.  He was issued  a  six
    month multi-visit family visit visa and arrived on the strength of that
    in February 2012.  During the course of the validity of  that  visa  he
    made a claim for asylum and an appointment was made  on  12  June  2012
    which the appellant failed to attend.

 3. It should be said at this stage that the  original  application  was  a
    fraudulent one in that he  said  that  he  was  visiting  a  fictitious
    character and that was arranged by an agent.  It is also right that the
    applicant says that his failure to attend the asylum  interview  on  12
    June 2012 was the result of a change in his solicitor but that does not
    justify why he did not attend the original appointment unless there had
    been some communication to the effect that he was no longer required to
    attend.  In any event he then did not  follow  it  through  because  he
    waited as an overstayer over three years in  order  to  instruct  other
    solicitors to request an appointment in order to claim asylum.  By that
    stage he had been in the country since 2012, all of  it  without  leave
    apart from the first six months but even that first six  months'  leave
    was obtained on the basis of a fraudulent application.

 4. It did not end there because he was  encountered  on  5  October  2015,
    apparently coincidentally, during an arrest team visit to a  centre  in
    London.  He initially ran out of the premises through the back door and
    when he was detected by Immigration Officers and checks  revealed  that
    he had been issued with a visit visa way back in 2012, he was  detained
    and served with the papers necessary to effect his removal.   Two  days
    after that arrest, on 7 October 2015, he claimed asylum.

 5. It seems to me that the  timing  of  this  application  is  significant
    because, on any view, it was a last ditch attempt to  claim  asylum  in
    circumstances where he had plainly had a number of years prior to  that
    to claim asylum but did not do so.

 6. The Secretary of State in a decision letter which is dated 10  November
    2015 provided a detailed account of the nature of the claim.  It is  22
    pages of consideration and it set out the basis of the claim.   It  was
    said that he had problems in Pakistan with  the  relationship  that  he
    effected with a girl called Uzma  and  her  father,  Mr  Ali,  did  not
    approve and although he  originally  had  said  that  Mr  Ali  was  not
    involved in politics it was apparent that he was at least  a  supporter
    of, or a member of, a proscribed organisation  which  the  judge  deals
    with in  due  course  in  the  determination.   It  was  therefore  the
    applicant's case not only that he had been at risk and was at risk  but
    that there had been a whole history in which he had been  found  by  Mr
    Ali and threatened.

 7. One of the difficulties  was  that  there  was  a  lot  of  documentary
    evidence from newspapers and the like which the original decision-maker
    did not think much of.  For example, in paragraph 37,  he  listed  five
    examples where the documents did not on the face of it make  sense  and
    used  language  which  the  decision-maker  described  as  bizarre  and
    nonsensical.  Just by way of an example it is said  that  there  was  a
    report in  the  weekly  Quami  News  describing  events  involving  the
    appellant in these terms,

     'When he reached  home  after  destroying  their  clutches  there  were
         operation marks on his belly...'

     Looking at the documents in  the  round,  the  decision-maker  did  not
    think that  these  were  likely  to  be  reports  from  reputable  news
    agencies.  The substance of the claim is that Mr Ali followed  Uzma  to
    Lahore where both were attacked and a police report was filed  alleging
    rape.  It was said there was a bribe.   One  of  the  startling  points
    raised by the decision-maker was that the  applicant  was  released  on
    payment of a bribe, it is said, on 28 January 2012 but  the  FIR  which
    was said to support the rape allegation is dated 16 January 2009,  some
    three years before, and the decision-maker was  not  provided  with  an
    explanation for that.  Needless to say, he was sceptical about it.

 8. There was also a claim advanced by the appellant that he had  been  the
    subject of abduction and  forced  medical  treatment  but  the  medical
    evidence which was recorded in paragraph 39, a report that I  have  not
    seen, refers  to  an  'accidental  injury  right  hypochondrium  repair
    (liver) and operated for  repair'.   That  by  no  means  supported  or
    corroborated, (indeed it was contrary  to)  the  appellant's  claim  of
    forced surgery and partial removal of his  liver.   There  was  also  a
    medical  report  which  confirmed  after  x-rays  and  scans  that  the
    applicant's liver was taken out for transplant.  To remove a liver  for
    transplant would itself be an unusual process if it was not  fatal.  It
    contradicted the claim and the other  medical  evidence  reported  that
    there had been repairs as a result of accidental injury to  the  liver.
    So, on the face  of  it,  there  were  difficulties  with  the  medical
    evidence.  The medical evidence also,  apparently  stated,  although  I
    have not seen the report, that the scarring  on  the  appellant's  body
    noted in paragraph 44 of the decision letter consisted of a small round
    scar which was consistent with a surgical drain and an  abdominal  scar
    which appeared to be performed by  medically  trained  individuals  and
    that the doctor was unable to say whether it  was  due  to  torture  or
    medically planned operation.  It certainly does not appear to have been
    conducted by somebody who was simply garnering transplant material.  So
    there were a number of credibility issues raised by  the  Secretary  of
    State.

 9. The decision maker then went on to deal with sufficiency of  protection
    and said that the organisations with which the appellant  said  Mr  Ali
    was involved were proscribed organisations and that the security forces
    are keen to prosecute those who are involved in such organisations.

10. More importantly still  the  decision  letter  went  on  to  deal  with
    internal relocation.  It noted that Pakistan has a population  of  over
    187 million people and that there were  large  clusters  of  people  in
    places like Rawalpindi, Lahore, Faisalabad and Hyderabad.  In  each  of
    those cases the population exceeds one  million  and  in  the  case  of
    Karachi it has a population of some eleven  and  a  half  million.   So
    there was undoubtedly an internal relocation option which was difficult
    for the appellant to meet.  The internal relocation argument is perhaps
    made more difficult by the fact  that  Uzma  had  apparently  told  the
    appellant that her father runs a clothing business and is in farming so
    it is not suggested that he was involved in the top echelons of society
    and therefore might be able to exercise a great deal of influence.

11. All of this material formed the basis  upon  which  the  judge  had  to
    assess the claim.  He did so and concluded that the appellant  had  not
    satisfied him that any of the claims had been made out.   The  decision
    runs to some eleven pages.

12. The judge recites in the early parts of the  determination,  paragraphs
    15 onwards, the allegation that he was caught making love at the  house
    of Uzma and that her father had shot at him but he had escaped.  He was
    later kidnapped and assaulted and part  of  his  liver  may  have  been
    removed.  He went to his uncle but was shot again.  He went  to  Lahore
    but was beaten and handed to the police and his father  had  to  pay  a
    bribe of 200,000 rupees.  It is not entirely clear how Mr Ali was  able
    to locate the appellant in Lahore.

13. When it came to the credibility findings which begin at paragraph 32 of
    the determination, the judge properly in  my  judgment  said  that  the
    account about Uzma was very vague.  The appellant had said that he  had
    been in contact with her during the course of the year but that he  did
    not know where she lived.  Since Uzma was central to the claim that was
    in any event surprising.  The appellant also  remarked  upon  the  fact
    that Uzma's evidence as a woman would be given less weight than that of
    her  father  and  the  appellant  and  so  there  would  obviously   be
    difficulties about Uzma giving evidence.  If  she  gave  evidence  that
    supported  the  appellant  that  was  hardly  likely  to  result  in  a
    conviction.  If, on the other hand, she gave  evidence  which  did  not
    support the appellant's claim, then it would be difficult to know  what
    the outcome would be.  However, the judge went on to conclude  that  if
    the girl's father was involved in and was  a  member  of  a  proscribed
    organisation, he might find it difficult in securing a conviction.

14. In paragraph 37 of the determination the judge  properly  records  that
    this was not a Refugee Convention reason because there was no political
    involvement as far as the appellant or Mr Ali was  concerned.   It  was
    simply a personal vendetta.  He also gave evidence that, in support his
    claim, he said  he  had  been  infected  with  syphilis.   It  is  very
    difficult for me to understand quite how that had  come  into  play  as
    part of an asylum claim.  It is not suggested  that  it  was  Uzma  who
    infected him but in order to support  this  element  of  his  case,  he
    provided a form of medication  which  was  Mirtazapine.   This  was  an
    antidepressant drug and certainly was not a  drug  that  supported  any
    allegation that he was suffering from  syphilis.   There  had  been  no
    mention of syphilis in the papers prepared before the hearing.  It  was
    something which was simply mentioned in the course of the  hearing  but
    obviously mentioned in circumstances where it was in some way  said  to
    enhance his asylum claim.  The judge looked at the evidence of the FIRs
    and  concluded  that  those  documents  may  well  be  unreliable   and
    consequently it was not something that he was required  to  place  much
    weight on.

15. There was reference to the appellant not being a reliable and  accurate
    witness on the basis of  his  medical  condition.   There  was  nothing
    independently to establish that Uzma's  father  was  connected  with  a
    terrorist organisation or, if he was, how that advanced the claim.  The
    applicant had failed to establish the truth of his claim of  a  partial
    organ theft.  All in all, he came to the  conclusion  in  paragraph  50
    that the credibility of this account, taken in the round, was  so  poor
    that he failed to meet the threshold for an asylum or protection claim.
     That was entirely open to the judge on the material  that  was  before
    him and I find no error of law.

16. The second point that is raised is in relation to  Article  8.   It  is
    said that the decision letter was an unlawful consideration of  Article
    8.  The basis upon which the Article 8 claim was advanced was that  the
    appellant had entered the United Kingdom in February  2012,  some  four
    and a half years ago, (just over four years at the date when the  judge
    had to determine the case); that he had not established  any  right  to
    remain after the initial visit visa, (a visit visa  which  as  we  have
    noted was obtained by fraud) and that he had no  substantive  right  to
    remain.  All that we know about his claim is that he was  arrested,  as
    the decision letter says, in a raid sometime in October 2015.  That  is
    all we know about this.  So there is  nothing  within  the  applicant's
    account of his private life that supports a claim that it is  protected
    against his removal.  He has lived with a sister  in  the  same  street
    where he now lives, (that is paragraph 21 of the determination).  There
    is nothing to suggest that the relationship between brother and  sister
    is anything other than a  normal  emotional  relationship  that  exists
    between siblings.  But that does not give rise to a  right  not  to  be
    removed.  It  does  not  establish  that  his  sister  would  suffer  a
    violation of her human rights by his removal.  The Article 8 claim  was
    looked at by reference to the public interest considerations set out in
    section 19 of the 2014 Act  (making  changes  to  section  117  of  the
    Immigration Act 2002).  Reference was made to the  Razgar  analysis  in
    order to assess whether, notwithstanding anything said in the  statute,
    there was a freestanding Article 8 claim.  So absent credible  evidence
    or indeed compelling evidence about a protected private or family life,
    the Article 8 claim was bound to fail.

DECISION

The Judge made no error on a point of law and the original determination  of
the appeal shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


