
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: PA/00462/2019 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 18 May 2021                     |On 1 June 2021                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                                     AMA

                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)



For the appellant:     Mr A Islam, instructed by Fountain Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer



This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face-to-
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,
I reserved my decisions and reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.



Appeal History

1. The appellant, who is an Iraqi national of Kurdish  ethnicity  and  Sunni
   Muslim faith, with date of birth  given  as  1.1.94,  has  appealed  with
   permission to the Upper Tribunal against the decision of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal promulgated 30.4.19 (Judge Obhi), dismissing on all grounds  his
   appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State, dated 20.12.18, to
   refuse his claim for international protection.

2. The appeal in the Upper Tribunal  was  heard  by  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
   Judge Juss. The decision promulgated 23.10.19 found no error  of  law  in
   the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and,  therefore,  dismissed  the
   appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

3. By an in-time application dated 8.11.19, the appellant sought  permission
   to appeal the Upper Tribunal's 'no error of law' decision to the Court of
   Appeal on the grounds that the  Upper  Tribunal  had  failed  to  provide
   adequate reasoning for finding that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  made
   adequate reasoned findings as  to  fact,  injuries  sustained,  risk  and
   internal relocation. On consideration of  that  application  on  21.7.20,
   Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Coker  found  that  those  grounds  were  a  mere
   unamplified statement, concluding, "It is  not  arguable  that  the  DUTJ
   failed to make adequate reasoned findings for his conclusion that the FtT
   judge had not erred in law in reaching her findings."

4. However, Judge Coker found that although the DUTJ had set out the  ground
   of appeal in relation to identity documents, he  had  failed  to  address
   that ground and make findings on it. Judge  Coker  considered  that  this
   lack of consideration, by both the First-tier Tribunal and the DUTJ,  may
   have had a material outcome  to  the  appeal,  had  it  been  considered,
   observing that "There was no clear finding in  either  judgement."  Judge
   Coker considered the appropriate approach would be for the Upper Tribunal
   to review the decision in accordance with  Rule  45(a)  of  the  Tribunal
   Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

5. Reviewing the decision of the DUTJ, Judge Hanson found  that  Rule  45(a)
   was engaged, on the basis that the DUTJ  had  "overlooked  a  legislative
   provision or binding authority which could have had a material effect  on
   the decision." Exercising the Upper Tribunal's power  to  set  aside  the
   impugned decision of the Upper Tribunal, Judge Hanson directed the appeal
   be listed for a remote hearing in the Upper Tribunal  "to  enable  it  to
   consider whether First-tier Tribunal Judge Obhi erred in law in a  manner
   material to her decision to dismiss the appeal, by reference to the issue
   of the appellant's identity documents and any matters  arising  from  the
   decision of the Upper Tribunal in SMO as identified by Judge Coker."

6. At the error of law hearing before me  on  2.2.21,  Mr  Islam  sought  to
   reopen the  first  ground,  namely  alleged  inadequacy  of  reasons  for
   rejecting the appellant's core  factual  account,  in  respect  of  which
   ground both the DUTJ  deciding  the  error  of  law  issue  and  the  UTJ
   considering the application for permission to  appeal  considered  to  be
   without merit. After due consideration, I was not persuaded by Mr Islam's
   submissions that the first ground should be revisited for a  third  time.
   It follows that the rejection of the appellant's core  factual  claim  by
   the First-tier Tribunal must stand and there remains no reason to  depart
   from those findings.

7. It followed that the error of  law  consideration  listed  before  me  on
   2.2.21, was necessarily limited to the question of any error  of  law  in
   the First-tier Tribunal's dealing  with  the  issue  of  the  appellant's
   identity documents.

Relevant Background

8. The relevant background is that the appellant was born, raised and  lived
   in Kirkuk, Iraq. His biological parents are deceased, and he  was  raised
   by foster parents. Although the refusal decision asserts that  Kirkuk  is
   within the IKR, Mr Bates accepted that this is not accurate. Whilst it is
   very close to the IKR border and regarded by  many  as  a  Kurdish  city,
   Kirkuk lies outside it in a governorate that was previously considered to
   be a 'contested area'. It follows that the  appellant  does  not  emanate
   from the IKR and, as Mr Bates confirmed, the Home  Office  policy  is  to
   only enforce return to Baghdad. However, as a Kurd, the Country  Guidance
   is clear that he will not be refused admission to the IKR. Leaving  aside
   the issue of relocation to Baghdad, whether he  can  make  his  way  from
   Baghdad International Airport to the IKR, either Erbil  or  Sulaymaniyah,
   depends on the identity documentation issue.

Error of Law Considerations & Decision

9. The appellant's argument,  as  originally  set  out  in  the  grounds  of
   application for permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal, was that the
   First-tier Tribunal failed to apply the applicable Country Guidance from:
   AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ 944; AAH  (Iraqi  Kurds  -internal  relocation)
   Iraq Country Guidance  [2018]  UKUT  00212  (IAC);  and  BA  (Returns  to
   Baghdad) Iraq Country Guidance [2017] UKUT 00018 (IAC). It  was  asserted
   that Kirkuk is a contested area; that the  appellant  has  no  biological
   family members in Iraq; and that he has  never  been  issued  with  Iraqi
   identification documentation. It  was  submitted  that  without  identity
   documentation, no family, and no connections within  the  IKR  to  assist
   him, he will not be able to obtain a CSID or travel from Baghdad  to  the
   IKR. In the premises, it was argued that  the  judge  failed  to  provide
   adequate reasoning for concluding that the  appellant  will  be  able  to
   obtain a CSID and relocate on arrival in Baghdad to the IKR.

10. In relation to the identity document issue, it can be seen that  between
   [43] and [47] of the decision,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  addressed  the
   issue of relocation to either the IKR or Baghdad, noting  the  importance
   of a CSID. At [45] the judge found that the appellant was  likely  to  be
   able to obtain a CSID from foster parents or other relatives in Kirkuk or
   the IKR. At [46] the judge considered but rejected the appellant's  claim
   that he had not contacted the Iraqi embassy to seek replacement  identity
   documents because he feared he would attract  adverse  attention  amongst
   the Iraqi community in the UK, the judge concluding that he would  be  at
   no risk in doing so.

11. The appellant's evidence, summarised at [15] of the  impugned  decision,
   was that he was no longer in contact with his foster parents. He  claimed
   not have heard from them since 16.10.16, when a militia  group  attacked,
   and his cousin was killed. Effectively, his case  was  that  he  was  now
   unable to make contact with his foster parents or any  biological  family
   member. This was further advanced in his legal  representative's  closing
   submissions in the First-tier Tribunal, as recorded at [32] of the First-
   tier Tribunal decision, where Mr Khan submitted that he was a  young  man
   with no family support, who had had no contact with  his  foster  parents
   since October 2016, and did not have any identity documents, and  without
   a CSID he could not get to the IKR, where, in any event, he would have no
   family or friends support.

12. At the February 2021 error of law  hearing,  Mr  Bates  stated  that  he
   could not defend the decision and accepted  that  there  was  a  material
   error of law in the judge's finding that the appellant will  be  able  to
   obtain a CSID. He accepted that the judge failed to resolve that  crucial
   issue, stating only at [45] of the decision that "The appellant is likely
   to have a CSID at some time. He has foster parents  and  may  have  other
   relatives in Kirkuk or indeed in the Kurdish area. He  is  likely  to  be
   able to  obtain  a  CSID."  Mr  Bates  conceded  that  this  finding  and
   conclusion was inadequately reasoned.

13. For the reasons more fully set out in my error of law decision,  I  also
   found that the judge failed to resolve with adequate reasoning the  issue
   as to whether the appellant remains in contact with his foster parents or
   has other means open to him to obtain a CSID, despite his  assertions  to
   the contrary.  The  judge  appeared  to  have  merely  assumed  that  the
   appellant remained in contact with his foster parents and would  be  able
   to obtain a CSID, without explaining those findings any further.

14. For those reasons, I found a material error of law in  the  decision  of
   the First-tier Tribunal requiring it to be set aside to be remade in  the
   Upper Tribunal. I was also satisfied that the remaking of the decision in
   the appeal should be restricted  to  the  issue  of  risk  on  return  in
   relation to identity documentation or the lack of it,  and  so  directed.
   The findings of the First-tier Tribunal rejecting  as  not  credible  the
   appellant's core factual account were  preserved,  save  in  relation  to
   identity documentation.



Remaking the Decision in the Appeal

15. In remaking the decision in the appeal, I have carefully considered  the
   various oral and written submissions  and  evidence,  together  with  the
   updated oral evidence of the appellant, applying the  lower  standard  of
   proof.

16. The Upper Tribunal has before it  the  appellant's  First-tier  Tribunal
   appeal bundle, purportedly comprising 308 pages, though only the first 32
   are in the bundle with  the  Tribunal's  case  file.  This  includes  the
   appellant's witness statement of 8.2.19.  The  absent  documents  do  not
   matter, which Mr  Islam  confirmed,  as  the  remaining  pages  primarily
   comprise case authorities and objective material  including  Home  Office
   CPINs on Iraq blood feuds and Ba'athists, the contents of  which  do  not
   appear  to  be  relevant  to  the  identity  documentation   issue.   The
   respondent's bundle is also present.

17. The day before the Upper Tribunal  hearing  on  18.5.21,  the  appellant
   submitted further documentation, first comprising a letter dated  20.5.20
   acknowledging a (then) recent tracing request but  without  stating  what
   details had been provided by the appellant to enable tracing attempts. In
   addition, the appellant relies on an outdated UNHCR 'Iraq: Centre & South
   Bi-Weekly  Protection  Update',  dated  21-31.8.17,  and  detailing   IDP
   displacement  movement  by  area.  Mr  Islam   relied   on   the   latter
   documentation in support of the appellant's further  oral  evidence  that
   his foster family were  displaced  from  Kirkuk.  I  have  given  careful
   consideration to all of these materials.

18. It is not disputed that the appellant is an Iraqi Kurd of  Sunni  Muslim
   faith who emanates from the Kirkuk area. Since  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   decision, the Upper Tribunal promulgated the Country Guidance decision in
   SMO, KSP & IM (Article 15(c); identity documents)  Iraq  CG  [2019]  UKUT
   004100. I have borne  in  mind,  however,  that  the  Court  of  Appeal's
   decision dated 16 February 2021 to remit SMO, KSP &  IM  (Article  15(c);
   identity documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 400 (IAC) to the  Upper  Tribunal
   to reconsider the finding at headnote 13 that most Iraqi  citizens  would
   recall the family book information, and any other findings in  the  light
   of developments in Iraq. Nevertheless, SMO explains the importance  of  a
   CSID or INID in being able to return to the appellant's home area, or  to
   the IKR. I have also noted the considerations set out at headnote [27] as
   to the difficulties for relocation to the IKR  without  family  or  other
   support.

19. Since SMO was promulgated, the situation in Iraq has moved on again,  in
   particular in relation to Kirkuk. I confirmed  with  Mr  McVeety  at  the
   outset of the hearing that the respondent accepts that Kirkuk is  one  of
   those governorates  where  INID  terminals  have  been  installed,  which
   require attendance in person for the  taking  of  biometric  details.  In
   consequence, no new or replacement CSID will be issued by the  local  CSA
   office or the Iraqi Embassy in London. It follows that if  the  appellant
   cannot gain access to his original CSID, return to Iraq and onward travel
   to either Kirkuk or the IKR is not feasible. A  laissez-passer  will  get
   him  to  Baghdad  International  Airport  but  no  further.  However,  as
   confirmed in SMO, "In the light of the Court of Appeal's judgment  in  HF
   (Iraq) and Others v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2013]
   EWCA Civ 1276, an international protection claim made by P cannot succeed
   by reference to any alleged risk of harm arising from  an  absence  of  a
   current or expired Iraqi passport or a Laissez passer,  if  the  Tribunal
   finds that P's return is not currently feasible on account of a  lack  of
   any of those documents."  It  follows  that  in  such  circumstances  the
   appellant could not succeed on asylum grounds but  only  on  humanitarian
   protection or article 3 ECHR grounds  because  of  the  circumstances  in
   which he would be left on return to Iraq without the ability to return to
   his home area or relocate to the IKR. As  Mr  McVeety  submitted  and  Mr
   Islam agreed, this narrows the issues before the Tribunal even further.

The appellant's Factual Claim

20. With the assistance  of  a  Kurdish  Sorani  interpreter,  the  Tribunal
   received the appellant's further oral evidence. In summary, he relied  on
   his witness statement of 8.2.19 as his evidence in chief, supplemented by
   further evidence that should have  been  reduced  to  a  further  witness
   statement. He referred to the Red Cross  letter  or  20.5.20,  explaining
   that he contacted the Red Cross after his foster family made contact with
   him in March 2020 through Facebook Messenger and went to the Red Cross to
   seek help in  tracing  them.  His  evidence  was  somewhat  confused  and
   difficult to follow but he said that his foster family had left Iraq  and
   went through Turkey to Greece but that he had heard that there  had  been
   some boats wrecked and as he had had no further  contact  with  them,  he
   feared they may have been drowned. It was difficult to ascertain when the
   appellant had contact with his foster family and how this came about.  He
   said that he has only had two contacts with them since he arrived in  the
   UK. The first was in 2017 when they allegedly  told  him  they  had  fled
   Kirkuk but failed to tell him where they went to. The second was in March
   2020, when they were allegedly in Turkey planning to sail to  Greece.  He
   maintained that they had to flee for the self-same reasons he left  Iraq,
   stating, "They get in trouble as well because of my issue. After my issue
   they could not stay. They told me they were under threat  and  threatened
   on many occasions." However, he agreed with Mr McVeety that these threats
   were made even though they  had  allegedly  fled  Kirkuk  and  that  they
   evidently had not left Iraq until four years after the appellant had done
   so for the exact same reasons.

21. He claimed that the family had contacted him through Facebook  Messenger
   with an 'add' request but also said that they did  not  have  a  Facebook
   account when they were in Iraq. However, the account they  contacted  him
   on has now ceased to exist. He was unable to explain how in the course of
   being smuggled through Turkey to Greece they were suddenly able  to  make
   contact with him through Facebook after silence of some three years.

22. The starting point  for  consideration  of  the  identity  documentation
   issue is the almost entire rejection of the appellant's factual claim  by
   the First-tier Tribunal. At [37] of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision,
   Judge Obhi accepted that the appellant's parents were  reasonably  likely
   to have been killed  in  a  bomb  blast,  which  would  account  for  the
   appellant having shrapnel in his legs and living with  a  foster  family,
   but the judge did not accept that this was a targeted attack, finding  it
   to be a random attack. Neither did  the  judge  accept  that  his  foster
   family had been targeted or that the  appellant  was  the  subject  of  a
   family or blood feud. The judge also rejected the account of a fight in a
   restaurant and his  life  being  threatened  which,  on  the  appellant's
   account, was the alleged trigger for his departure from Iraq.  The  judge
   also rejected the claim to be at risk because of his father's association
   with the Ba'ath Party, which even Mr Islam had accepted to be the  weaker
   part of the appellant's case. As indicated above, at [46] of the decision
   the judge rejected the appellant's claimed reason for not contacting  the
   Iraqi Embassy in London, finding there would be no risk to him  in  doing
   so. The judge concluded that a weak asylum account had  been  embellished
   and fabricated.

23. These First-tier  Tribunal  findings  serve  to  undermine  the  general
   credibility of the appellant and in particular his claim that he has lost
   contact with his foster family (or others family or associations) in Iraq
   following a militia attack on  16.10.16,  during  which  his  cousin  was
   allegedly killed.

24.  In  the  context  of  the  appellant's  preserved  overall  credibility
   findings  rejecting  his  factual  account,  and  after  considering  the
   evidence in the round in the context of the whole,  I  found  that,  even
   applying the lower standard of proof, the whole  account  advanced  of  a
   further contact with his foster family in March 2020  not  only  confused
   but not at all credible. I do not accept as credible that they only  made
   contact in the way claimed through Facebook but that  account  no  longer
   exists. He did not provide  any  supporting  evidence  of  this  Facebook
   contact, even though I am satisfied that this should reasonably still  be
   available to him. He told  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  he  last  had
   contact with his family in October 2016, though he may have meant October
   2017, which is when he came to the UK.  I also found it not credible that
   he should claim to have been told in October 2017  that  the  family  had
   fled Kirkuk but didn't tell him where they went to. The  account  he  has
   given suggests rather too much knowledge of their history when he  claims
   only two contacts, stating that they were constantly under threat for the
   same  causation  entirely  rejected  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   His
   suggestion that they may have been lost in boat wrecks whilst crossing to
   Greece  is  little  more  than  speculation  but  provides  a  convenient
   explanation for the loss of further contact and why  he  cannot  retrieve
   his CSID from them. However, I reject the account as  not  credible,  for
   the reasons highlighted above.

25. The appellant's witness statement of 8.2.19 does not deny that he has  a
   CSID but claims that the last time he had it was in Iraq and that he does
   not know where it is now. He claimed that  as  he  has  no  contact  with
   anyone in Iraq he is unable to obtain his documents from there. He stated
   at [18] of the witness statement that following arrival in the UK he  had
   a "successful contact" with his foster father  but  claimed  that  number
   does not work anymore, "as though the telephone is switched off". He also
   maintains that he cannot go to Baghdad as he is a single male Sunni  Kurd
   with no family contact there and who does not speak any Arabic.

26. I note from  the  Screening  Interview  (SI)  that  he  said  his  birth
   certificate was in Iraq and that he did have an Iraqi passport for  which
   his fingerprints were taken, but that this was retained by the agent.  It
   appears from his witness statement that he was denying ever having had  a
   valid Iraqi passport and that used  a  false  passport  procured  by  the
   agent. When challenged on this in evidence before me, he maintained  that
   he never had a passport of his own in Iraq. He said that a friend of  his
   foster father made a false passport  for  him.  However,  that  does  not
   explain his initial account that his fingerprints were taken in Iraq  for
   the issue of a passport. I do not accept that fingerprints would be taken
   for the creation of a false passport and I reject the  appellant's  claim
   on this issue as incredible and a fabrication. I can only  conclude  that
   the appellant did have an Iraqi passport of his own, whether or not  this
   has been retained by the agent.

27. I can give little weight to  the  Red  Cross  document.  Evidently,  the
   appellant only made contact with the Red  Cross  around  or  shortly  May
   2020, despite allegedly having lost contact with his foster family  since
   2017. No adequate explanation for the delay was  provided  save  that  it
   followed the alleged Facebook contact in March 2020. In oral evidence  he
   claimed he provided details of both his foster parents,  Mr  Mahmood  and
   his wife. However, the Red Cross letter refers only to  relative  in  the
   singular. The appellant sought to blame interpretation  for  this  error,
   but it is obvious that it is the Red Cross which has referred to a single
   relative. Unfortunately, the letter does not indicate who was referred to
   them or what  details  were  provided.  In  the  premises,  I  cannot  be
   satisfied that the appellant has given correct details of his family  for
   tracing and taking it in the context of the evidence as a whole it  lends
   but little support to the appellant's claim to have only had contact with
   his foster family again in March 2020.

28. I have also considered the UNHCR IDP document produced by Mr  Islam  and
   accept that there was significant movement of displaced persons  in  Iraq
   including around Kirkuk in 2017. However, given that  this  Tribunal  and
   the First-tier Tribunal has entirely rejected the factual basis as to why
   the family would have had to flee, I do not accept that his foster family
   has left Kirkuk. For similar reasons, I further do not  accept  that  the
   appellant has lost contact with his foster family  in  Iraq.  I  entirely
   reject the claim to have had only two contacts with them since he arrived
   in the UK in 2017.

29. I note that the appellant declined to seek redocumentation at the  Iraqi
   embassy in London and there has been no  suggestion  that  he  has  tried
   again. In light of the matters set out above, it does not seem to me that
   he would be able in any event to obtain a  replacement  CSID  given  that
   INID terminals have been installed in Kirkuk. However, I am satisfied  on
   the evidence that at some stage he has had an Iraqi  passport  issued  in
   his own name during which process his fingerprints were taken. It follows
   that there would be utility in contacting the Iraqi Embassy.  The  First-
   tier Tribunal entirely rejected the claim that the appellant had anything
   to fear from contacting the embassy, which finding I accept and adopt. It
   follows that this failure to contact the embassy also serves to undermine
   the appellant's account as to his identity documentation.

30. In summary, I am driven to the clear  conclusion  that  in  his  further
   oral evidence the  appellant  continues  to  rely  on  a  fabricated  and
   invented account of his reasons for leaving  Iraq  so  that  I  can  only
   conclude that he is no more than an  economic  migrant.  I  maintain  the
   reject of his claim on asylum grounds,  finding  that  he  has  no  well-
   founded fear of persecution or that he would be at real risk  of  serious
   harm on return to Iraq.

31. Both representatives accepted that the outcome of this appeal turned  on
   the appellant's credibility. If his account were to be believed, he would
   not be able to return to Iraq as he would have no access to a  CSID,  and
   whilst he could not succeed on asylum grounds the circumstances would, Mr
   McVeety accepted, breach article 3 ECHR. If his account is  rejected,  it
   follows that there is no reason  not  to  conclude  that  he  remains  in
   contact with his foster family who will be able to provide him  with  his
   CSID, if he does not already have it.

32. In relation to the issue of identity documentation, I am satisfied  that
   the appellant has lied about having lost contact with his  foster  family
   in Iraq. His account  was  comprehensively  rejected  by  the  First-tier
   Tribunal and nothing in the further evidence  is  sufficient  to  justify
   departing from those findings. I further find that the additional account
   presented in the oral evidence to me of  a  subsequent  fleeting  contact
   with his foster family  in  March  2020  is  a  further  fabrication  and
   entirely incredible, very likely designed to explain away why he  can  no
   longer be provided with his CSID he claims to have left in Iraq. I cannot
   say where his CSID is, whether it is in fact with him in the UK, or  left
   with his family in Iraq, but I am satisfied that he  remains  in  contact
   with them and that at the very least they will be  able  to  provide  him
   with his CSID.

33. It follows that there  should  be  little  if  any  difficulty  for  the
   appellant to return to Iraq. I am satisfied that he has had a passport in
   the past and should be able to obtain a  replacement  by  contacting  the
   Iraqi Embassy, which may explain his reluctance to attend the embassy for
   assistance. At the very least, I find that the appellant  has  failed  to
   demonstrate that this will not be possible. In any  event,  at  the  very
   least the Home Office will be able to return him to Baghdad International
   Airport with a laissez-passer. As SMO confirms, he faces no risk  at  the
   point of return by reason of not having a current passport.

34. From Baghdad International Airport, I do not  suggest  it  feasible  for
   the appellant as a non-Arabic-speaking  Kurd  with  no  known  family  or
   support in Baghdad to relocate to Baghdad. However, I am  satisfied  that
   he will be able to access his CSID before return and with  that  will  be
   able to return to his home area and the  support  of  his  foster  family
   without encountering  treatment  or  conditions  which  are  contrary  to
   Article 3 ECHR.  SMO confirmed that, "With the  exception  of  the  small
   area identified in section A, the general conditions within the  Formerly
   Contested Areas do not engage Article 15 QD(b) or (c) or Article 3 ECHR."
   I am satisfied that if the appellant wishes to return directly to the IKR
   he will be able to do so on a direct flight from the UK, as SMO  confirms
   to be available. Alternatively, with his CSID he will be able to fly from
   Baghdad to Sulaymaniyah or Erbil in the IKR. From there he  could  either
   make the short journey to his family in Kirkuk, using their assistance to
   do so. Alternatively, he can return directly to Kirkuk,  there  being  no
   article 15(c) risk in doing so. Once there, he will be able to attend for
   a biometric appointment to be able to obtain his INID. Alternatively,  he
   can remain in the IKR where I am satisfied his family  in  nearby  Kirkuk
   will be able to assist him to find  accommodation  and  seek  employment.
   Either way, whether remaining in the IKR or returning  to  Kirkuk,  I  am
   satisfied for the reasons outlined above that he will have the assistance
   of his foster family to settle and reintegrate.

35. In the  premises  and  for  the  various  reasons  outlined  above,  the
   appellant's appeal must fail on all grounds.

Decision

      The appellant's appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  is  dismissed  on  all
      grounds.

      I make no order for costs.



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       18 May 2021



Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        appellant and the respondent. Failure to comply with this direction
        could lead to contempt of court proceedings."



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       18 May 2021





