
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00088/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 July 2019                      |On 09 August 2019                    |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                IBRAHEM TAHA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Brown, instructed by Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 1 October 2001 and claims to be a citizen  of
    Iran. By a decision dated 21 December  2018,  the  Secretary  of  State
    refused the appellant's application for international  protection.  The
    appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  which,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 27 March 2019, dismissed the appeal. The  appellant  now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2.  At  the  initial  hearing  at  Bradford  on   23   July   2019,   both
    representatives agreed that the judge had erred in law  such  that  her
    decision falls to be set aside. The judge has miscalculated the age  of
    the appellant. Judge considered that the appellant  had  been  over  18
    years old at the  time  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  his  asylum
    application. Both parties agree that, when he claimed  asylum  in  June
    2018, the appellant was by his own account 16 years and  8  months  old
    and at the date of the First-tier Tribunal appeal hearing he  was  aged
    17 years and 4 months. The parties agree that  the  judge's  error  has
    vitiated her analysis of the appellant's credibility.

 3. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  set-aside.  None  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand. The appeal is returned to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for that Tribunal to remake the decision  at  or  following  a
    hearing.



Notice of Decision

 4. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  set-aside.  None  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand. The appeal is returned to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for that Tribunal to remake the decision  at  or  following  a
    hearing.


Signed                              Date 23 JULY 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane











