
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00847/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 March 2018                              |On 26 April 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                   MRS A Z
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Patel, Counsel, instructed by Malik & Malik
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The appellant, a national of Albania, has permission to  challenge  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal (FtT) Judge Bradshaw sent on  20  March
    2017 dismissing her appeal against the decision made by the  respondent
    to refuse her protection claim.

2.   The grounds of appeal are lengthy but comprise six main grounds:

    (i)  that the judge failed to apply the correct guidance case of TD and
         AD (Trafficked women) CG [2016] UKUT 92 (IAC);


    (ii) that the judge failed to properly apply the principles set out  in
         Devaseelan;


    (iii)    that the judge failed to give adequate reasons for her adverse
         credibility findings;


    (iv) that the judge failed to give  any  proper  consideration  to  the
         medical evidence and to weigh them in the  balance  when  assessing
         credibility;


    (v)  that the  judge failed to make clear  findings  on  the  mediation
         documents;


    (vi) (which is really an extension of ground (i)) that the judge failed
         to give proper reasons for concluding the appellant would not be at
         risk on return given that it was accepted that she was unlikely  to
         have financial or family support and has mental health problems and
         would return as a  lone mother.

3.   I express my gratitude  to  both  representatives  for  their  targeted
    submissions.

4.   The appellant's original asylum application, based on  the  claim  that
    she was a victim of trafficking, was  refused  by  the  respondent  and
    dismissed on appeal (by Judge Scobbie in  December  2014).   Her  fresh
    claim was based largely on her fear of reprisals at the  hands  of  her
    father, ex-husband and ex-boyfriend.

5.   This is one of those cases where I do not consider that any one  ground
    on its own  establishes  a  material  error  of  law,  but  that  taken
    cumulatively they render the decision legally flawed and unsafe.

6.   As regards (i), I agree with Ms Patel that although the guidance in  TD
    is specifically directed at the issue of trafficked women, it  contains
    important and relevant information if not also  persuasive  indications
    regarding  the  situation  of  women  returned  to  Albania  as  single
    mothers/lone parents.  Whilst the  judge  did  refer  to  TD  her  only
    reliance on UT guidance related to the 2004 case of DM (Sufficiency  of
    Protection, PSG, Women, Domestic Violence) Albania CG 2004 UKIAT 00059.

7.   As regards (ii), it is difficult to follow precisely  what  weight  the
    judge attached to the previous judge's adverse credibility findings and
    whether they were treated  as  a  start  point  or  as  an  end  point.
    Paragraph 52ff does not make  this  clear,  even  though  some  of  the
    particulars given in the appellant's previous appeal and  in  this  one
    were the same.

8.   I do not  consider  that  ground  (iii)  conclusively  demonstrates  an
    inadequacy of reasons for the judge's adverse credibility findings, but
    the concerns I have regarding grounds (ii), (iv) and (v) (on the latter
    two, see below), incline me to see  significant  force  in  the  ground
    also.

9.   As regards ground (iv), the judge's treatment of the  medical  evidence
    is set out at paragraph 56:

         "56. The medical and other  evidence  is  that  the  appellant  has
             benefitted  from  counselling  and   no   risk   factors   are
             identified.  The various counsellors have  relied  largely  on
             what the appellant has told them about her  experiences  which
             have  been  found  to  be   lacking   credibility   generally.
             Psychologists do diagnose and referral to  a  Psychiatrist  is
             not determinative one way or the other but  I  agree  that  Dr
             Darcy does not appear to have professional qualifications  and
             her evidence must be regarded in that  light.   The  appellant
             has clearly been diagnosed with anxiety and depression but her
             medication was increased then decreased and the evidence  from
             the Red Cross and the  Craggs  shows  that  the  appellant  is
             motivated, highly active and  attending  college  for  various
             courses including child care; a considerable change  from  the
             earlier  findings  of  her  being  withdrawn,  having   little
             interest,  low  concentration,  difficulty  engaging  and  low
             mood".

10.  There are a number of difficulties with this analysis.   First,  whilst
    the various counsellors did rely to a significant extent  on  what  the
    appellant told them, the  judge  should  still  have  considered  their
    evidence as potentially independent evidence: see AM  [2012]  EWCA  Civ
    521.   Second,  more  than  one  of  the  reports/letters  by   medical
    professionals stated that the  appellant  had  anxiety  and  depression
    displaying signs  of  PTSD.   Third,  the  medical  evidence  does  not
    identify any decrease in medication.  Fourth, it is not clear what  the
    judge intended to find in  stating  that  the  appellant  now  appeared
    better, since the medical evidence indicated that this was largely  due
    to the strong support she had had from  a  counselling  network,  which
    would not necessarily be available on return to Albania.

11.  Although not on its own identifying any  fatal  error,  ground  (v)  is
    absolutely right.  The judge's treatment of the mediation documents  is
    inconclusive.

12.  Ground (vi) also seems to me to have certain force.  Given the  judge's
    own findings that the appellant would return on her  own  as  a  single
    mother and not have family or financial support (see paragraphs 60  and
    61), it was particularly important for the judge  to  consider  whether
    she could receive support beyond mere temporary shelter  accommodation.
    Increasing my concern about the judge's assessment  of  this  issue  of
    risk on return, it is  difficult  to  accept  her  description  of  the
    appellant as "educated" at paragraph 60 (she left education after  high
    school) and the judge's finding that she was a resilient person appears
    not to have factored in to what extent this was due to her  counselling
    support network in the UK.

13.  I am also bound to say that I do not find it  helpful  that  the  judge
    should describe the appellant as  paragraph  62  as  "not  particularly
    vulnerable".  This begs the question of whether she was vulnerable and,
    as such someone requiring to be treated as a vulnerable  witness  under
    the Joint Presidential Guidance Note of 2010.

14.  For the above reasons, and taking into account  the  cumulative  effect
    of the concerns I have identified with the judge's decision, I conclude
    her decision is vitiated by legal error necessitating  that  I  set  it
    aside.

15.  Since no findings of fact can be preserved the case is remitted to  the
    FtT (not before Judge Bradshaw).

16.  To conclude:

    The decision of the FtT Judge is set aside for material error of law.


    The case is remitted to the FtT.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:                                 Date: 25 April 2018

             [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

