
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/00744/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at the Royal Courts of       |              Decision & Reasons        |
|Justice                            |Promulgated                             |
|On 05 June 2017                    |              On 20 June 2017           |
|                                   |                                        |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum

                                   Between

                                     G C
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim, Counsel, instructed by Topstone
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal Amin (FtJ), promulgated on 24  February  2017,  dismissing
        the appellant's appeal against  the  respondent's  decision  of  12
        January  2017  refusing  his  protection  and  human  rights  claim
        following a decision, dated 10 October 2014, to  deport  him  under
        the automatic deportation provisions of the UK Borders Act 2007.

   Factual Background


     2. The appellant is a national of  Sierra  Leone,  date  of  birth  23
        October  1989.  He  claims  to  have  entered  the  United  Kingdom
        illegally in 2003. AC, his aunt, sought to regularise his status in
        April 2003 and applications for ILR were  made  in  June  2003  and
        March 2005, but these were refused when  the  deportation  decision
        was made.


     3. On 9 September 2011 the appellant was convicted in  respect  of  14
        robberies and 5 counts of having an imitation firearm. On  each  of
        the  counts  of  robbery  he  received  a  sentence  of   6   years
        imprisonment, and on each of the  counts  of  having  an  imitation
        firearm with intent he received a sentence of 2 years imprisonment.
        The appellant received a total sentence of 8 years imprisonment.


     4. In July 2015 the appellant made an asylum claim based on  his  fear
        of unknown individuals who were said  to  be  responsible  for  the
        death of his parents. In  December  2015  the  appellant  signed  a
        National Referral Mechanism claim form contending that he had  been
        treated as a slave and trafficked into the UK. On 30 December  2015
        the Competent Authority concluded that  the  appellant  was  not  a
        victim of trafficking. On 21 January  2016  his  asylum  claim  was
        refused,  a  certificate  was  issued  under  section  72  of   the
        Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, and the asylum  claim
        was certified under section 94 of the same  Act  as  being  clearly
        unfounded.


     5.  On  2  August   2016   the   appellant,   through   his   previous
        representatives, made a fresh claim for asylum, this time based  on
        his sexuality (he claimed to be gay or bisexual) and his conversion
        to Islam, which would place him at greater risk of being persecuted
        as a gay man in Sierra Leone. Although the respondent accepted  the
        further representations as a fresh asylum claim she comprehensively
        rejected the appellant's claim to be either gay or bisexual, and to
        have converted to  Islam.  The  respondent  harboured  considerable
        doubts as to the  appellant's  credibility  because  he  could  not
        recall the names of his partners, or the names  of  gay  clubs  and
        pubs  that  he  frequently  frequented.  There  were  said  to   be
        inconsistencies in his accounts of his relationships. In his asylum
        interview the appellant indicated that he  had  only  informed  one
        acquaintance that he was gay and did not appear  to  have  informed
        his own relatives, despite the fact that they were not Muslims. The
        respondent  additionally  drew  adverse  inferences  based  on  the
        failure by the appellant to disclose his new  fear  of  persecution
        when he made his earlier asylum claim. The respondent excluded  the
        appellant from a grant of Humanitarian Protection  under  paragraph
        339D(iii)  of  the  immigration  rules.  The   respondent   finally
        considered the appellant's private life and family life  rights  as
        protected by article 8  of  the  ECHR  and  the  immigration  rules
        relating to deportations (and in particular paragraphs 398, 399 and
        399A)  but  concluded  that   there   were   no   very   compelling
        circumstances over and above those described in paragraphs 399  and
        399A.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

     6. The appellant produced a bundle of documents before the  First-tier
        Tribunal running to some 49 pages. This  included,  inter  alia,  a
        statement from him, statements from his adoptive mother (a Canadian
        citizen residing in Canada),  a  witness  statement  from  HD  (the
        appellant's  sister),  and  a  witness  statement  from   AC   (the
        appellant's aunt).


     7. The FtJ heard evidence from the appellant, his sister and his aunt.
        The FtJ concluded that appellant had not rebutted  the  presumption
        that he no longer posed a danger to the community. At [36] to  [50]
        the FtJ gave reasons in support of her rejection of the appellant's
        claim to be gay or bisexual and his claim to be a convert to Islam.
        At [48] the FtJ  noted  that  the  appellant's  sisters  and  aunts
        knowledge of his homosexuality was based on information provided by
        him to them and that they were only  repeating  what  he  had  told
        them. From [54] onwards the FtJ considered the appellant's  article
        8 claim. At [54] the FtJ stated that the immigration rules were  "a
        complete  code  for  considering  article  8  claims  and  reflects
        Parliament's view of what the  public  interest  requires  for  the
        purposes of article 8(2)".


     8. The FtJ thereafter considered the basis of the appellant's  article
        8 claim highlighting his length of residence in the UK,  his  claim
        to have integrated into the UK, his relationship  with  his  sister
        and his aunt, and the absence of  any  known  relatives  in  Sierra
        Leone. The FtJ did not accept that  the  appellant  had  integrated
        into the UK as his offending demonstrated a disregard for the  laws
        of the UK and his offences were detrimental to the wider community.
        Although accepting that his integration  into  Sierra  Leone  would
        involve some difficulties and may involve some discomfort  the  FtJ
        was not satisfied that this amounted to very significant obstacles.
        Having regard to the fact that the appellant had no children in the
        UK, did not have a partner, could maintain contact with his  family
        through modern communications and was in  good  health,  she  found
        that he could re-establish his private life  in  Sierra  Leone  and
        that there were no very compelling  circumstances  over  and  above
        those contained in paragraphs  399  and  399A  of  the  immigration
        rules. The appeal was dismissed.

The grounds of appeal

     9. The grounds challenge the FtJ's  conclusion  that  the  appellant's
        aunt and sister were simply repeating what he had  told  them,  and
        contend that the FtJ failed to  make  any  credibility  finding  in
        respect of the aunt and sister. The  grounds  argue  that  the  FtJ
        failed to 'factor in' the evidence that the appellant informed  his
        sister and aunt of  his  sexuality  "well  before  any  deportation
        proceedings and during his teenage years", and that their  evidence
        was not  challenged  in  cross  examination.  It  was  additionally
        submitted that the FtJ failed to consider evidence  from  the  aunt
        that she physically met 2 of the appellant's former partners.


    10. The grounds additionally  content  that  the  FtJ  failed  to  give
        sufficient  reasons  for  rejecting  the  evidence  given  by   the
        appellant's sister that he had learning difficulties, and that  the
        FtJ assumed the role of "expert" with reference to a letter written
        by him in which she saw no evidence of learning  difficulties.  The
        grounds contend that  the  FtJ  failed  to  give  any  reasons  for
        rejecting the appellant's claim to be a convert to  Islam,  or  how
        his conversion to Islam bolstered his claim to remain  in  the  UK.
        The  grounds  finally  challenge  the  FtJ's  assertion  that   the
        immigration rules constitute  a  complete  code  in  light  of  the
        Supreme Court decision in Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC 60, and  that  the
        judge failed to consider or apply the factors listed  in  Maslov  v
        Austria [2009] INLR 47. Permission was granted on all grounds.

Submissions at the error of law hearing


    11. Mr Karim  adopted  and  expanded  upon  his  grounds.  He  drew  my
        attention to the relevant part of the witness  statement  from  the
        appellant's aunt  in  which  she  described  a  brief  conversation
        between her and the appellant at a bus stop in which he  introduced
        his friend as being his partner, but then "laughed it off", and the
        part of the sister's statement in which she recalled the  appellant
        once asking her opinion about gay people and her belief that he was
        joking when he smiled at her and said "do you know I  am  one".  It
        was submitted that both events were significant to the  credibility
        issues because they disclosed an intimation by the  appellant  that
        he was gay.  Mr Karim submitted  that  the  FtJ  failed  to  attach
        adequate  weight  to  the  sister's  evidence  that  the  appellant
        suffered  from  learning  difficulties,  even  in  the  absence  of
        independent evidence of such learning difficulties,  and  that  the
        FtJ erred in law by acting as an expert  when  assessing  a  letter
        written by the appellant. The issue of the  appellant's  conversion
        to Islam was  described  as  a  "red  herring".  Mr  Karim  finally
        submitted that the failure  by  the  FtJ  to  appreciate  that  the
        immigration rules did not constitute a complete code  was  material
        and that she failed to apply the Maslov criteria.


    12. Mr Melvin submitted that the FtJ's assessment of the evidence  from
        the appellant's aunt and sister should not be read in isolation and
        that the FtJ gave full and detailed reasons for rejecting his claim
        regarding his sexual orientation. Despite  the  evidence  from  the
        appellant's sister relating to learning difficulties there  was  no
        independent  or  medical  evidence  confirming  the  existence   of
        learning difficulties. Although the FtJ may have mistakenly  stated
        that the immigration rules  were  a  complete  code  this  was  not
        material to the decision as the FtJ  undertook  a  full  article  8
        assessment. In any event, that Ali had not lowered the  significant
        hurdle which must be overcome by a foreign criminal to  succeed  in
        demonstrating that it would be disproportionate to deport him  from
        the United Kingdom, and the FtJ had in fact considered all  of  the
        Maslov factors. I reserved my decision.


Discussion

    13. Mr Karim's 1st ground takes issue with the FtJ's  approach  to  the
        evidence from the appellant's aunt and  sister.  At  [28]  the  FtJ
        considers the evidence given by the appellant's aunt and sister and
        disagrees with their description of the appellant's offending as  a
        'mistake' and 'an unfortunate incident'. The FtJ found that it  was
        natural for  the  appellant's  aunt  and  sister  to  minimise  his
        involvement in the offending. In so doing the FtJ did not hold that
        the evidence from the aunt and sister was incredible, or that  they
        were giving untruthful evidence. Giving valid  reasons  in  support
        the FtJ disagreed with  the  opinion  expressed  by  the  aunt  and
        sister. This was a conclusion rationally open to the FtJ. The focus
        of Mr Karim's submissions however relates to the alleged failure by
        the FtJ to properly consider the evidence given  by  the  aunt  and
        sister in relation to their knowledge  of  the  appellant's  sexual
        orientation.

    14. It is necessary to consider the evidence given by  the  appellant's
        aunt and sister in more detail. In AC's statement, at paragraph 15,
        she recalled meeting the appellant one day at a local bus stop with
        a male friend. He introduced his friend as his 'partner', but  both
        of them laughed it off, so she thought he was joking.  AC  saw  the
        appellant in the company of the same person a  few  times  'hanging
        around the house' but she never thought they were in a relationship
        until the appellant expressly informed her that he was gay and in a
        relationship with a boy called John. AC does not indicate when  the
        incident at the bus stop occurred. In her statement,  at  paragraph
        11, the appellant's sister recalled the appellant once  asking  her
        opinion about gay people. The appellant apparently smiled and  said
        'do you know I am one?' His sister thought the appellant was joking
        and brushed the  topic  aside.  The  appellant's  sister  does  not
        indicate when this incident occurred.  Both  the  sister  and  aunt
        believed that the person claimed by the appellant to be his partner
        was simply a friend.


    15. The absence of any timescale in which the appellant's utterances to
        his aunt and sister occurred is significant as his  earlier  asylum
        claim was refused in January 2016 and his  fresh  protection  claim
        based on his sexual orientation was made in August 2016.  The  only
        date provided by either the appellant's aunt or sister  in  respect
        of his express assertion to them that he was  gay  was  July  2016,
        when the appellant informed his sister that he was gay and was in a
        gay relationship. The evidence from the appellant's aunt and sister
        do not support the assertion contained in  the  grounds  of  appeal
        that he informed them of his sexuality "well before any deportation
        proceedings and during his teenage years." Further, while there was
        no challenge in cross examination to this evidence, and the FtJ did
        not find that the witnesses were giving  untruthful  evidence,  the
        FtJ correctly stated that the sister and aunt were  wholly  reliant
        on what the appellant told them. Whilst the aunt, in oral evidence,
        did indicate that she met 2 of the individuals whom  the  appellant
        claimed were former partners, she explained that she was not  aware
        of their sexual orientation  at  the  time.  It  is  clear  from  a
        holistic assessment of the  evidence  that,  when  the  appellant's
        sister and aunt met  the  individuals  now  claimed  to  be  former
        partners, they regarded them as friends of  the  appellant  and  no
        more.


    16. In determining whether any failure by  the  FtJ  to  make  adequate
        findings in respect of the evidence from the appellant's  aunt  and
        sister was material it  is  also  necessary  to  contextualise  the
        evidence from the aunt and sister against the totality of the other
        unchallenged adverse credibility findings. From [36]  to  [47]  the
        FtJ identifies a number of factors  that  seriously  undermine  the
        appellant's claim to be gay. These included inconsistencies in  the
        appellant's  account  of  when  his  relationships  commenced,  his
        inability in his asylum interview to give the  full  names  of  his
        partners, his inability to name any of the clubs or pubs he claimed
        to have frequently attended with his partners, and his  failure  to
        mention his sexual  orientation  or  his  conversion  to  Islam  in
        respect of his earlier asylum application. In the  absence  of  any
        clear  chronological  framework  in  which  to  posit   the   brief
        conversations described by the appellant's  sister  and  aunt,  and
        having regard to the nature of  the  conversations  and  the  other
        cogent reasons relied on by the FtJ in  rejecting  the  appellant's
        account of his sexual orientation, I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
        absence of any express reference to these conversations  materially
        undermines the safety of the FtJ's findings of fact.


    17. I see no merit in the 2nd ground of appeal. The  evidence  provided
        by the appellant's sister intimating that he suffered from learning
        difficulties  was  unsupported  by  any  independent   or   medical
        evidence. It is for the appellant to discharge the burden of  proof
        in a protection claim, albeit to  the  lower  standard.  While  the
        sister may  genuinely  believe  that  the  appellant  suffers  from
        learning difficulties the FtJ was entitled, for the reasons  given,
        and in the absence of any independent supportive evidence, to  find
        that he did not suffer from learning difficulties. Nor did the  FtJ
        fall into legal error  in  relying  on  a  letter  written  by  the
        appellant making representations against  deportation  as  evidence
        that he did  not  have  learning  difficulties.  The  FtJ  was  not
        unlawfully acting as an expert but making a necessary and  relevant
        evaluation of the evidence before her.


    18. In respect  of  the  appellant's  conversion  to  Islam,  Mr  Karim
        submitted that this was a "red herring". If it was a red herring it
        was  one  advanced  by  the  appellant  in  his  asylum  claim.  He
        maintained that he would be at greater risk as a gay Muslim man  in
        Sierra Leone. The FtJ, at [42] to [45], gave detailed  reasons  for
        rejecting the appellant's claim to be a convert to Islam. This  was
        a conclusion rationally open to the FtJ on the evidence before  him
        and for the reasons given.


    19. Grounds 4 and 5 relate to the appellant's article  8  human  rights
        claim. I accept  Mr  Karim's  submission  that  the  FtJ  erred  in
        referring to the immigration  rules  relating  to  deportations  as
        being a complete code. In the light of Hesham Ali  the  immigration
        rules do not amount to a complete code.


    20. In Hesham Ali the Supreme Court stated, at [51] and [53]
          In MF (Nigeria) [2014] 1 WLR 544 the Court  of  Appeal  described
          the new rules set out in para 23 above as "a complete  code"  for
          article 8 claims (para 44). That expression  reflected  the  view
          that the concluding words of rule 398 required the application of
          a  proportionality  test  in  accordance  with   the   Strasbourg
          jurisprudence, taking into account all the article 8 criteria and
          all other factors which were relevant  to  proportionality  (para
          39). On that basis, the court commented that the result should be
          the same whether the proportionality assessment was  carried  out
          within or outside the  new  rules:  it  was  a  sterile  question
          whether it was required by the rules or by the general law  (para
          45).
          ...
          53.     As explained at para 17 above,  the  Rules  are  not  law
          (although they are treated as law for  the  purposes  of  section
          86(3)(a) of the 2002  Act),  and  therefore  do  not  govern  the
          determination of appeals,  other  than  appeals  brought  on  the
          ground that the decision is not in accordance with the Rules: see
          para 7 above. The policies adopted by the Secretary of State, and
          given effect by  the  Rules,  are  nevertheless  a  relevant  and
          important consideration for tribunals determining appeals brought
          on Convention grounds, because they reflect the assessment of the
          general public interest made  by  the  responsible  minister  and
          endorsed by Parliament. In particular,  tribunals  should  accord
          respect to the Secretary of State's assessment of the strength of
          the  general  public  interest  in  the  deportation  of  foreign
          offenders, and also consider all factors relevant to the specific
          case before them, as explained at paras 37-38, 46 and  50  above.
          It remains for them to judge whether, on the facts as  they  have
          found them, and giving due weight to the strength of  the  public
          interest in deportation in the  case  before  them,  the  factors
          brought into account on the other side  lead  to  the  conclusion
          that deportation would be disproportionate.
    21. In EA v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA  Civ
        10 the Court of Appeal held, at [19], that Hashem Ali had "...  not
        lowered the significant hurdle which must be overcome by a  foreign
        criminal  to  succeed   in   demonstrating   that   it   would   be
        disproportionate to deport him from the United Kingdom."  Moreover,
        in NE-A (Nigeria) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
        [2017] EWCA Civ 239, a Court of Appeal decision in  which  sections
        117A to 117D of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002
        were considered (unlike Hesham Ali), Sir Stephen  Richards  stated,
        at [14],


         Part 5A of the 2002 Act, by contrast [to the immigration rules], is
         primary legislation  directed  to  tribunals  and  governing  their
         decision-making in relation to Article 8 claims in the  context  of
         appeals under the Immigration Acts. I see no reason to  doubt  what
         was common ground in Rhuppiah and was  drawn  from  NA  (Pakistan),
         that sections 117A-117D, taken together, are  intended  to  provide
         for a structured approach to the application  of  Article  8  which
         produces in all cases a  final  result  which  is  compatible  with
         Article 8. In particular, if  in  working  through  the  structured
         approach one gets to section 117C(6),  the  proper  application  of
         that provision produces a final result compatible with Article 8 in
         all cases to which it applies. The provision contains more  than  a
         statement of policy to which regard  must  be  had  as  a  relevant
         consideration. Parliament's assessment that  "the  public  interest
         requires   deportation   unless   there   are    very    compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2" is one to which the tribunal is bound by law to give effect.

    22. It is clear from the  above  authorities,  and  in  particular  the
        extract above from NE-A, that the approach  identified  in  section
        117C must be followed by a Tribunal and that  the  appellant  would
        need to demonstrate the existence of very compelling  circumstances
        over and above exceptions 1 and 2. Section 117C effectively mirrors
        the immigration rules at  paragraphs  398  to  399A.  The  FtJ  was
        clearly aware of her statutory obligation to consider and apply the
        factors in section 117C. In the circumstances I do  not  find  that
        her mistaken categorisation of the immigration rules as a  complete
        code amounts to a  material  error.  From  [54]  to  [60]  the  FtJ
        considered the appellant's article 8 claim taking full  account  of
        his length of residence and his relationship with his family in the
        UK. Although the FtJ did not make reference to the case  of  Maslov
        of by name she did take into account  the  criteria  identified  in
        that case. The FtJ was entitled to find that the appellant had  not
        integrated into  the  United  Kingdom  by  reason  of  his  serious
        criminality and the absence of any evidence to  show  any  positive
        contribution to UK society. The FtJ was clearly aware of the length
        of time the appellant resided in the UK and his age when he arrived
        in 2003. The FtJ considered the relationship between the  appellant
        and his aunt and sister but was entitled  to  conclude  that  these
        relationships could continue through remote forms of communication.
        The FtJ considered that, whilst the appellant may face difficulties
        in integrating into Sierra Leone society, these were outweighed  by
        the serious  nature  of  his  criminality.  Having  considered  the
        appellant's circumstances and the impact of his deportation on  his
        relationship with his aunt and his sister the FtJ was  entitled  to
        conclude  that  there  were  no   very   compelling   circumstances
        justifying a grant of leave to remain on the basis of article 8.

    23. In the circumstances I find that the FtJ did not materially err  in
        law and I formally dismiss the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal did  not  materially  err  in  law.  The  appeal  is
dismissed.

Signed
[pic]

Upper                  Tribunal                  Judge                  Blum
    Date           19 June 2017


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed
[pic]

Upper                  Tribunal                  Judge                  Blum
    Date           19 June 2017

