
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00002/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 8th February 2016                 |On 23rd February 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [S A]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Mathews, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed  by  Latta  &  Co.,
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are as described above, but the rest of this  determination
    refers to them as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia, born on 6th July 1980.   He  has
    not sought an anonymity order.  His immigration and criminal history is
    set out at the beginning of the SSHD's  decision  dated  19th  February
    2015.

 3. The respondent decided to refuse the appellant's protection  and  human
    rights claim; to certify under section 72 of the 2002 Act  that  he  is
    presumed to have been convicted of a particularly serious crime and  to
    constitute a danger to the community of the UK; and to proceed with his
    deportation as a foreign criminal, being conducive to the  public  good
    and in the public interest.

 4. By decision promulgated on 6th August 2015 a panel  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal comprising  Judge  Kempton  and  Mr  A  Armitage  allowed  the
    appellant's appeal "on humanitarian protection  grounds,  human  rights
    grounds and under Immigration Rules 397 and 399A".

 5. It became common ground in course of submissions in the Upper  Tribunal
    that the decision contains a typographical error at the end,  and  that
    the panel intended to say that the appeal was allowed under Rule 399(a)
    not 399A.

 6. The grounds on which the SSHD was granted permission to appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal are set out in 11 paragraphs.  1  and  2  are  narrative
    only.

 7. Paragraph 3 points out that  the  panel  did  not  decide  whether  the
    presumption in terms of section 72 was rebutted.   It  is  acknowledged
    that the omission may not be material, but Mr Mathews submitted that it
    is nevertheless serious because it overlaps with other  issues  in  the
    case and if the certificate were upheld  that  would  factor  into  the
    ultimate assessment.

 8. Mr Winter acknowledged there was error in this respect, but  said  that
    it is not material.

 9. Paragraph 4 of the grounds points out that  the  respondent's  decision
    also  excluded  the  appellant  from  humanitarian   protection   under
    paragraph 339D of the Immigration Rules.  The panel sets out  paragraph
    339D at paragraph 21 of its decision but goes on  at  paragraph  45  to
    find that the appellant "ought to be granted  humanitarian  protection"
    without  any  reference  to  the  exclusion  point.   This  turned   on
    considerations similar to the section  72  presumption.   Nor  was  the
    panel entitled to find that his appeal should also  be  allowed  "under
    Article 3 of the ECHR" (also at paragraph  45)  without  resolving  the
    point.  In any event, Mr Mathews submitted, the decision  contained  no
    reasons to justify a grant of humanitarian  protection,  or  protection
    under Article 3, or no adequate reasons.

10. Paragraph 5 goes on to criticise further the adequacy of the  reasoning
    for the panel's Article 3 finding.  Insofar as the panel  had  in  mind
    the appellant's mental health, the high threshold was  not  approached.
    Although the panel founded upon the appellant ending up in an IDP camp,
    it did not explain how that would come about or how it would involve  a
    breach of Article 3.  Mr Mathews pointed out that there  was  no  clear
    analysis in the part of the decision  which  comes  under  the  heading
    "Asylum Claim" at paragraphs 42 to 46 and which ends by finding no real
    risk of persecution on account of a breach of the  Refugee  Convention.
    Insofar as the panel notes the appellant's  educational  background  in
    the UK, there is no reason  to  think  that  it  is  such  that  he  is
    particularly  disadvantaged  in  Somalia  in  the  labour   market   or
    otherwise.  The panel  recorded  competing  submissions  regarding  the
    situation in Mogadishu (paragraphs 37 to 39) but did not say  why  they
    preferred one submission  over  the  other,  and  failed  to  refer  to
    background evidence or to the country guidance case of MOJ.  Mr Mathews
    submitted that the panel's findings on the appellant's protection needs
    simply could not stand.

11. Mr Winter's position on these grounds was again that while error  might
    be disclosed, it was not material to the outcome.  He also said that on
    Article 3 the panel did give adequate reasons to support the conclusion
    that there was a risk of ending up in an IDP camp.

12. Ground 6 stems from the narration in the respondent's decision at  page
    2 that on 17th  April  2012  an  email  from  the  Metropolitan  Police
    confirmed that the appellant had been arrested in Morocco in possession
    of what was believed to be  a  stolen  UK  vehicle.   Although  he  was
    thereafter excluded from the UK he re-entered (by some  unknown  means)
    and came to the attention of the SSHD next when convicted  at  Trafford
    Magistrates' Court on 19th May 2014.  At paragraph 2  of  the  decision
    the panel says that the appellant disputed that he  had  ever  been  to
    Morocco, that there was no evidence of the  matter,  that  it  was  not
    pursued at the hearing and that they accordingly concluded it to be  an
    error in the respondent's summary.  Paragraph 6  of  the  grounds  says
    that the panel's assertion is an error, and the fact  that  the  matter
    was not pursued at the  hearing  could  not  mean  that  there  was  no
    exclusion order.  Mr Mathews said this disclosed  a  further  error  of
    approach.

13. Mr Winter said that there had  been  no  substantial  evidence  of  the
    appellant having been in Morocco, and that this was  a  side  issue  on
    which nothing turned.

14. Neither side seemed quite sure what to make of ground 6, and I find  it
    an odd matter.  It is correct that the respondent did not  produce  the
    underlying or  most  proximate  source  of  the  information  that  the
    appellant left the country  and  went  to  Morocco,  with  the  further
    inference that he re-entered the UK unlawfully.  The  appellant  denied
    this in his statement, saying he had never been  out  of  the  country.
    Neither side in the First-tier Tribunal appears to have  made  much  of
    it.   In  my  view,  the  panel  might  well  have  observed  that  the
    authorities in Morocco and the Metropolitan Police have  no  reason  to
    make up an allegation that the appellant was in Morocco, while  he  has
    reason to deny it, and he has such a compendious record  of  dishonesty
    that everything he says should be treated with  suspicion.   The  panel
    might have found it difficult to reach a  conclusion  one  way  or  the
    other, but I do not see why they should have  thought  this  to  be  an
    error creeping out of  nowhere  into  the  respondent's  summary.   The
    present ground logically points out that non-explanation of  the  issue
    at the hearing did not mean that there was no exclusion order, but that
    is not what the panel found.  The panel found that there  had  been  no
    exit from and re-entry to the UK.  Why they thought so is a mystery.

15. Paragraph 7 of the grounds complains that  the  panel  give  inadequate
    reasons for the finding that the appellant's ex-spouse now  resides  in
    Ghana, and has little or no involvement  in  the  lives  of  their  two
    children.  The ground says that although she provided a statement or  a
    letter she did not attend court and there  was  no  "independent  third
    party evidence e.g.  from  Social  Services  to  verify  that  she  had
    permanently left the  UK  and  had  therefore  no  involvement  in  the
    children's lives".  Mr Mathews  submitted  that  the  panel  failed  to
    tackle the issue.

16. Mr Winter in response pointed out that  the  evidence  was  before  the
    panel.  In her statement the mother said that she had effectively given
    up any involvement with the two children.  The background was that  the
    behavioural problems of the older child were a principal cause  of  the
    breakdown of the relationship.  Mr Winter pointed  to  item  X  of  the
    appellant's bundle in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  being  letters  from
    Springfield Community Primary School regarding  the  wellbeing  of  the
    children.  This narrates that the  appellant  has  been  known  to  the
    school as the custodial parent and that he has been the  primary  carer
    for almost four years.  It is apparent that there were concerns  during
    the appellant's custodial and immigration detention that there  was  no
    other legally identified adult to act regarding their welfare and  that
    without him the children were likely to be taken into care.  Mr  Winter
    directed attention in particular to paragraphs 15, 16  and  36  of  the
    panel's decision and said that it was plain that the  panel  had  ample
    evidence that the mother of the  children  was  in  Ghana  and  had  no
    involvement, and that responsibility lay with the appellant  and  to  a
    lesser extent with his relatives.  He submitted that this was more than
    sufficient to justify the panel's conclusions at paragraph  52  to  55,
    which are highly  favourable,  based  on  the  best  interests  of  the
    children, with the alternative "very poor and unacceptable outcome"  of
    their being taken into care.

17. Ground 8 makes two points - firstly, that the panel did not  adequately
    explain how and why deportation would be unduly harsh on the  children,
    and secondly that the conclusion that deportation "is not conducive  to
    the public good in terms of Rule 398(b)" is simply wrong  in  law.   Mr
    Mathews submitted that it was a glaring legal error for  the  panel  to
    conclude that deportation was not conducive  to  the  public  good,  an
    issue settled by statute and not open to the  panel  to  re-visit.   He
    acknowledged that the panel did say at paragraph 64 that  there  was  a
    public interest in deportation, but that observation was in context  of
    another legal error (ground 10)  and  did  not  serve  to  correct  the
    previous error.

18. Mr Winter on the first point in Ground 8 said that it was simply  wrong
    for the SSHD to say that the appellant "clearly had little  involvement
    in the children's lives".  The evidence was entirely to  the  contrary.
    On the second point, he acknowledged that  the  panel's  statement  was
    wrong as a matter of law.  However, he said that this  point  also  was
    cancelled out because the panel's answer to the ultimate question was a
    sustainable one.

19. Paragraph 9 of the grounds says that the panel's treatment of  sections
    117A to D of the 2002 Act, within the context of the Rules, was  inapt,
    the Rules in respect  of  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  being  a
    complete code - Bossade [2015] UKUT 00415.  Mr Mathews  drew  attention
    also to KMO [2015] UKUT 543.

20. Mr Winter submitted that the  panel  may  have  been  confused  in  its
    approach to the interaction between the Immigration Rules and  Part  5A
    of the 2002 Act, but that did not disclose anything material.

21. Paragraph 10 of the grounds  criticises  the  panel  for  conducting  a
    "brief freestanding Article 8 analysis" and for purporting to allow the
    appeal on that basis also.

22. Mr Winter similarly submitted that any separate analysis  in  terms  of
    Article 8  was  incidental,  and  was  not  the  real  reason  for  the
    favourable outcome.

23. Paragraph 10 does disclose another error.  It is well established  that
    the deportation provisions form a complete code, leaving no scope for a
    separate and freestanding Article 8 analysis.  The  answer  in  such  a
    case emerges from the Rules; in this case it must  ultimately  turn  on
    the "unduly harsh" consideration.

24. There is also an error within an error here, in relation  to  what  the
    panel said about the impact on the public purse.  As  the  SSHD  points
    out, there is little  or  no  evidence  that  the  appellant  has  ever
    provided for his children or  that  they  have  ever  been  other  than
    dependent on the public purse.

25. There will almost inevitably be considerable public  expense,  whatever
    the outcome of these proceedings; although the panel may well have been
    right to the extent that the expense is likely to be even  greater,  in
    absence of the appellant.

26. Paragraph 11 of the grounds submits, "It is simply not  clear  how  the
    absence of a recidivist criminal who has limited involvement  with  the
    children would be unduly harsh on them".  This ground encapsulates  the
    ultimate issue, but it is  again  plainly  wrong  on  the  facts.   The
    appellant is a recidivist criminal (although it might be observed  that
    his more serious sentences and periods of custody are prior to his life
    as a parent) but the SSHD's quarrel with the panel's view of what would
    be unduly harsh for the children is not based on a correct appreciation
    of the evidence and of the panel's conclusions in  this  respect.   The
    ground repeats the assertion of limited  involvement,  which  does  not
    accord with the findings in fact, and would not  be  justified  on  any
    sensible view of the evidence.

27. I have recorded the grounds and  competing  submissions,  and  to  some
    extent sought to resolve them point by point, prior to dealing with the
    ultimate submissions.

28. Having heard all the submissions, as mentioned above, both  sides  were
    in agreement that for paragraph 399A the decision should  read  399(a).
    Mr Mathews thought the reference to paragraph 397 was  also  an  error.
    He accepted in light of the evidence and findings to  which  Mr  Winter
    referred that the criticism in the SSHD's grounds  that  the  appellant
    had little involvement in the children's lives went too far.

29. The final submission for the SSHD was that  the  decision  disclosed  a
    series of legal errors, such that the final conclusion on  whether  the
    impact on the children would be unduly harsh could not be sustained.

30. Mr Winter's final submission was that while it could not be  said  that
    the decision was free from  error,  it  did  identify  and  answer  the
    ultimate question whether deportation of the appellant would be  unduly
    harsh in respect of the effect on the children, and therefore  did  not
    require to be set aside and re-visited.

31. The panel has gone  significantly  astray  on  several  legal  aspects.
    These errors have been picked off one by one in the grounds,  and  need
    not be repeated.   However, the SSHD's grounds go wrong and are  indeed
    misleading on the nature  of  the  evidence  and  of  the  facts.   The
    appellant is a recidivist whose deportation would be conducive  to  the
    public good, but there was ample evidence  before  the  panel,  clearly
    recorded in its decision, to justify its conclusions that they are more
    active and much happier having their father  back;  that  there  is  no
    other carer and it is highly likely that they would be taken into care,
    with "far-reaching consequences" especially for the  older  child;  and
    that the appellant is an excellent father and the children love  living
    with him where they feel safe and secure, with  a  big  improvement  in
    their behaviour since he returned (paragraph 55).  At paragraph 67  the
    panel concluded that these were:

         "... given the  considerable  weight  of  family  and  professional
         witness  evidence  ...  in  support  of  the  appellant  ...   very
         compelling circumstances, taking into  account  the  needs  of  his
         children and the lack of any other person in  the  family  able  or
         willing to look after them".

32. The further conclusion at paragraph  67  that  deportation  would  have
    "devastating and life changing effects on the children" does not go any
    further than the panel was entitled to hold.

33. While preparing this decision I have noted the case  of  Suckoo  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 39, which has only just been reported and probably  would  not
    have been available to representatives.  The case was somewhat  similar
    to this one, in that the Court of Appeal found that the Upper  Tribunal
    in allowing a deportation appeal had not followed the case law.  The UT
    had failed:

         "... to recognise  that  the  public  interest  in  deportation  of
         foreign  criminals  and  Article  8  rights  are  not  held  in   a
         suspenseful balance.  As this court has repeatedly  reiterated  ...
         the scales are weighed in favour of deportation  unless  there  are
         circumstances which  are  sufficiently  compelling  (and  therefore
         acceptable) to outweigh the  public  interest  in  deportation  ...
         there must be something very compelling  to  outweigh  that  public
         interest ..."

    The  Court  held  that  the  UT  had  not  made  findings  sufficiently
    compelling to outweigh the public interest, and that  the  legal  error
    was not such that the UT decision could nevertheless stand.  There  had
    been "an  insufficiently  rigorous  approach  to  Article  8,  and  the
    decision reached cannot be said to be  the  only  decision  open  to  a
    rational Tribunal on the evidence before it" (paragraph 44).

34. If the facts were as set out in the SSHD's grounds of appeal  i.e.  (a)
    there was no good reason to believe that the mother was absent from the
    children's lives, and (b) the appellant had little  or  no  involvement
    with his children, then plainly the present  decision  would  fall  not
    only to be set aside but to be reversed.  However, the  SSHD's  grounds
    (which are  not  the  responsibility  of  Mr  Mathews)  are  even  more
    misleading on the facts than  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  is
    shaky on several points of law.

35.  Notwithstanding  that  legal  fragility,  I  find  that  the   panel's
    resolution of the ultimate question, based on the facts of the case, is
    a legally justified one.

36. Each case is different.  Although with some initial  hesitation,  given
    the errors along the way, I have come to the view that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's  conclusions  on  the  unduly  harsh  consequences  for  the
    children of remaining in the  UK  without  the  person  who  is  to  be
    deported are so well  justified  that  those  legal  errors  played  no
    significant part in their ultimate analysis.   The  legal  side  issues
    were thoroughly muddled, but the correct ultimate question in terms  of
    Rule 399(a) was arrived at.   The  rest  is  immaterial.   The  panel's
    analysis of the facts, going to that ultimate question, was  clear  and
    well justified.  There is nothing legally  wrong  with  the  conclusion
    that  the  facts  of  the  case  amounted  to   the   very   compelling
    circumstances required by  the  scheme  of  the  statute  law  and  the
    Immigration Rules.

37. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and remade to  the
    extent only of reformulating the outcome thus: the  appeal  is  allowed
    under paragraph 399(a) of the Immigration Rules.




                           [pic]
                           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


                           16 February 2016
