
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00350/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 7 November 2016                         |On 23 November 2016              |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                                     S S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Martin of Counsel instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a national of Sri Lanka, has permission to  challenge  a
    decision of First-tier Tribunal (FtT) Judge Dineen sent on 9  September
    2016 dismissing his appeal against a decision by the respondent  on  15
    June 2015 refusing to grant him asylum or humanitarian protection.

2.   The principal ground relied on concerns the delay in promulgating  this
    case.  Judge Dineen heard the case on 13 November 2015.  By the time it
    was promulgated, on 9 September 2016, nearly nine months  had  elapsed.
    It is submitted that this delay makes the decision unsafe  because  the
    appeal was one that very much turned on credibility.

3.   I consider this ground is made out.  Judge  Dineen  sought  to  address
    the delay point at para 55:

         "55. I have considered all the evidence and  submissions  presented
             in the appeal, both in the period of  three  months  following
             the hearing and thereafter.  I regret the time which has  been
             taken in promulgating this decision, which has been due to the
             pressure of work and the listing of hearings in the Tribunal."

    From the above I deduce that the judge  was  not  seeking  to  rely  on
    failings of the Tribunal administration in promulgating.  His reference
    to "pressure of  work"  can  only  refer  to  his  personal  situation.
    Further the judge makes clear that his was not a case in which  he  had
    reached specific findings of fact within the three months.  Rather  his
    consideration of the evidence continued "in the period of three  months
    following the hearing and thereafter" (italics added)

4.   The judge's reference  to  three  months  signifies  his  awareness  of
    established case law on delays  in  promulgation,  in  particular,  the
    judgment given by Wilson, LT in RK (Algeria) [2007]  EWCA  Civ  868  at
    para 20:

         "20. Miss Chan relies in particular upon a decision of this  court,
             namely Sambasivan v Secretary of State for the Home Department
             (2000)  Imm  AR   85.    In   that   case   an   asylum-seeker
             unsuccessfully appealed to this court  on  the  primary  basis
             that, instead of hearing his  appeal  substantively,  the  IAT
             should have remitted the matter for a fresh hearing by another
             adjudicator because the adjudicator had failed  to  promulgate
             his determination for four months after the hearing.   It  was
             my Lord, the President, then Potter  LJ,  who  gave  the  only
             substantive judgment.  The appellant pressed on this court the
             statement of the IAT in Mario (1998) Imm AR 281 at 287 to  the
             effect that:

             "In an area such as asylum  where  evidence  requires  anxious
             scrutiny, the Tribunal will usually remit a  case  to  another
             adjudicator where the  period  between  the  hearing  and  the
             dictation of the determination is more than 3 months."

             In my judgment my Lord said, at [16]:

             "In my view, the decision in Mario was no  more  and  no  less
             than a useful statement of guidance to practitioners upon  the
             usual attitude and likely decision of the IAT in a case  where
             an issue essential to the disposition of the claim for  asylum
             depends upon a careful weighing  of  the  credibility  of  the
             applicant and yet  it  appears  that  the  delay  between  the
             hearing date and the preparation of the determination  exceeds
             three  months.   In  the  absence  of  special  or  particular
             circumstances, that is plainly a useful  and  proper  rule  of
             thumb which, in the experience of the Tribunal, it is  broadly
             just to apply, for the twin  reasons  that  substantial  delay
             between hearing and preparation of the  determination  renders
             the assessment of the credibility issues unsafe and that  such
             a delay tends to  undermine  the  loser's  confidence  in  the
             correctness of the decision once delivered."

             Later my Lord continued:

             "In cases of delay of this kind, the matter is best approached
             from the  starting  point  that,  where  important  issues  of
             credibility arises, a  delay  of  over  three  months  between
             hearing and determination will merit remittance for re-hearing
             unless, by reason of particular  circumstances,  it  is  clear
             that the eventual outcome of the application, whether  by  the
             same or a different route, must be the same."

             In his judgment my Lord went on to  explain  that  there  were
             particular circumstances in the case before  the  court  which
             militated against application of the  rule  of  thumb,  namely
             that the  Tribunal  had  allowed  for  the  substance  of  the
             appellant's complaint about the delay by stating that it would
             proceed to determine the appeal on the basis that, save in one
             respect which my  Lord  considered  to  have  been  rationally
             excepted, the appellant's account of past events was true."

5.   In the Rule 24 response  the  respondent  noted  "the  grounds  do  not
    establish a nexus between the delay and the safety of the decision".  I
    beg to differ.  The judge heard from the appellant  in  November  2015.
    On his own accord he was still considering what findings to make on his
    evidence outside the period of three months.  Among the  reasons  given
    for rejecting the  appellant's  credibility  were  concerns  about  his
    handling of questions put to him.  In the asylum interview and in  this
    context it would have been important to know how the judge regarded the
    appellant's performance as a witness before him;  yet  the  judge  says
    nothing about this.  The period in excess of  three  months  is  really
    twice as long of the rule of thumb benchmark of 3 months; that adds  to
    my concern as to the transparency  of  the  judge's  deliberations  and
    their safety.

6.   Had it not been for the excessive delay, I  would  not  have  found  an
    error of law on the basis of the other grounds on their own, although I
    do not accept that they identify  certain  other  shortcomings  in  the
    judge's assessment.

7.   I do not consider that the judge was entitled  to  discount  completely
    the evidence set out in the  report  from  South  West  London  and  St
    George's NHS Trust  dated  29  May  2014  stating  that  the  appellant
    suffered from PTSD, just because it was not in the  form  of  a  report
    from a "qualified practitioner".  Whilst he may have been  entitled  to
    consider that the appellant's sur place activities would not place  him
    at risk in the eyes of the Sri Lankan authorities, it does  not  appear
    that he took account of their entirety: he refers at  para  78  to  the
    letter from the National Liberal Party and the "photographic  evidence"
    without making clear that he understood  the  evidence  before  him  to
    include internet articles showing the appellant at a ceremony where the
    LTTE  flags  are  on  display  and  the  deaths  of  LTTE  members  are
    commemorated.

8.   These shortcomings, whilst not  enough  on  their  own  to  identify  a
    material error of law, add a backdrop to my principal concern that  the
    judge has made his key findings on the case too long after he heard the
    appellant's oral evidence.

9.   For the above reasons I consider that the  judge  materially  erred  in
    law and that his decision should be set aside.

10.  In light of my above analysis I have decided that the  case  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   [pic]                               Date

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

