
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00379/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|                                              |                              |
|on 8th March 2016                             |on 1st April 2016             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                    [A J]
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



For the Appellant:     Mr D Katani, of Katani & Co, Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mrs S Saddiq, Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran, born on [ ] 1990.  He has not asked
    for an anonymity order.  He was encountered  by  police  on  8th  April
    2015, and claimed to have entered the UK clandestinely  on  that  date.
    He sought asylum.

 2. The appellant does not dispute the summary of his claim, set out in the
    respondent's refusal letter dated 12th June 2015 as  derived  from  the
    information he gave at interview.  He says that he is a member  of  the
    Arabic minority in  Iran.   Along  with  two  friends,  he  distributed
    circulars and CDs in his area to raise awareness of the problems  faced
    by that minority.  One of his friends told him that the other had  been
    captured by the authorities, and that it was not safe for him to return
    home.  He arranged to flee the country.   The  authorities  have  since
    searched his home and made enquiries of his parents.

 3. The respondent found the  appellant's  claim  vague,  and  declined  to
    accept it as genuine.

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.   His  grounds  are
    only a generalised expression of disagreement, setting out no  specific
    issues for decision.

 5. First-tier Tribunal Judge D'Ambrosio dismissed the  appellant's  appeal
    by decision promulgated on 9th December 2015.

 6. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal on grounds which in summary
    are as follows:

         1.   Error at paragraphs 48 and 50 in expecting  the  appellant  to
             obtain corroboration from relatives  in  Iran.   Even  if  the
             appellant had obtained letters from family members, the First-
             tier Tribunal would have placed little weight upon them.

          2. Speculation and conjecture:

               i) At paragraphs 49 and 50, speculation  that  the  appellant
                  would not carry out activities which might  implicate  his
                  family.

              ii) Paragraph 50, no evidence to support the finding  that  it
                  was not  plausible  that  the  appellant  would  not  have
                  contacted his family.

             iii) Paragraphs 52 to 56, no evidence to  justify  the  finding
                  that the appellant's family could not have afforded to pay
                  a people smuggler.

              iv) Paragraph 61, in finding that the appellant,  if  he  were
                  committed, would have contacted his party in the UK,  when
                  there was no evidence that the party had a presence in the
                  UK.

               v) Paragraph 70 and 71, no evidence that  the  appellant  had
                  access to the internet.

          3. Failure to assess  evidence  material  to  the  outcome  -  at
             paragraph 16, an irrational finding that the  appellant  would
             not have carried out such activities knowing that he would  be
             arrested if discovered, it being well-known that many  persons
             carry out risky activities in opposition to governments.

 7. In a Rule 24  response  to  the  grant  of  permission  to  appeal  the
    respondent says that the conclusions reached by the judge stem  from  a
    full consideration of the facts of the case; it was open to  the  judge
    to reach an opinion regarding both the actions of the appellant and his
    family in Iran; and the grounds are mere disagreement.

 8. Mr Katani sought at the outset of the hearing to add a  further  ground
    of appeal.  He referred to paragraphs 54 to 56  of  the  determination,
    where the judge analyses the ability of the appellant's family  to  pay
    for his travel by reference to evidence of the average income in  Iran.
    The judge finds this evidence in the Home Office's  Country  of  Origin
    Information Report and in the US State Department Country  Report.   Mr
    Katani submitted that the judge erred by carrying out his own  research
    and by referring to sources which were not cited to him.

 9.  Mr  Katani  accepted  that  these  are  sources  well-known  in   this
    jurisdiction, that there was nothing to show that the judge  was  wrong
    in the conclusions he drew about average income, and that the appellant
    did not seek to offer any alternative evidence or interpretation of the
    matter.  Nevertheless, he said this was a  significant  aspect  of  the
    judge's assessment, and an error of law which alone was  sufficient  to
    justify a remit to the First-tier Tribunal.

10. The further submissions for the appellant sought to amplify the grounds
    above.  It was argued that these disclosed  an  overall  error  of  the
    judge relying on his own point of view both of the likely behaviour  of
    someone in the appellant's position and of the behaviour of the Iranian
    authorities.  It was accepted that ground 3 did not disclose a discrete
    category of error, but was rather another example of error of the  type
    sought aimed at in ground 2.

11. Mrs Saddiq submitted as follows.  The proposed new ground of  error  by
    relying on a  judge's  own  researches  came  much  too  late,  and  no
    amendment should be permitted.  In any event,  an  appellant  with  the
    benefit of professional representation could not properly  complain  of
    being  taken  by  surprise  by  such  sources  of  information  as  the
    respondent's Country of Origin Reports and US State Department Reports.
     These are basic sources of information in all asylum cases, within the
    public domain and within judicial knowledge.  There was  nothing  wrong
    with a judge reasoning part of his findings  by  reference  to  average
    income levels in the country of origin.  On ground  1,  the  judge  was
    entitled to note the absence  of  evidence  from  sources  which  might
    reasonably have been expected to provide  it,  namely  members  of  the
    appellant's  family.   Grounds  2  and  3  formed  only  a  series   of
    disagreements with findings which were not  speculative  but  evidence-
    based.

12. I reserved my determination.

13. The proposed new ground of appeal came at  the  last  possible  moment.
    There was no good reason for it being held back until then.

14. The judge's point based on evidence of average income  was  that  there
    was not before him a reasonable  explanation  of  how  the  appellant's
    family could so readily fund the claimed amount of  US$10,000  for  his
    journey to the UK.  The appellant made no direct attack on that  aspect
    of the reasoning, only on the judge deriving it  from  the  sources  he
    did.

15. I do not think it is an error of law for  a  judge  to  refer  to  such
    common source documents as the  respondent's  COIR  and  the  US  State
    Department  Report.   These   are   within   the   knowledge   of   all
    representatives in this jurisdiction, in which  Mr  Katani's  firm  has
    many years of experience.

16. Ground 1 discloses no error.  A judge is always entitled  to  note  the
    absence of evidence which ought to have been easily forthcoming.  It is
    wrong to speculate in the grounds that the judge  would  have  rejected
    such evidence  anyway.   He  would  have  been  bound  to  evaluate  it
    according to his judicial duty.

17. The particular point at ground 2(v) is not well taken.  The  judge  did
    not say that the appellant must have found out his information from the
    internet.  He said that the appellant  might  have  known  of  protests
    against anti-Arab discrimination from public sources such as television
    and newspapers.  It is hardly speculative but rather  common  sense  to
    say that the appellant as an Iranian Arab was likely to know about such
    matters.

18. Ground 3  seeks  to  elevate  another  disagreement  to  the  level  of
    irrationality, but the judge at paragraph 60 was entitled  to  find  it
    implausible that the appellant would run significant  risks  for  party
    members, when he himself was not a member.  The judge did not say  that
    no one ever runs a risk.  What he had to decide, and  did  decide,  was
    whether the appellant had shown to the necessary standard that he chose
    to do so.

19. As to grounds 2 and 3 generally, it is always easy  to  attack  adverse
    findings as speculative or conjectural (whereas a favourable finding is
    always seen as reasonable).  This all depends on judging the particular
    facts.  In my view, the judge's findings  were  open  to  him  and  are
    sensibly explained.  Cumulatively, they justified the  conclusion  that
    the appellant failed to establish his case.

20. Put another way, I uphold the submission for the  respondent  that  the
    appellant's  grounds  resolved  into  no  more   than   a   series   of
    disagreements.

21. The appellant's  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  dismissed.   The
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.


                           [pic]


                           14 March 2015
                           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
