
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00183/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Manchester    Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 2nd May 2019   On 03rd June 2019


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                  M D M A H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Miss N Patel, Lei Dat & Baig, Solicitors (Renshaw
House)
For the respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a Kurdish national of Iraq born in March 1995. He
      made a claim for protection based upon imputed political opinion. His
      appeal against the refusal of his application was heard by Judge of
      the First-tier Tribunal Chambers at Manchester on 7 February 2019. In
      a decision promulgated on 9 February 2019 it was dismissed.


   2. The appellant has been granted permission to appeal to the Upper
      Tribunal on the basis that the judge failed to give adequate reasons
      for departing from AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544. The
      appellant was from Diyala, a contested area.

   3. Mr Bates pointed out that the First-tier Tribunal judge did not have
      the benefit of a presenting officer at the hearing. He referred me to
      paragraph 17 of the decision and took the view that this was
      insufficiently detailed to justify a departure from the country
      guidance decision. The refusal decision referred to a judicial review
      decision but did not provide the full citation. In any event it
      predated the country guidance case of AAH (Iraqi Kurds-internal
      relocation) Iran CG [2018] UKUT 00212.

   4. The Secretary of State's case in the refusal letter was that the
      situation on the ground had changed. However, the judicial review
      decision referred to related to Kirkuk and it did not necessarily
      follow that the same arguments would apply to a different contested
      area. Furthermore, the judge was not provided with a copy of the
      decision and the judge would have needed to have engaged with that
      decision to explain the justification for the departure from the
      country guidance. Furthermore, the decision of AAH (Iraqi Kurds-
      internal relocation) Iran CG [2018] UKUT 00212 continued to endorse
      the earlier country guidance decision.

   5. Both parties were in agreement that the decision should be set aside
      and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing. For the
      reasons expressed I would agree with that conclusion.

Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Chambers materially errs in law
and is set aside. The matter is remitted for a de novo hearing in the First-
tier Tribunal


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly



Directions

   1. Relist in Manchester for a de novo hearing in the First-tier Tribunal
      excluding Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Chambers.
   2. A Kurdish Sorani interpreter will be required.
   3. The appellant is the only witness anticipated.
   4. At hearing estimate of 2 to 2 1/2 half hour scan be anticipated.
   5. A new country guidance decision in relation to the article 15 C risk
      is anticipated this summer. It would be helpful to have a case
      management review before relisting in relation to the timescale
      expected for the new country guidance case.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly

Dated 28 May 2019



























