
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)        Appeal Number: PA/00535/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 March 2021                      |On 20 April 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                     WU
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

This has been a remote hearing to which both parties have consented. The
form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to face hearing was
not held because it was not practicable and all issues could be determined
in a remote hearing. I did not experience any difficulties, and neither
party expressed any concern, with the process.

Direction Regarding Anonymity
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify the appellant or any member of the appellant's family.
This direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.
Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court
proceedings.

Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr Fazli, Counsel instructed by Sohaib Fatimi
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. At the outset of the hearing Mr Fazli sought permission to rely on  a
       bundle of evidence submitted on 23 February 2021. I refused to  admit
       the bundle because the new evidence, which was not before the  First-
       tier Tribunal, is irrelevant to the question of whether the  decision
       of the First-tier Tribunal is undermined by an error of law.

    2. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan, born in  April  1991,  who
       entered the UK on 28 February 2017.  He applied for asylum,  claiming
       to be at risk in Afghanistan because he is gay. His  application  was
       refused on 9 October 2018.

    3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal,  where  his  case
       came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Bowler.  In  a  decision
       promulgated on 7 December 2018 (that was  upheld  on  appeal  to  the
       Upper Tribunal) Judge Bowler found that the appellant had  fabricated
       his claim to be gay and dismissed the appeal.

    4.  In  July  2019  the  appellant  made  further  submissions  to   the
       respondent, which were rejected. The appellant exercised his right of
       appeal, and appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  In  a  decision
       promulgated on 26 March 2020, Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Buttar
       ("the judge") dismissed the appeal. The appellant  is  now  appealing
       against this decision.

    5. A central part of the appellant's case is his claim that,  whilst  in
       Afghanistan, he was caught engaging in sexual relations  with  a  man
       called Ajmal by Ajmal's brother and cousin. The appellant claims that
       Ajmal's family killed Ajmal and that they are determined to kill  him
       as well. To support/corroborate this claim  the  appellant  submitted
       several documents and reports. These include two petitions by Ajmal's
       brother for his arrest and letters from the elders of Sangar  village
       and the headmen of  Baro  village  confirming  his  account  of  what
       occurred.

    6. In addition, the appellant submitted a "verification  report"  by  Dr
       Giustozzi. The purpose of this report was to confirm whether the  two
       arrest petitions are genuine. Dr Giustozzi described  in  the  report
       how he engaged a researcher, Mr Samim, who he considers reliable,  to
       visit the appellant's village and make investigations. He stated that
       Mr Samim visited the appellant's village where he  gathered  together
       five members of the village  council.  One  of  the  elders  (who  is
       described in the report  as  the  head  of  the  village  development
       council) is said to have confirmed the incident occurred  as  claimed
       by the appellant. It is apparent from the report that  Mr  Samim  was
       the second researcher sent by Dr Giustozzi to  the  village,  as  the
       report describes how Mr Samim met with  a  different  elder  who  had
       previously confused the appellant with another person with  the  same
       name. The five elders signed a statement stating that  the  appellant
       and Ajmal were caught in a homosexual act, and  that  Ajmal's  family
       killed Ajmal and are seeking the appellant in order to  kill  him  as
       well. The elders express support for Ajmal's family  and  state  that
       the appellant must be executed in the same way as Ajmal.

    7. In the respondent's refusal letter dated  24  December  2019,  it  is
       stated that the verification report adds little weight to the  asylum
       case. The reasons given for this are that: (a) the  report  fails  to
       state that the photocopies of the petitions are genuine;  (b)  it  is
       not possible to determine the integrity of the photocopied documents;
       and (c) there is no evidence to  demonstrate  that  Mr  Samim  is  an
       expert or that he visited the village.

    8. Dr Giustozzi submitted an addendum report in  order  to  address  the
       points raised in  the  respondent's  refusal  letter.  Amongst  other
       things, he stated that the respondent's criticism is based on a false
       premise, as if a source indicates that the content  of  a  letter  is
       correct that should be more important  than  whether  the  letter  is
       genuine or not.

    9. In a comprehensive and thorough decision, the judge  found  that  the
       evidence  adduced  by  the  appellant   (including   Dr   Giustozzi's
       verification report) did not justify a departure from the findings of
       Judge Bowler. The judge found, inter alia, that the evidence did  not
       demonstrate that there are petitions for the  appellant's  arrest  in
       Afghanistan or that the incident with Ajmal occurred.

   10. The grounds raise a range of issues, all but one of which I  consider
       to lack merit. However, the ground that does have merit (which is the
       first ground of  appeal)  identifies  an  error  that,  in  my  view,
       undermines the decision to such an extent that it will need to be re-
       made afresh.  The  error  relates  to  the  judge's  approach  to  Dr
       Giustozzi's verification report.

   11. The judge's assessment of the verification report is in paragraphs 42
       and 43 of the  decision.  In  paragraph  42  the  judge  stated  that
       although he found Dr Giustozzi to  be  a  credible  witness,  various
       shortcomings in the verification report meant  that  he  could  place
       only little weight on the statement from the elders  obtained  by  Mr
       Samim. The  shortcomings  identified  by  the  judge  were:  (a)  the
       letter/statement by the elders was undated; (b) he did  know  how  Mr
       Samim asked the elders to verify before they signed the  letter;  (c)
       he did not know whether the elders were told the brief  facts  to  be
       verified which they simply replicated in the letter; (d) he  did  not
       know how the individuals who signed the letter proved they  were  the
       heads of the village; (e) he did not know whether Mr Samim  gave  the
       elders details about the appellant; and (f) he did not  know  whether
       the elders have a connection to the appellant or  how  they  came  to
       know the facts stated in the letter.

   12. In paragraph 43 the judge stated that Dr Giustozzi and Mr Samim  were
       unable to verify whether the arrest petitions were genuine. The judge
       stated that the petitions do not have the name  of  the  person  they
       were issued against at the top and are not dated at  the  bottom.  He
       also noted that the two petitions are identical despite being  issued
       by separate departments. The  judge  concluded  that  they  were  not
       genuine petitions.

   13. The error of law is that the judge did not engage with the fact  that
       an experienced expert who understood his duty to  the  Tribunal  (see
       the declaration and statement of truth in the  report),  and  who  he
       found to be credible after giving oral  evidence,  was  able  (via  a
       trusted colleague) to corroborate the substance of a core part of the
       appellant's account.  Whether or not the arrest petitions adduced  by
       the appellant are genuine documents is beside the  point  if  village
       elders in the appellant's  village  have  actually  corroborated  the
       appellant's account directly to a person acting on the instruction of
       a competent and credible expert. The judge in paragraph 42  described
       various shortcomings in Dr Giustozzi's report but if Dr Giustozzi  is
       a truthful witness (which the judge found him to be - stating that he
       was "a credible witness"), it follows that what Dr Giustozzi wrote in
       his report is reasonably likely to be an accurate record of what  the
       village elders told Mr Samim.

   14. Ms Everett, when this was put to her, argued that it is not necessary
       to impugn  Dr  Giustozzi  in  order  to  not  attach  weight  to  the
       verification report. She stated that the  process  described  in  the
       report is vague and that there is not a clear chain of  custody.  She
       also maintained that the judge  was  entitled  to  have  reservations
       about how the information was obtained.  I  do  not  agree  that  the
       process was vague or  involved  an  unclear  chain  of  custody.  The
       process undertaken by Dr Giustozzi, as described in  his  report,  is
       straightforward and clear: he sent a researcher he  has  worked  with
       previously (and who he has confidence in) to the appellant's  village
       to make enquiries and then set out in his report the outcome of those
       enquiries; ie what the researcher was told. Having found Dr Giustozzi
       to be credible there was not, in my view, a legitimate basis to  find
       that the content of the verification report,  which  merely  recorded
       what Dr Giustozzi's researcher was told, was not reasonably likely to
       be an accurate record of what  the  village  elders  said  about  the
       appellant.

   15. This error is material because it concerns a central  aspect  of  the
       appellant's account. I have carefully considered whether any findings
       of fact should be preserved.  As it is difficult to say  whether  the
       error has infected the conclusions reached by the First-tier Tribunal
       regarding the appellant's credibility in other aspects of his case, I
       have decided that no findings should  be  preserved  and  the  appeal
       should be  determined  afresh.  Given  the  extent  of  fact  finding
       necessary for the decision to be re-made, I have decided to remit the
       matter to the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

   16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved  the  making  of  an
       error of law and is set aside.

   17. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  made  afresh
       by a different judge with no findings preserved.
|                                    |                                    |
|                                    |                                    |
|Signed                              |                                    |
|                                    |                                    |
|D. Sheridan                         |                                    |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan       |                                    |
|                                    |Dated: 9 April 2021                 |

