
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00185/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4th June 2019                     |On 20 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                  mr a. a.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Dirie, Counsel, ZD Spicer Zeb Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Albania born  on  11th  June  2002.   The
    Appellant left Albania on 31st May 2018 and travelled to Italy by plane
    and thereafter to France by bus and to Belgium by train where he stayed
    until 20th June  2018.   On  21st  June  2018  he  arrived  in  the  UK
    clandestinely via a lorry.  On 25th June 2018 he claimed  asylum.   The
    Appellant's claim for asylum was refused by Notice of Refusal  on  27th
    December 2018.  At the date  of  refusal  he  had  been  granted  leave
    because he was an  unaccompanied  asylum-seeking  child  but  the  main
    Notice of Refusal followed the application by the Appellant for  asylum
    on the basis of his membership of a  particular  social  group,  namely
    that he was a gay male.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Sweet sitting at Hatton Cross on 6th February 2019.  In a
    decision and reasons promulgated on 12th February 2019 the  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 3. Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper Tribunal  on  12th  February
    2019.  Those grounds contended that the judge had adopted an  erroneous
    approach to credibility and had failed to give reasons and  had  failed
    to give proper consideration to  the  country  background  information.
    Attached to the Grounds of  Appeal  was  an  appendix  making  specific
    reference to the GA-Europe Annual Review on the Human Rights  Situation
    of  LGBTI  people  in  Europe  2016  and  the   UNHCR   Guidelines   on
    International Protection: Child Asylum Claims.

 4. On 18th March 2019 First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Brian refused permission
    to appeal.  On 10th April 2019 renewed grounds of permission to  appeal
    were lodged to the Upper Tribunal.   Miss  Dirie  confirms  that  those
    grounds are identical to the original grounds and  were  considered  by
    Judge O'Brian.

 5. On 7th May 2019 Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam  granted  permission  to
    appeal.  Judge McWilliam considered  that  it  was  arguable  that  the
    finding  in  respect  of  the  Appellant's   sexuality   was   arguably
    inadequately reasoned.  She considered that Ground 2 was dependent upon
    Ground 1 however it was arguable that the judge  erred  in  respect  of
    risk and relocation for the reasons raised and the grounds.

 6. On 21st May 2019 the Secretary of State responded  to  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  The Rule 24  response  opposes  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal and points out that the Appellant had  been  granted  permission
    for leave to appeal on the basis that an  arguable  error  of  law  was
    disclosed in relation to the First-tier Tribunal Judge's assessment  of
    the Appellant's sexuality.  However, it contends that contrary  to  the
    grant of permission the First-tier Tribunal Judge  properly  considered
    the Appellant's claim to be at risk of persecution on the basis of  his
    sexuality and  the  Respondent  submits  that  the  credibility  of  an
    Appellant's account is primarily  a  question  of  fact  and  that  the
    determination of that question  of  fact  has  been  entrusted  to  the
    Immigration Judge.  He goes on to contend that the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge thoroughly evaluated  the  Appellant's  claim  and  made  adverse
    credibility findings that were properly open to him on the evidence.

 7. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant appears by his Counsel,  Miss
    Dirie.  Miss  Dirie  is  extremely  familiar  with  this  matter.   She
    appeared before the First-tier Tribunal and she is the  author  of  the
    Grounds of Appeal.  The Secretary of State appears by her  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer, Ms Isherwood.  The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had
    granted the Appellant anonymity.  No application is made to  vary  that
    order and the anonymity direction will remain in place.

Permission/Discussion

 8. Miss Dirie advises that the starting  point  is  paragraph  31  of  the
    judge's decision.  Therein the judge accepts that the Appellant has not
    attempted to  embellish  his  account  or  claim  that  he  had  sexual
    relations with A.  Nor did he claim to have had sexual relations  while
    in the UK.  Consequently, she submits that the basic starting point  is
    that the Appellant's core account is that he  "outed"  in  Albania  and
    consequently the judge erred in focusing the failure of  the  Appellant
    to claim asylum in a country prior to arriving in the UK.  She  submits
    that in adopting such an approach the judge failed to consider that the
    Appellant (who was then a child) was acting under the control of agents
    and whom his mother had left him and that it is unfair to suggest  that
    the Appellant who was a child with limited  schooling  would  have  the
    ability to leave the people his mother  had  arranged  for  him  to  be
    placed with and to contact the authorities.

 9. She points out that at paragraph 10  of  the  Appellant's  SEF  witness
    statement he actually states:

         "My mother left me with an agent and my mother told me  that  these
         people would look after me."

    She thereafter takes me to paragraph 32 of the decision.  The judge has
    noted that there are "issues as to how the journey to Italy was funded"
    when the Appellant's mother did not work and the Appellant had, it  was
    contended, been vague about his father's  whereabouts,  his  occupation
    and whether he was able to provide sufficient financial support for the
    family.  He points out that the Appellant had never claimed to know how
    his mother was able to fund his journey out of Albania and that she had
    simply never told him and that it was unfair again for such minor point
    to be taken as adversely affecting the  Appellant's  credibility.   The
    judge had previously noted that the  Appellant  had  not  attempted  to
    embellish the core of his account.  She submits that in  adopting  such
    an  approach  the  judge  had  erred  in  drawing  adverse  credibility
    inferences from the Appellant's lack of knowledge.

10. Thereafter Miss Dirie takes me to paragraphs 32 and 35 of  the  judge's
    decision and the contention that the Appellant had been vague regarding
    the whereabouts of his father and his occupation pointing out that this
    is incorrect and that the Appellant's evidence had remained consistent.
      At paragraph 32 the judge notes:

         "Nor was any reason provided for the Appellant failing to  maintain
         contact with his mother."

    She submits that that is incorrect and  refers  me  to  the  concluding
    questions in the Appellant's interview where he gave the answer:

         "I fear that if I do (contact mother), she will contact my uncle."

11. Consequently, she submits that  the  judge  has  given  no  substantive
    reasons for rejecting the Appellant's account and instead  has  adopted
    an erroneous approach to credibility on immaterial points.

12. Secondly, she takes me to the contention that the judge has  failed  to
    consider the background information.  The finding made at paragraph 34:

         "Even if I took a  different  view  on  his  sexuality,  I  am  not
         persuaded that he would be persecuted on return.".

    Here she submits the judge errs in  adopting  such  an  approach  which
    fails to consider and engage with the considerable amount of background
    evidence that is available to show that pervasive homophobic  attitudes
    are to be found throughout Albania which means that the Appellant would
    be at risk on return and that there  would  not  be  a  sufficiency  of
    protection nor would internal relocation be an alternative.  She points
    out that the judge has given an  absence  of  reasons  for  failing  to
    consider and rejecting country information  evidence.   For  all  these
    reasons she submits that there are material errors of law that make the
    decision unsafe and she asked me to set aside the decision and to remit
    the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

13. In response  Ms  Isherwood  begins  by  addressing  the  second  ground
    submitting that there has never been a challenge made  prior  to  today
    that the findings  of  the  judge  at  paragraph  35  where  the  judge
    concluded that the Appellant would be able  to  return  to  his  family
    where he lived with  his  mother  and  two  younger  brothers  and  his
    paternal  grandparents  was  wrong.   Consequently,  she  submits   the
    contention that the Appellant would  be  returning  effectively  as  an
    unaccompanied minor is not a conclusion that remains sustainable.

14. She submits that these issues were addressed at  paragraph  23  in  the
    judge's decision and  consequently  the  argument  that  has  been  put
    forward is mere repetitive disagreement with the findings of the judge.
     She  states  that  the  judge  has  noted  the  documentary  evidence.
    Paragraph 34 is just an alternative finding to the main conclusion  and
    that paragraph 35 just applies to the individual circumstances  of  the
    case.  Consequently, she contends that the  judge  has  actually  taken
    account of the background evidence.

15. Thereafter she turns to the first ground and submits that the Appellant
    is not someone of limited education and that he was  actually  educated
    up to year 9 and that the Tribunal is still entitled, even  though  the
    Appellant is a minor, to disregard and not accept  his  evidence.   The
    judge has noted, she submits throughout  the  determination,  that  the
    Appellant is of a young age.

16. She takes me through the decision pointing  out  that  the  Appellant's
    foster parent gave evidence, as did the Appellant, and that  the  judge
    at paragraph 28 has made due reference to the Appellant's age, and  has
    summarised the Appellant's account at paragraph 29.  Further  she  goes
    on to note that the judge  has  addressed  the  Section  8  Asylum  and
    Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 issues at paragraph
    30 and that whilst the Appellant's young age is accepted these  factors
    cannot be ignored.  She submits that there is no corroborative evidence
    to the Appellant's testimony and that the findings made  by  the  judge
    are ones that he was entitled to make.  She asked  me  to  dismiss  the
    appeal.

The Law

17.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

18. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative action has been rejected or can  be  said
    to be possible.   Nor  is  it  necessary  to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

19. The starting point of this appeal and the submissions before  me  today
    relate  to  the  Appellant's  credibility.   A   proper   approach   to
    credibility will require an assessment  of  the  evidence  and  of  the
    general claim.  In asylum claims relevant factors would be the internal
    consistency, the inherent plausibility and the consistency of the claim
    with external factors of the sort typically found in country  guidance.
    I accept that it is theoretically correct that a Claimant  need  do  no
    more than state his claim, but that claim still needs  to  be  examined
    for consistency and inherent plausibility  and  in  nearly  every  case
    external information against which the claim can  be  checked  will  be
    available.  In this instant case some external information does lend  a
    degree of support to the claim.

20. The judge has made credibility findings having  firstly  accepted  that
    the Appellant  has  not  embellished  his  claim.   In  reaching  those
    findings the judge has made an assessment that the Appellant could have
    claimed asylum in one of  the  numerous  countries  he  crossed  before
    reaching the UK.  Whilst I accept that as a matter of law such findings
    can be held as damaging to credibility,  they  have  to  be  considered
    against the age of the Appellant, the evidence that his  mother  placed
    him in the hands of agents and  the  vulnerability  of  a  young  adult
    making his way across Europe.  In such circumstances  I  consider  that
    the weight given to this factor, whilst one that would  be  taken  into
    account when assessing the claim generally, is unduly onerous.

21. Thereafter there are other issues which are raised.  The judge has made
    a finding with regard to a question posed to the Appellant stating that
    he had not answered it with regard to contact of his mother.   This  is
    clearly wrong and must  be  an  oversight  because  the  Appellant  has
    addressed this in the question and answer to be found at pages 32/33 of
    his interview whilst a minor.

22. As submitted by Miss Dirie the issues upon which  the  judge  has  made
    adverse credibility findings are on the face  of  it  very  minor.   In
    addition, the judge has failed to give full and proper consideration to
    the country information and has failed to give reasons for his findings
    relying simply on a statement that the Appellant  can  return  to  live
    with his mother and grandparents.

23. In such circumstances I am satisfied that there are errors of  law  and
    that they are material in that they go to the ultimate finding  by  the
    judge on credibility particularly  as  that  has  led  to  the  judge's
    conclusion that whatever  the  Appellant's  reasons  were  for  fleeing
    Albania it was not on the grounds of his alleged  sexuality.   For  all
    these reasons I am satisfied  that  the  decision  is  unsafe  and  the
    correct approach is to set aside the decision and to remit  the  matter
    back to the First-tier Tribunal Judge for rehearing with  none  of  the
    findings of fact to stand.  Whilst I have found material errors of  law
    that does of course not mean necessarily that a judge on rehearing  the
    matter will come to a different conclusion to that  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  It will be a matter for consideration by the judge  on
    a complete rehearing of the evidence.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains  material  errors  of
law and the decision is set aside and the matter is  remitted  back  to  the
First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.  The following directions are given:-

 1. On the finding that there are material errors of law in the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge the decision of the Tribunal is set aside
    with none of the findings of fact to stand.


 2. The matter is remitted back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at
    Hatton Cross on the first available date 28 days hence with an  ELH  of
    three hours.

 3. The appeal is to be before any Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  other
    than Immigration Judge Sweet or Immigration Judge O'Brian.

 4. That there be leave to either party to file  and  serve  an  up-to-date
    bundle of such subjective and/or objective  evidence  upon  which  they
    seek to rely at least seven days prior to the restored hearing.

 5. That an Albanian interpreter do attend the restored hearing.

The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  granted  the  Appellant   anonymity.    No
application is made to vary that order and none is made.


Signed                              Date 18 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date 18 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

