
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00925/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15th March 2017                            |On 6th July 2017              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                             MR AMIR HUSSEIN ALI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Sharif (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Ms Peterson (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Ferguson, promulgated on 14th September 2016, following a hearing
    at Birmingham Sheldon Court on 2nd August 2016.  In the  determination,
    the judge rejected the Appellant's asylum claim, but allowed the appeal
    on the  basis  of  humanitarian  protection,  whereupon  the  Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is male, a citizen of Iraq, and was born  on  20th  April
    1992.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent Secretary  of
    State dated 18th January 2016 refusing his application for  asylum  and
    for humanitarian protection in line with paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he lived  in  the  town  of  Yangiga  and
    worked there at the water supply plant, mostly responsible for guarding
    the water tanks.  Daesh took over the  area  where  he  lived  and  the
    following months he was approached at his work by people from Daesh who
    asked him to join them.  He did not want to do so so his  parents  made
    arrangements for him to leave with the assistance  of  an  agent.   His
    fear now is that if he is returned back to Iraq he will  be  killed  by
    Daesh because he did not join them when he was asked to do so.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The  judge  gave  consideration  to  the  appeal  and  highlighted  the
    following matters.  First, the details of the Appellant's claim are set
    out in answer to questions 48 to 102 and there is one year between  the
    first visit to him and the last visit to him,  but  these  visits  show
    that the purpose of the visit was  not  to  recruit  the  Appellant  to
    Daesh, and it could not be plausibly argued that there was  an  attempt
    to recruit the Appellant to Daesh  against  his  will  (paragraph  14).
    Second, the upshot of the background evidence shows that the Appellant,
    like many other people in his area, simply want  to  leave  the  strict
    regime in the country and he had tried to  leave  many  times  and  had
    planned to do so by paying an agent.  Following many attempts to  leave
    one succeeded in August 2015.  Third, the country guidance case  of  AA
    [2015] UKUT 544 makes it quite clear that the Appellant is not somebody
    who stands to benefit from subsidiary protection under Article 15(c) of
    the Qualification Directive.  This is not least because Kirkuk  is  not
    part of the independent Kurdish region (IKR).  The Appellant would  not
    be returned to Iraq via IKR and could not practically  relocate  there.
    The Tribunal in AA made it clear that all of the citizens of Iraq would
    be returned via Baghdad.  Given that Yangiga is in the conflict area of
    Iraq, it was established that the Appellant could not safely return  to
    his home area from  Baghdad.   The  outcome  of  the  appeal  therefore
    depended  upon  the  reasonableness  of  the  Appellant  relocating  to
    Baghdad.  The evidence showed that the Appellant has no family or other
    support available to assist him in Baghdad.  He has no Sponsor to  help
    him obtain accommodation.  He does not speak Arabic.  He would  find  a
    barrier to getting employment there.  All these  factors  lead  to  the
    conclusion  that  returning  him  to  Baghdad  would  be  unduly  harsh
    (paragraph 20).

 5. On this basis, the appeal was allowed  on  the  basis  of  humanitarian
    protection, even though the asylum claim itself was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state  that  the  judge  made  contradictory
    findings in:  failing  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  rejecting  the
    Appellant's asylum claim; failing to make a  finding  or  give  reasons
    relating to the  Appellant's  reliance  on  paragraph  276ADE;  and  in
    allowing the appeal  on  the  basis  of  humanitarian  protection,  but
    refusing the asylum claim, as that was irrational.

 7. On 7th October 2016, permission to appeal was granted on the basis that
    it did appear that there was a prima facie for  suggesting  that  there
    was a lack of clear and adequate reasoning as to why,  having  accepted
    that the Appellant would be at risk in his home area and that  internal
    relocation is not available to him, he has not  made  out  his  refugee
    claim.  There was also a lack  of  any  decision  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's reliance on human rights grounds.

 8. Accordingly, what was being maintained here in the  Grounds  of  Appeal
    was  that  the  decision  to  allow  the   Appellant's   appeal   under
    humanitarian  protection  grounds  was  not  appealed.   However,   the
    decision to reject the Appellant's appeal under the Refugee  Convention
    was being appealed because there was inadequate reason,  a  failure  to
    assess persecutory risk on return,  and  a  failure  to  determine  the
    Appellant's eligibility under  paragraph  276ADE,  given  the  lack  of
    reasoning in this regard.

 9. On 25th October 2016, a Rule 24 response was entered by the  Respondent
    Secretary of State to the effect that the Appellant's refugee claim was
    predicated upon his being at risk of recruitment by Daesh.   The  judge
    held (at paragraphs 14 to 16) that the assertion of forced  recruitment
    was not credible.  At paragraph 16, the judge dismissed the Appellant's
    asylum claim.  At paragraph 17 the judge  found  that  the  Appellant's
    home area is a contested region under the control of Daesh and as  such
    the Appellant would be at risk of indiscriminate  violence.   This  did
    not mean that he stood to win his appeal under the Refugee Convention.

Submissions

10. At the hearing before me, Mr Sharif submitted that this was an  upgrade
    appeal.  The judge had not given adequate reasons for why, in rejecting
    the  claim  under  the  Refugee  Convention,  internal  relocation  was
    available to the Appellant.  He referred to the Grounds of Appeal.   Mr
    Sharif  submitted  that  the  repeated  visits  to  the  Appellant  was
    indicative of a "softer approach" by Daesh, such that the judge was  in
    error in concluding (from paragraphs  14  to  16)  that  there  was  no
    attempt to recruit him when these visits were being made.

11. For her part, Ms Peterson submitted that she would rely upon  the  Rule
    24 response.  The judge was clear that the repeated visits to  him  was
    not a "genuine attempt to recruit Mr Ali to  Daesh  against  his  will"
    (paragraph 14).  Furthermore, it was an understandable  wish  that  the
    Appellant would not want to live in an area  controlled  by  ISIS,  but
    this did not show the Appellant to  be  at  risk  of  ill-treatment  or
    recruitment  (paragraph  16).   The  Appellant  had  now  been  granted
    humanitarian protection and the appeal on the basis of  a  claim  under
    the Refugee Convention was futile.  The judge was entitled to  conclude
    that this was  the  best  that  the  Appellant  could  get  by  way  of
    protection.

12. In reply, Mr Sharif submitted that it was almost  inevitable  that  the
    Appellant would now be tracked down by agents  of  Daesh  upon  return.
    The judge had failed to make a clear finding on  this  point.   It  was
    inevitable that this would  happen  because  the  Appellant  came  from
    Yangiga.  He had been planning to leave for a long time.  The risk  was
    evident to him.  It was simply logical,  if  the  Appellant  came  from
    Yangiga, to say that the Daesh  were  not  attempting  to  recruit  him
    against his will.

13.  Following  the  Hearing,  at  the  end  of  the  day,  I  dreafted  my
    determination.

No Error of Law

14. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  I come  to  this
    conclusion notwithstanding Mr Sharif's valiant efforts to  persuade  me
    otherwise.  My reasons are as follows.

15. First, the risk to the Appellant is a matter of evidence.  It  is  true
    that Daesh have taken control of Yangiga.  The judge  recognises  this.
    However, in his response to questions (from question 48 to 102  of  the
    interview) the Appellant referred to a person who  came  to  check  the
    water plant (see specific answers at question 66 and 67).  The  subject
    of Daesh was raised, but the purpose of the visit was  not  to  recruit
    the Appellant to Daesh.  The judge makes a clear finding  on  this  (at
    paragraph 14).  A second person who then came  to  see  the  Appellant,
    visited him three times before asking him to join Daesh  on  the  third
    occasion.  The Appellant stated that he left within days of this  event
    taking place.  The judge is clear that, "this account  is  contradicted
    by  its  earlier  evidence  in  which  he  said  that  he   had   tried
    unsuccessfully to leave the village many times before the night he  was
    able to get out" (paragraph 15).  The  judge  reads  this  evidence  in
    conjunction with other evidence (at question 103) that many people  had
    already left Yangiga and others were planning to do so.   Finally,  the
    judge was clear that the Appellant was not at risk of  being  recruited
    by "Hamza" (paragraph 16).

16. Second, the Appellant has not made out his refugee  claim  because  the
    judge, having applied AA [2015]  UKUT  544,  has  recognised  that  the
    Appellant could not relocate to  Kirkuk,  which  is  not  part  of  the
    independent Kurdish region, with the result that he would  be  returned
    to Iraq via Baghdad.  It is in the analysis of that particular form  of
    return, that  the  judge  concludes  that  this  return  would  not  be
    reasonable and would  amount  to  unduly  harsh  consequences  for  the
    Appellant because he has no family, no visible means of support, and no
    prospects of getting accommodation or employment in Baghdad  (paragraph
    20).  The return  would  therefore  not  be  viable  to  Baghdad.   The
    Appellant was only left with the situation of a return to Yangiga where
    Daesh/ISIS  had  taken  over,  and  here  there  would  be  a  risk  of
    indiscriminate violence to him.

17. Accordingly, it is not the  case  that  the  judge  fails  to  give  an
    adequate reason as to why the Appellant  has  no  persecutory  risk  on
    return awaiting him (see ground 2.1 of the Grounds of Appeal).   It  is
    not the case that he would face risk on return  to  Iraq  as  a  failed
    asylum seeker  (paragraph  3.1).   As  to  paragraph  276ADE,  and  the
    possibility  of  there  being  very  significant   obstacles   to   the
    Appellant's reintegration into Iraq, this is not a  material  error  of
    law, given that he has come from Yangiga and  would  be  able  to  find
    reintegration there into the society from which he hails, and is not an
    insurmountable obstacle to him, in the absence of a  persecutory  risk,
    as the judge found.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 6th July 2017

