
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/00373/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at : Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 30 June 2017                            |On 5 July 2017                 |

                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                               ashfaq hussain

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Butterworth, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant appeals, with permission, against the decision of  the  First-
tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the respondent's decision  of  5
January 2017 to refuse his protection and human rights claim.

The appellant is a national of Pakistan born on  1  January  1964.  He  last
arrived in the United Kingdom on 21 May 2009 on a visitor visa, having  made
previous  visits  in  2006  and  2008.  On  20  December  2013  he  made  an
application for leave to remain outside the immigration rules, on the  basis
of a land dispute in Pakistan and made it clear that  he  did  not  wish  to
claim asylum, despite also claiming to have converted to the  Ahmadi  faith.
His application was refused on 27 January 2014. He  did  not  claim  asylum,
despite being advised to do so.


On 10 March 2016 the appellant was arrested on suspicion of  sexual  assault
on a 13 year old girl on a train and  on  14  July  2016  was  convicted  of
sexual touching and was sentenced to a two year community order  and  placed
on a sex offender register. An emergency travel document  (ETD)  application
was completed and on 10 November 2016 he was detained  pending  removal.  At
that point he made an asylum and human rights claim which was refused  on  5
January 2017. The appellant appealed against that decision  and  his  appeal
was  heard  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  was   dismissed   in   a
determination promulgated on 23 February 2017. Permission to appeal  to  the
Upper Tribunal was granted on 15 May 2017.

The appellant's claim was made on two bases. The first was that  he  was  at
risk from his brothers as a result of a land dispute and the second that  he
was at risk as he had converted to the Ahmadi faith in July 2012 in the  UK.
With regard to the latter the appellant claimed to have accepted the  Ahmadi
faith as his own in Pakistan in 1985 but did not practise or  preach  openly
as he would have been killed.


The respondent did not accept either claim, finding both to  be  lacking  in
credibility. In regard to the  claim  based  on  conversion  to  the  Ahmadi
faith, the respondent noted that in his application of 20 December 2013  the
appellant had made it clear that his application was  mainly  based  on  the
land dispute and that he had not claimed  asylum  after  his  conversion  in
July 2012. The  respondent  considered  the  appellant's  knowledge  of  the
Ahmadi faith to be  limited  and  questioned  his  attendance  at  Ahmadiyya
conferences. The respondent accorded little weight to a letter submitted  by
the appellant from the Ahmadiyya Association  UK.  The  respondent  did  not
accept that the appellant was a genuine Ahmadi, but considered that even  if
he was it was not accepted that he  was  a  spiritually  active  Ahmadi  and
concluded that he would be at no risk in Pakistan.


The appellant appealed against that decision and his  appeal  was  heard  by
First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Kainth  on  2  February  2017.   Judge   Kainth
considered that the appellant's asylum claim was  a  last-ditch  attempt  to
circumvent the system with a view to frustrating removal. He did not  accept
the appellant's account of the land dispute, noting various  inconsistencies
in his evidence, and rejected his claim to be at risk on such  a  basis.  As
to the appellant's claim based on conversion to the Ahmadi faith, the  judge
did not accept that he was a genuine Ahmadi convert. He did not accept  that
a letter relied upon by the appellant from the Ahmadiyya Muslim  Association
UK (AMMA) dated 26 July 2012  was  confirmation  of  conversion  and  placed
little weight on a second letter from the  AMMA  dated  17  March  2016.  He
found the appellant's evidence as to his claimed conversion  to  be  unclear
and evasive. He did not  accept  that  the  medal  and  identification  card
relied on by the appellant was evidence  of  conversion  to  the  faith  and
neither did he accept that photographs produced by the  appellant  confirmed
his conversion to the faith. The judge concluded that the appellant  had  no
risk profile to cause the Pakistani authorities to have any interest in  him
and he accordingly dismissed the appeal on all grounds.


The appellant then sought permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
relation to the judge's findings based on his  Ahmadi  faith.  The  decision
and findings relating to  the  land  dispute  were  not  challenged  in  the
grounds. Permission was initially refused, but was then granted  on  15  May
2017 by Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan  who  considered  it  to  be  at  least
arguable that the judge may not  have  appreciated  the  difference  between
conversion and registration as an Ahmadi.

Appeal hearing and submissions

The matter came before me on 30 June 2017. I  heard  submissions  from  both
parties.


Mr Butterworth submitted that the judge had made various errors of  fact  in
concluding that the appellant had not converted to the Ahmadi faith  and  he
expanded upon the grounds.  In  regard  to  the  first  ground  the  judge's
finding at [54], that the objective material made no reference  to  the  ten
pillars of the Ahmadi faith mentioned by  the  appellant,  was  inconsistent
with the expert evidence in MN and others (Ahmadis -  country  conditions  -
risk) Pakistan CG [2012] UKUT  389  at  [187]  which  referred  to  the  ten
conditions  of  bai'at.  In  regard  to  the  second   ground,   the   judge
misunderstood  the  conversion  process  and  confused   the   concepts   of
conversion and registration and wrongly rejected the two letters  from  AMMA
which were persuasive evidence of the  appellant's  conversion.  As  to  the
third ground, the judge erred by  according  no  weight  to  the  medal  and
identification card produced by the appellant as evidence of  conversion  to
the Ahmadi faith, or by failing  to  give  reasons  for  according  them  no
weight. As to the fourth  ground,  the  judge  erred  by  finding  that  the
photographs the appellant had produced  did  not  provide  evidence  of  his
attendance at the Ahmadi conference and by failing to consider  the  weblink
on the photographs.  The  fifth  ground  asserted  that  the  judge  wrongly
concluded that the appellant was only able to name one Ahmadi book.

Mr Tufan submitted that  the  judge  had  provided  sufficient  reasons  for
reaching the conclusions that he did.  As  regards  the  first  ground,  the
expert in  MN  referred  to  five  tenets  of  the  Ahmadi  faith,  but  ten
conditions of initiation. As regards the letters from  the  AMMA,  Mr  Tufan
submitted that the judge was entitled to place limited weight on  the  them,
in accordance with the guidance in AB (Ahmadiyya  Association  UK:  letters)
Pakistan [2013] UKUT  511,  owing  to  their  brevity  and  the  absence  of
reference to any activities undertaken by the appellant in the UK. What  the
judge was saying at [54] was that he did not accept that the  appellant  was
a genuine Ahmadi convert. There was no letter from the  head  of  the  local
Ahmadi community and no evidence of activities undertaken in the UK. In  any
event, even if the  judge  ought  to  have  found  that  the  appellant  had
converted to the Ahmadi faith, he properly found that  he  would  be  at  no
risk in Pakistan as an ordinary Ahmadi.

In response, Mr Butterworth submitted that the judge's error  in  regard  to
the appellant's conversion was material as he did not go on to consider  [6]
of the head-note to MN and that that  was  a  matter  which  still  required
consideration by the First-tier  Tribunal.  He  requested  that  the  matter
therefore be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.


Consideration and findings


It is the appellant's case that Judge Kainth misunderstood the evidence  and
made errors of fact in concluding that the appellant had  not  converted  to
the Ahmadi faith and that the evidence, particularly the letter of 17  March
2016 from AMMA, provided confirmation that he had converted  to  the  faith.
However, as Mr Tufan submitted, what the judge found was that the  appellant
was not a genuine convert, namely a person whose intentions  and  commitment
to the Ahmadi faith were genuinely held.

I am not in agreement  with  the  assertion  in  the  grounds  and  with  Mr
Butterworth's  submission  that  the  judge  misunderstood  the  process  of
conversion to the Ahmadi faith and the  difference  between  conversion  and
verification, but consider that he was fully aware that, in  line  with  the
country guidance in MN, the appellant was considered to have  undergone  the
process to convert to the faith. At [51] he  specifically  referred  to  the
paragraph in MN which dealt with the conversion process  (his  reference  to
[271] rather than [217] was plainly a typing error and the reference was  in
fact to [217]) and referred to  the  initial  form  of  conversion  and  the
subsequent two year process for official recognition as an Ahmadi. I do  not
consider  that  the  judge's  observation  at  [53]   detracts   from   that
understanding, although I accept that the paragraph  could  have  benefitted
from being more clearly and concisely expressed. It seems to  me  that  what
the judge was saying at [53] was that the fact  that  the  AMMA  letter  was
produced four years after the initial letter, with no  confirmation  of  his
registration as an Ahmadi at the relevant two  year  point,  detracted  from
the weight to be accorded to it. For that reason, and for the  reason  given
at [56], that the letter made no reference to any activities  undertaken  by
the appellant, the judge was perfectly entitled to  accord  the  letter  the
limited  weight  that  he  did  when  considering  the  genuineness  of  his
commitment to the Ahmadi faith. Such a finding was entirely consistent  with
the guidance in AB, as referred to by Mr Tufan.

With regard to the reference to the judge's finding at [54] in  relation  to
the ten pillars of the faith, it  is  relevant  to  note  that,  whilst  the
expert's evidence in MN referred to ten conditions of initiation  at  [187],
[195] and [200], it was clear from  [187]  that  there  were  in  fact  five
fundamental tenets to the faith. As the judge properly found, the tenets  or
conditions were not actually set out in the background evidence provided  in
MN. The judge was entitled to find the appellant's evidence  lacked  clarity
in that regard, but in any event the judge provided many other  reasons  for
doubting the genuineness of the appellant's claim as to his  involvement  in
the Ahmadi faith.


As to the medal and identity card, Mr Butterworth  admitted  to  not  having
seen these but submitted that the judge erred by not giving them any  weight
when they were evidence that a conversion had taken place.  The  grounds  of
appeal, at [30], state that the items were for the purpose of attending  the
Ahmadiyya annual convention. However, as the judge  observed  at  [58],  the
appellant's  claim  to  have  attended  two  conferences  was  significantly
undermined by the fact that his claim was to have  attended  the  events  in
London whereas they were held in Alton. In light of the various concerns  he
had about the appellant's evidence as a whole, the  judge  was  entitled  to
accord the items the limited weight that he did in supporting a claim to  be
a genuine convert.


The fourth ground of appeal  refers  to  the  photographs  produced  by  the
appellant and assert that the judge erred  by  failing  to  note  that  they
contained a web link to the annual conference,  the  Jalsa  Salana.  However
the judge found at [53] that the photographs did not identify the  appellant
as being a true and genuine convert and found in any event,  at  [66],  that
it was unclear whether  the  appellant  actually  appeared  in  any  of  the
photographs. Those were findings he was entitled to make and,  as  such,  he
was entitled to accord the photographs no weight.


As to the appellant being able to name five Ahmadi books, as referred to  in
the fifth ground, there is no evidence that those he named were correct  and
no evidence to show that the respondent wrongly found at [42] that  he  only
named one correctly. In any event  the  appellant's  knowledge  was  clearly
limited in that regard, given the significant number of other publications.


The judge gave various reasons for concluding that the appellant was  not  a
genuinely committed convert, noting  inconsistencies  and  discrepancies  in
his evidence.   At  [42]  he  noted  that  a  certificate  produced  by  the
appellant stating that his property had been forcibly confiscated  by  local
people and that the whole community was against him because  of  his  change
of religion was inconsistent with his evidence  in  his  statement  and  his
interview that no-one in Pakistan aside from two  friends  had  known  about
his Ahmadi faith; at [49] and [56] he noted  that  the  appellant's  claimed
intention to openly practise the Ahmadi faith and preach  to  others  if  he
was returned to Pakistan was inconsistent with  his  evidence  that  he  had
deliberately not approached Pakistani Muslims in the  UK  out  of  fear;  at
[56] he noted that the appellant's statement of 20  December  2013  made  no
reference to activities undertaken for the Ahmadi  mosque  in  Bradford  and
that the AMMA letter made no reference to activities  undertaken  for  them;
at [57] the judge noted  that  the  appellant  specifically  stated  in  his
statement of December 2013 that he did not  wish  to  claim  asylum  on  the
basis of his conversion and that he had placed reliance instead on the  land
dispute; at [58] the judge noted the lack  of  knowledge  displayed  by  the
appellant about the Ahmadi faith and noted the  appellant's  claim  to  have
attended two Ahmadi conferences  in  London,  whereas  the  conferences  had
taken place in Alton, Hampshire; and  at  [59]  the  judge  noted  that  the
appellant had failed to provide any evidence in his witness statement  about
his association with subsequently named Ahmadis.

The judge  was  perfectly  entitled  to  consider  that  those  matters  all
undermined the  appellant's  claim  to  be  a  genuinely  committed  Ahmadi.
Contrary to the suggestion in the grounds, the judge  was  not  required  to
conclude from the AMMA letter of support that the appellant was  genuine  in
his claimed commitment to the faith. The letter of 17 March  2016  confirmed
simply that the appellant had  undergone  the  conversion  process  and  was
registered as an Ahmadi, having maintained contact with  the  community  and
attended prayers. There was nothing inconsistent  in  the  judge's  findings
with the expert evidence set out at [217(iv)] of MN,  to  which  he  plainly
had full regard.


In any event it is clear from the judge's findings  and  from  the  evidence
before him that the appellant could  not  possibly  have  succeeded  in  his
claim to be at risk on return to Ahmadi with respect to  [6]  of  the  head-
note to MN. I disagree with Mr Butterworth that the judge did not  make  any
relevant findings in that regard. In accordance with [9]  of  the  head-note
to MN the judge's adverse findings in  the  appellant's  case,  as  set  out
above at [18],  are  clearly  relevant  to  the  assessment  of  his  likely
behaviour on return to  Pakistan.  Furthermore,  as  the  judge  noted,  the
appellant's evidence was that he had not  sought  to  preach  his  faith  to
Pakistani Muslims in the UK, his claim to be at risk on return  to  Pakistan
had previously related only to the land  dispute  rather  than  his  claimed
conversion, the letter from AMMA dated 17  March  2016  indicated  that  the
appellant's commitment to the faith was limited to maintaining contact  with
the community and attending prayers at the mosque (with  no  information  as
to frequency) and  there  was  absolutely  no  evidence,  and  certainly  no
reliable evidence, from the appellant to show that he  had  engaged  in,  or
was likely to, engage in the type of behaviour set  out  at  [2(i)]  of  the
head-note to MN, as the  judge  properly  found  at  [65].  Accordingly,  as
consistent with the findings in MN, there was no basis to conclude that  the
appellant, even as a convert to the  Ahmadi  faith,  would  be  at  risk  on
return to Pakistan and the judge's conclusion to that effect was  fully  and
properly open to him on the evidence before him.

For all of these reasons I do not consider there to be  any  errors  of  law
Judge Kainth's decision which would require it to be  set  aside.  I  uphold
his decision.

DECISION

The appellant's appeal is accordingly dismissed. The making of the  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  an  error  on  a  point  of  law
requiring it to be set aside. I do not set aside the decision. The  decision
to dismiss the appellant's appeal therefore stands.








Signed   [pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                               Dated: 5 July
2017
