
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00422/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated         |
|On 24 January 2018                    |On 26 March 2018                       |
|                                      |                                       |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN

                                   Between

                                     FA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Smith, Counsel, instructed by Kesar & Co
Solicitors (Dover)
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan who was  born  on  1  January
    2000.  I am sure that is a nominal date of birth, as is often the  case
    with Afghani citizens.  It means that at some time in the year 2018, he
    will become an adult in accordance with United Kingdom  law.   However,
    at the time the decision was made by the Secretary of State and at  the
    time the First-tier Tribunal Judge heard the appeal and promulgated the
    decision he was a  minor.   It  is  in  those  circumstances  that  the
    appellant comes to appeal  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Woolf promulgated on 10 April 2017 dismissing his appeal  against
    the respondent's decision of 23 December 2016 to refuse his  protection
    claim and to refuse his claim that his removal would violate his  human
    rights.  Consequently, the issues at large are  his  protection  claims
    including Articles 2 and 3 as well as Article 8.

 2. I can summarise the position that was found by the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.  He and his father and the family  were  part  of  the  Ahmadzai
    tribe and came from a village in Baghlan Province.  His  father  was  a
    member of the Ahmadzai Shora, which is a  committee  of  notables  from
    different provinces  in  Afghanistan  who  participate  in  a  form  of
    government.  There is no  doubt  that  the  appellant's  home  area  is
    controlled by the Taliban and it was  his  case  that  his  father  was
    threatened by the Taliban because they  saw  members  of  the  Ahmadzai
    Shora as supporters of the government.  That seems both plausible  and,
    according to  the  judge,  credible.   In  the  result  the  judge  was
    satisfied, according to paragraph 55 of the determination, that it  was
    reasonably likely that the appellant's  father  came  under  threat  to
    leave his post as a member of the Ahmadzai Shora  and,  accordingly,  I
    think the inevitable consequence  of  that  was  that  the  appellant's
    family were at risk in the home area.

 3. At present I do not see it was a finding made by  the  judge  that  the
    appellant himself as a minor could return to an area which is under the
    control of the Taliban, all the more so if his father had a position as
    a member of the Ahmadzai Shora.  It followed from this that  the  issue
    before the  Tribunal  was  whether  or  not  it  was  reasonable,  (the
    expression 'unduly harsh' is sometimes used as a synonym), for  him  to
    relocate as a minor to Kabul.  The judge's findings in relation to  the
    level of contact that the appellant had with his parents was equivocal.
     There are no findings that I find  sustainable  in  relation  to  that
    element of the enquiry.  He concluded: "I am  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant has lost contact with his family members and that he would be
    unable to be united with them on return."

 4. However, it was simply not enough to render the appellant's  relocation
    to Kabul reasonable or not unduly harsh.   It  would  require  specific
    findings that the appellant as a minor could  have  returned  to  Kabul
    where he would have contacted a member of his family, either his mother
    or father or more distant relatives.  In normal circumstances it  would
    be a perfectly proper inference to draw that if a  family  member  were
    confronted with a telephone call from a minor who could not  return  to
    his home area that the family member would make efforts to provide  the
    safety net that the minor requires but there has to be a  thoroughgoing
    enquiry as to whether that is possible.

 5. If there is an issue as to whether it is reasonable for  the  appellant
    to relocate, the burden of  establishing  that  is  probably  upon  the
    respondent but at the very least it is a mutual matter upon  which  the
    Tribunal has to be satisfied.  That does require a consideration of the
    family's circumstances in the village, the circumstances in  Kabul  and
    the family's ability to offer the support which  is,  in  my  judgment,
    essential before it can be  said  that  the  appellant  could  properly
    return to Kabul as a minor.  He would travel as an unaccompanied  minor
    but in Kabul it would be  essential  that  he  becomes  an  accompanied
    minor.  That was an enquiry which the judge did not embark upon and  it
    is for that reason that I find that  the  determination  is  materially
    flawed.  It requires a considerable amount of  additional  fact-finding
    which will include evidence as to  the  ability  of  the  appellant  to
    contact his parents.

DECISION

    (i)  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error of  law
         and I set it aside.

    (ii) The decision is to be re-made in the First-tier Tribunal in Hatton
         Cross.  A Pashtu interpreter will be needed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                         Dated 20 March 2018

