
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00894/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 July 2019                      |On 30 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                              MS (AFGHANISTAN)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Ben Bundock, Counsel instructed by Southwark Law
Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr Lawrence Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Following the promulgation of my error of law decision  on  22  January
    2019, the decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  in  AS  (Safety  of  Kabul)
    Afghanistan CG [2008] UKUT 00118 (IAC) was partially overturned by  the
    Court of Appeal.

 2.  On 24 June 2019 the Court of Appeal made an order that the  appeal  be
    remitted  to  a  different  panel  of  the   Upper   Tribunal   for   a
    reconsideration of the Upper Tribunal's conclusions on the question  of
    the extent of  the  risk  to  returned  asylum  seekers  from  security
    incidents  of  the  kind  considered  at  paragraphs  190-199  of   the
    determination promulgated on 23 March 2018, to include reference to any
    updating evidence and/or further submissions as to  security  risk  and
    the relevance of that  risk  to  the  reasonableness  of  Kabul  as  an
    internal relocation alternative.  The Court  directed  that  all  other
    findings in the Upper Tribunal in the determination promulgated  on  23
    March 2018 should be  preserved,  "save  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
    entitled to reconsider any such finding if and to the extent that if it
    thinks it right to do so in the light of development since that date".

 3. At a hearing on 17 May 2019, the  parties  to  this  appeal  agreed  to
    proceed with the re-making of the decision,  notwithstanding  the  fact
    that the revised Country Guidance from the Upper Tribunal was  unlikely
    to be available by the date of  the  proposed  hearing.   In  addition,
    although not envisaged in my original directions, it  was  agreed  that
    the appellant should give oral evidence on the outstanding issues  with
    the caveat that, as a vulnerable witness, measures  would  need  to  be
    taken to enable him to give his evidence in an optimum  environment  in
    line with the Presidential Guidance Note No.2 of 2010.

 4. Accordingly, the hearing to remake the decision proceeded before me  in
    accordance with the recommendations made by Robert  Selwood,  Chartered
    Psychologist, in his supplementary report dated 10 June 2018.

 5. The appellant gave his evidence through a Pashtu  Interpreter  whom  he
    clearly understood.  He adopted as his evidence in  chief  his  witness
    statement of 4 July 2019  in  which  he  re-adopted  all  his  previous
    statements.  He remained tired, depressed and  isolated.   The  GP  had
    decided to give him a new prescription  of  Mirtazapine  to  treat  his
    stress  and  anxiety.   He  was  taking  double  his  previous  dosage.
    Although he was still a Muslim, the last time he had gone to  a  Mosque
    was in 2018.  He had had a bad experience during Ramadan last  year  at
    Norbury Mosque.  He had turned up in shorts and he was not  allowed  to
    enter.  Although he remained a Muslim, he  did  not  follow  any  other
    Islamic practices.  In the past, he had dated a  girl  during  Ramadan,
    and this was completely forbidden in his culture, even in the UK.

 6. He was particularly upset when he  thought  about  his  mother  in  her
    current situation.  He had tried to  contact  her,  but  the  telephone
    connection in Afghanistan had been down for six weeks.  He had also now
    lost contact with his Uncle Yousaf in Italy on Facebook.   He was  sure
    that Yousaf wanted nothing more to do with him because of the money his
    family owed him for arranging his transport from Afghanistan.

 7. It was nice to be with his "mum" Mary in the UK.   He felt included and
    protected, and Mary and Dave were giving him 100% support.   He was not
    ready to stand on his own two feet.  He had previously  tried  to  move
    away from his foster family to independent living,  but  he  could  not
    manage this.

 8. He had been in the UK since he was 13 years old, and he had adopted the
    culture of the UK.  He had sleepless nights worrying about  going  back
    to a place that was now completely alien to him.   He  no  longer  felt
    like an Afghan.

 9. In cross-examination, the appellant confirmed that his home province of
    Baghlan was very religious, as were his  family  in  Baghlan.   He  was
    asked whether he felt it was wrong to attend a Mosque  in  shorts.   He
    answered 'no'.  He added that he was not a religious person now.

10. In  answer  to  questions  for  clarification  purposes  from  me,  the
    appellant initially said that his mother was living in the home village
    with his maternal uncle's father-in-law, and there was no one else with
    her.  But there might be other relatives living in  the  same  village.
    He did not know this one way or the other. He then said that his father-
    in-law had his own family, and they were in the village.  He had a wife
    and kids.  They lived in the same house as his  mother  and  father-in-
    law.  Mr Bundock asked the appellant why he had not said  this  at  the
    outset.  The appellant responded that his mum was on  her  own.   There
    was no one with her.  He then added that they all  lived  in  the  same
    house.  When he had said that they were living in the same village,  he
    had meant that they were living in the same house.

11. He had made friends at school, but not  recently.   He  was  no  longer
    seeing other Afghans.  This was because he got  so  depressed  and  sad
    that he did not want to interact with  others.   He  only  occasionally
    spoke Pashtu now, as he had lost interest in friends.

12. Ms Maya Pritchard was called as a witness, and  she  adopted  her  most
    recent statement dated 3 July 2019 in which she re-adopted her  earlier
    witness statements.  She had been working as a Youth Caseworker at SLRA
    (South London Refugee Association) since November  2013,  and  she  had
    been promoted to a Casework Manager in September 2018.  She had a  wide
    range of vocational training in areas such as safeguarding children and
    vulnerable adults, mental health, drug dependency, youth  work,  sexual
    exploitation and gang awareness.  The level  of  support  she  provided
    varied according to a young person's needs and  the  issues  they  were
    experiencing.   Most  of  the  young  people  she  worked   with   were
    unaccompanied asylum-seeking children and a large  percentage  of  them
    were from Afghanistan.  Until recently,  she  had  been  providing  1:1
    casework support to around 50 young people a year, but as a manager her
    case load had been reduced to about 15 young people, involving the most
    complex cases.

13. In her opinion, Muhammad presented as one of the most complex cases she
    had known, perhaps due to the twin factors of his  poor  mental  health
    and learning  difficulties.   It  was  those  vulnerabilities  and  his
    character which would put him more at  risk  than  most  of  the  young
    Afghan men she had provided  casework  support  to  over  the  years  -
    between 60 and 80 - if returned.  In addition, Muhammed was by far  the
    most Westernised Afghan that she had worked with.  This might not  seem
    significant in itself, but she believed that  the  way  in  which  this
    trait intersected with, and was compounded by, his  mental  health  and
    learning disability was what made him so vulnerable.  As  mentioned  in
    her last statement, Muhammad seemed to possess  no  ability  to  censor
    himself, and appeared incapable of  self-moderation  when  it  came  to
    expressing his views or managing his  behaviour.   This  therefore  put
    into doubt that he would be able to employ those kinds of skills if his
    safety depended on it.   She thought that  it  was  this  factor  which
    separated him from other Afghan  young  men  with  whom  she  had  been
    involved.

14. During the time in 2016 that she was advocating Croydon Social Services
    to continue to support him, Muhammad was completely incapable of saying
    and doing what he  needed  in  order  for  them  to  maintain  support.
    Despite repeated advice, Muhammad did not understand  what  was  needed
    from him, and was unable to grasp what the consequences would be.  This
    ultimately led to Social Services closing his case in  early  2017  and
    him becoming destitute.

15. Muhammad's mental health remained extremely poor.  He  got  overwhelmed
    very easily and then seemed to become frozen with  anxiety.   This  had
    meant that his daily function had been reduced to bare minimum, and his
    routine seemed to consist of just eating and sleeping, with  occasional
    visits to their office.  Tragically, he seemed  to  have  lost  contact
    with most of his friends.  He used to be quite sociable, but  the  only
    time he left the house was to visit her at the office or if he had  the
    occasional appointment.

16. Muhammad was now back on the waiting list for counselling at Compass, a
    specialist Mental Health Service where he had received  counselling  in
    2015.   Her view was that Muhammad was extraordinarily  vulnerable  and
    very much dependent upon agency support  to  meet  his  complex  needs.
    This view was based on the 100s of hours she had been spent  supporting
    him, multiple needs assessments, risk assessments and support planning.
     SLRA had gone to great lengths to assist  Muhammad  because  they  had
    assessed him as  being  acutely  vulnerable  and  he  was  therefore  a
    priority case for them.  She had  grave  concerns  for  his  safety  if
    removed from the UK to Afghanistan.

17. Mr Tarlow declined to cross-examine Ms Pritchard, but she answered some
    questions for clarification purposes  from  me.   She  was  seeing  the
    appellant once or twice a week.  He was living with a host family.  The
    original plan was that he should live with  his  host  family  for  six
    months, but he had now been with them for two years and  the  placement
    had been extended indefinitely.  His relationship with  Mary  and  Dave
    had deepened.  He now called them 'mum and dad'.

18. Ms Celia Sands of the SLRA was called as a witness, and she adopted  as
    her evidence in chief  her  witness  statement  signed  by  her  on  25
    February 2019.  She had been  appointed  a  Director  of  the  SLRA  in
    November 2014.  Ms Pritchard was Muhammad's main point  of  contact  in
    the organisation, but when she was away, Muhammad would  come  to  her.
    She herself was a mother of teenage boys growing up  in  South  London,
    and she saw in Muhammad traits that she recognised in her own boys  and
    their friends - a young man cockiness. There was a kind of swagger  and
    bravado amongst these young men where people with whom they  associated
    had to prove who they were.  She saw this in the way  Muhammad  greeted
    others and held himself.  Most of their young Afghan  clients  appeared
    much less sure of themselves, and Muhammad was much more  like  one  of
    her sons.

19. He differed from other Afghans in other ways.  One of these was in  the
    openness of his conversation on subjects which others had never  talked
    about in public.  For example, on a number of occasions Muhammad  would
    talk very openly in her presence about sex and relationships.   He  did
    not self-censor in relation to topics that  other  Afghans  would  find
    shocking or shameful.

20. With this in mind, she was very surprised at what happened when she had
    accompanied Muhammad to an appointment with a potential new host.  They
    were a young couple from just  down  the  road,  in  Brixton/Stockwell.
    Everything had been explained to Muhammad.  When they got there and met
    the couple, Muhammad seemed to fall apart.  The  swaggering  confidence
    completely evaporated and he did not know how to  interact  with  them.
    The whole experience of  meeting  the  couple  and  the  shattering  of
    external shells had completely unsettled him and  very  quickly  during
    the placement he decided to leave and sleep on  the  sofas  of  friends
    until they could sort out another arrangement for him,  which  was  his
    current arrangement with Mary and David.

21. It was very revelatory to see Muhammad change from the swaggering young
    South London man on the way to the  appointment,  to  someone  who  was
    monosyllabic and unable to make eye contact - totally  unable  to  cope
    with the situation he had been placed in.  The  current  placement  was
    successful. He called Mary and Dave 'mum and dad' and this  showed  her
    that he was much more child-like than his outside persona suggested.

22. She understood that he had been fairly  recently  diagnosed  as  having
    cognitive and learning difficulties, and this  did  not  surprise  her.
    From her experience, Muhammed struggled to understand even fairly basic
    concepts and he required frequent  repeated  explanations  before  they
    became clear. He was also not very guarded and did  not  think  of  the
    consequences of what he said or did.   She  was  very  concerned  about
    Muhammad going back to Afghanistan.  He would not be able to  care  for
    himself, or keep himself safe.  He had picked up the  mannerisms  of  a
    cocky South  London  teenager,  but  this  combined  with  an  immature
    attitude would lead to danger.  He had neither  the  ability  to  think
    through the consequences of his actions  nor  the  ability  to  process
    information quickly.  In  an  environment  which  would  require  self-
    reliance and strong self-preservation skills, she did not think that he
    would be able to cope.

23. In his closing submissions on  behalf  of  the  respondent,  Mr  Tarlow
    submitted that the appellant would be able  to  re-adapt  to  his  home
    environment in Baghlan province  so  as  not  to  come  to  harm.   The
    appellant would re-assimilate into the culture and society in which  he
    had been immersed up to the age of 13, and with which he  had  remained
    familiar through contact with fellow Afghans in the UK.  Alternatively,
    internal relocation to Kabul remained a reasonable and not unduly harsh
    option for him.  The Court of Appeal had not disturbed the  finding  of
    the Upper Tribunal in AS that westernisation would not be a significant
    risk factor in Kabul, and the appellant  would  be  able  to  access  a
    financial package from the Home Office to help  fund  his  survival  in
    Kabul.

24.  In  reply,  Mr  Bundock  developed  the  case  advanced  in  his  very
    comprehensive skeleton argument.

Discussion and Findings on Remaking

25. The first outstanding issue is whether the appellant's  return  to  his
    home area in Baghlan province is precluded by his  westernisation.   To
    support this proposition, Mr Bundock draws upon a number of sources  of
    evidence.  UNHCR's 2018 Guidelines identify  individuals  perceived  as
    westernised as being a category of person at risk.  There  are  reports
    of such people being threatened, tortured or  killed  by  AGEs  on  the
    grounds that they were perceived to have adopted values associated with
    western  countries.   Another  risk  category  identified  is  that  of
    individuals perceived as contravening AGEs' interpretation  of  Islamic
    principles, norms and values.  There are documented  instances  of  the
    Taliban  killing,  attacking  and  threatening  individuals   who   are
    perceived  to  contravene  the  Taliban's  interpretation  of   Islamic
    principles, norms and values.  A third relevant risk category  are  men
    who are "perceived as contravening social mores".

26. The EASO Country Guidance is to similar effect.  It says  that  Afghans
    identifying with Western values may "be targeted by  insurgent  groups,
    since they can be perceived as un-Islamic, or pro-Government, or can be
    considered spies."  Risk factors include the behaviours adopted,  rural
    areas, a conservative environment, and whether it  would  be  difficult
    for  particular  applicants  to  readjust   to   Afghanistan's   social
    restrictions.  Mr Tarlow  did  not  challenge  the  evidence  that  the
    appellant comes from a very religious and conservative  environment  in
    Baglan province.

27. Of particular pertinence is a passage in  the  EASO  Report  where  the
    following is stated: "Individuals who hold views that can be  perceived
    as having fallen away  from  Islam"  cannot  "express  their  views  or
    relationship to Islam openly, at the risk  of  sanctions  or  violence,
    including by  their  family.   Such  an  individual  must  also  appear
    outwardly Muslim and fulfil  the  behavioural  religious  and  cultural
    expectations of their local environment."

28. As submitted by Mr Bundock, it is unlikely that the appellant would  be
    able to  modify  his  behaviour  such  as  to  fulfil  the  behavioural
    religious and cultural expectations of his local environment, given his
    apparent inability to think through the consequences of his actions and
    his impulsivity.

29. In his expert opinion, Dr  Giustozzi  says  that  the  appellant  would
    simply not be able to display westernised attitudes in his  home  area,
    in view of its conservatism and the Taliban presence.   In  her  expert
    report, Dr Schuster  states  that  the  appellant's  views  and  likely
    behaviour "would put him at serious risk  of  alienating  those  around
    him, leading to exclusion at best and a risk  of  serious  violence  at
    worst" such as "a severe, potentially fatal, beating."  She opines that
    his failure to comply with the myriad of subtle ways  in  which  people
    are expected to demonstrate and affirm an Islamic faith "will give rise
    to comments and expose him to  accusations  that  he  is  no  longer  a
    believer."

30. Mr Tarlow did not challenge the appellant on his answer that he did not
    think that he was doing anything wrong or inappropriate when he  sought
    to enter a Mosque in shorts.   Accordingly,  the  incident  provides  a
    powerful illustration  of  the  appellant's  likely  inability  to  re-
    assimilate himself into a conservative and highly religious environment
    so as to avoid a risk of serious violence or worse.  As submitted by Mr
    Bundock, the appellant cannot in any event be  expected  to  modify  or
    conceal his acquired opinions regarding gender and cultural norms,  and
    nor can he be expected to feign or perform religious adherence in order
    to avoid persecution, following RT (Zimbabwe) -v- SSHD [2012]  UKSC  38
    and HJ (Iran) -v- SSHD [2010] UKSC 31.  In any event, in  view  of  the
    independent  evidence  regarding  the  appellant's  innately  impulsive
    character, and the very long and significant period that he  has  spent
    outside Afghanistan, there is a real risk that he would not be able  to
    modify or conceal the opinions that he has acquired in the West  so  as
    to avoid the risk of  serious  harm.   Accordingly,  I  find  that  the
    appellant has discharged the burden of proving  that  he  has  a  well-
    founded fear of persecution in Baghlan province, and/or of serious harm
    contrary to Article 3 ECHR, on account of his westernisation.

31. Nonetheless, the appellant  will  not  qualify  for  recognition  as  a
    refugee if paragraph 399O of the Rules applies. So I turn  to  consider
    whether the appellant can be reasonably expected to stay in Kabul.  The
    answer to this question is in the negative,  having  regard  to,  among
    other things, the unchallenged evidence of Ms Pritchard.  Her  evidence
    underpins the submission that the appellant is extremely vulnerable and
    struggles to manage his life, even with the deep and sustained  support
    he receives from multiple individuals and agencies in the UK;  that  he
    lacks very basic coping skills; that he presents as  one  of  the  most
    complex cases Ms Pritchard has ever known,  perhaps  due  to  the  twin
    factors of his poor mental health and learning  difficulties;  that  he
    has a learning disability which would seriously inhibit his ability  to
    find work to support himself in Kabul; and that there is  a  real  risk
    that his mental state would seriously deteriorate on removal to Kabul.

32. Although he is formally assessed as having  only  a  moderate  learning
    disability, his perceptual reasoning index  is  found  in  only  1%  of
    adults, placing him in the extremely low range.  His working memory  is
    at the 0.4% level, found only in 4 in 1,000 adults of his age.

33. In  addition,  the  appellant  has  no  educational  qualifications  or
    vocational experience that would be of assistance in Kabul,  and  there
    is a real risk that he would have no meaningful or effective support in
    Kabul from his family.  Judge Burns  found  to  the  contrary,  on  the
    premise that the appellant's family would provide funding  for  him  in
    Kabul. However, for the reasons given above, the appellant's ability to
    survive in Kabul does not  only  hinge  on  whether  he  can  access  a
    financial package from the Home Office or from family members  who  are
    willing and able to support him from a distance.

34. Having regard to the appellant's personal circumstances,  I  find  that
    the requirements of paragraph 399O(i)(a) are not made out.  I  find  to
    the lower standard of proof that he cannot reasonably  be  expected  to
    stay in Kabul, and therefore he qualifies for recognition as a refugee.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  contains  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly the  decision  is  set  aside  and  the  following  decision  is
substituted:
The appellant's appeal is allowed on the ground that his  removal  from  the
United Kingdom would breach the Refugee Convention and/or Article 3 ECHR  of
the Human Rights Convention.


Direction Regarding Anonymity

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 28 July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed this appeal on remaking, I have given consideration as  to
whether to make a fee award in respect of any fee which has been paid or  is
payable, and I have decided to make no fee award as the First-tier  Tribunal
reached the sustainable conclusion that his principal  ground  for  claiming
asylum (the existence  of  a  blood  feud)  should  be  dismissed,  and  the
appellant needed to bring forward further evidence in the Upper Tribunal  in
order to succeed in his appeal on his subsidiary ground for claiming  asylum
(risk of harm in home area due to westernisation) and on the ground  of  the
non-viability of his relocation to Kabul due to his personal circumstances.


Signed                              Date 28 July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
