
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00457/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 September 2016                   |On 18 October 2016                   |
|Extempore judgment                     |                                     |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                                     A A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Armstrong, Counsel, instructed by Sutovic &
Hartigan
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   I have found a material error of law  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    this appeal, who allowed the appellant's appeal on Article  3  grounds,
    and I set aside that element of the decision to be remade.  I dismissed
    the other grounds of appeal which were made by both the  appellant  and
    the respondent.

2.   The reasons for that decision are set out in the error of law  decision
    which was promulgated on 7 June 2016.  That error of law decision  also
    included directions.  Those directions were for  the  appellant  if  so
    advised to file and serve a witness statement to stand as  evidence-in-
    chief concerning her conduct in the UK and her  conduct  in  Uganda  in
    terms of HJ (Iran); that witness  statement  to  be  filed  and  served
    within 21 days of the sending out of my error of law decision.

3.   The Secretary of State was then to notify  the  appellant  through  her
    solicitors and to notify the Tribunal within 21 days of the  filing  of
    that  witness  statement  whether  she  wished  to  cross-examine   the
    appellant.  Unfortunately, there appears to have been an administrative
    failure on the part of the Secretary of State and they misfiled or  did
    not note properly the receipt of the witness statement although  it  is
    acknowledged by Mr Walker that the witness statement was received.  The
    witness statement was filed a couple of days late.   The  Secretary  of
    State did not respond to the direction that she  notify  the  appellant
    and the Tribunal whether she wished to cross-examine the appellant.

4.   On 5 September the appellant's solicitors wrote  to  the  Secretary  of
    State pointing out the non-compliance and saying that in the absence of
    an application, presumably they mean a notification, then the appellant
    would not now be brought to the Tribunal  for  cross-examination.   The
    Secretary of State acknowledged having received that letter but did not
    respond to it and on 28 September, the day  before  this  hearing,  the
    appellant's solicitors received a telephone call  from  the  Presenting
    Officers' Unit saying that the directions had been logged  incorrectly.
    It was confirmed that the letter of 5 September had been  received  but
    there was no request for the appellant to attend.

5.   Mr Walker was placed in quite a difficult position  and  says  that  he
    had considered whether to ask for an adjournment but  had  reached  the
    view that that  adjournment  request  would  be  objected  to  and  the
    Secretary of State had had opportunity  to  say  that  she  wished  the
    applicant to attend even as late as yesterday and that that request was
    not made.  He was therefore not  asking  for  an  adjournment  for  the
    appellant to come to court to enable her to be cross-examined.

6.   At the commencement of today's hearing I asked if it  was  accepted  by
    the Secretary of State that the appellant would only behave  discreetly
    on return to Uganda because of the fear of being  at  a  real  risk  of
    serious harm.  Mr Walker accepted that on that basis she would  receive
    Article 3 protection.  He said that the issue of whether the  appellant
    would be at real risk of serious  harm  would  have  to  be  looked  at
    through the prism of HJ (Iran) and the current circumstances  that  the
    appellant would face on return to Uganda.

7.   The Secretary of State's position was that the appellant would  not  be
    at risk on return although Mr Walker accepted  the,  now  unchallenged,
    evidence in the appellant's statement was that she fears return because
    of her sexuality and the risk of serious harm that she would sustain if
    she failed to hide her sexuality.

8.   The appellant in her witness statement makes very clear that she  would
    want to express her sexuality freely and openly and that if returned to
    Uganda she would fear a real  risk  of  persecution  and  serious  harm
    because of being a gay woman.  She states that she would be  forced  to
    live somewhere where she could not express her  sexuality  at  all  and
    that she could not bear to live her life in that way.   She  says  that
    she would have to regress and hide away, having now come to terms  with
    who she was and that this would be disastrous for her.  She states that
    she is comfortable with her sexuality and she wanted to be in an  open,
    loving and committed relationship  which  she  could  exist  in  safely
    without having to be secretive and always looking over her shoulder  in
    fear.

9.   On the  basis  of  her  uncontested  and  unchallenged  evidence  I  am
    satisfied that if the appellant  returned  to  Uganda  she  would  only
    behave discreetly because of a real  objectively  sustainable  fear  of
    serious harm from the authorities in Uganda.  On that basis  and  given
    the Secretary of State's  position,  having  looked  at  those  matters
    through the prism of HJ (Iran) I am satisfied that the applicant  meets
    all of the criteria set out  in  paragraph  82  of  HJ  (Iran).   Those
    questions and the appellant's responses identify  that  this  appellant
    would be at real risk of serious harm and I therefore allow her  appeal
    on Article 3 grounds.

Decision

The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                                    Date 17th October 2016
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Coker

