

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00485/2015
      PA/00487/2015
      PA/00488/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Determination Promulgated            |
|On Friday 12 May 2017                 |On Tuesday 23 May 2017               |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                  MR D K A
                                  MRS K K M
                                 MISS A T D
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Benfield, Counsel instructed by Theva
                 solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. It is appropriate to  continue  the  order.
Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any  member  of  their  family.  This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to  the  Respondent.  Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

    1. The Appellants appeal against  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision
       dated 18 June 2015 making a  deportation  order  against  the  First
       Appellant  under  s32  UK  Borders  Act  2007  and  refusing   their
       protection and human rights claims.  The appeals of the  Second  and
       Third  Appellants  are  dependent  on  the  outcome  of  the   First
       Appellant's appeal.


    2. The Appellants' appeals  were  heard  and  dismissed  by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Aujla by a decision promulgated on 28 July 2016.  The
       Judge  held  that  deportation  of  the  First  Appellant  and   the
       consequent removal of the Second  and  Third  Appellants  would  not
       breach the UK's obligations on asylum and human rights  grounds  and
       that the Appellants were not entitled to humanitarian protection.


    3. The Appellants sought permission  to  appeal  to  this  Tribunal  on
       protection grounds only.  Permission to appeal was granted by First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Brunnen on 17 August 2016.


    4. By an error of law decision promulgated on 27 October 2016, I  found
       an error of law  in  relation  to  one  aspect  of  the  Appellants'
       protection claim only.  I therefore set aside one paragraph only  of
       Judge  Aujla's  decision  (paragraph  [70]).   The  focus   of   the
       Appellants' protection claim before  me  is  therefore  very  narrow
       indeed.   I  deal  with  that  below  under  the  heading  of   "The
       Appellants' Claim".  My error of law decision is  appended  to  this
       decision for ease of reference.


    5. Also appended to this decision is a further decision promulgated  on
       11 January 2017 made following a  hearing  on  that  day.   By  that
       decision, I adjourned the hearing of the appeal as a result of  late
       service of further evidence by the  Appellants  on  the  Respondent.
       The Senior Home Office Presenting Officer who attended that  hearing
       therefore had no prior notice of that evidence.  He also  asked  for
       time to verify one  of  the  further  documents  put  forward.   The
       Appellants did  not  object  to  that  course  but  asked  that  the
       Respondent also consider verifying another document adduced  earlier
       in the proceedings.  That the Respondent agreed to do.


    6. The Respondent failed to file  a  document  verification  report  in
       relation  to  those  documents.   Mr  Duffy  who  appeared  for  the
       Respondent at this hearing indicated that no verification checks had
       been made for reasons which appear from an email which he  read  out
       at the hearing and with which I deal below under  the  heading  "The
       Respondent's Case".
    7. At the hearing before me, the First Appellant  gave  oral  evidence.
       The interpreter arrived late but the First Appellant indicated  that
       he was content to give evidence in English and did so.  He  was  not
       asked any questions by Mr Duffy.  I asked one  question  by  way  of
       clarification.  Otherwise, the hearing proceeded  on  the  basis  of
       oral submissions of both advocates which I have set out below  under
       the respective headings.


    Legal Framework


    8. In order to be recognised as a refugee an appellant must  show  that
       he has a well-founded fear of persecution for one  of  five  reasons
       set out in Article 1(A)  of  the  1951  Refugee  Convention  ie  for
       reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership of  a  particular
       social  group  or  political  opinion.   The  1951   Convention   is
       interpreted in European law  through  Council  Directive  2004/84/EC
       ("the Qualification Directive").   The  Qualification  Directive  is
       incorporated in UK law through The Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of
       International Protection (Qualification) Regulations  2006  and  the
       Immigration Rules.


    9. Article 3 of the 1950 European Convention on Human Rights  prohibits
       torture, inhuman or degrading treatment.  It is  an  absolute  right
       from which there can be no derogation.  An appellant must show  that
       there are substantial grounds for believing that  there  is  a  real
       risk that the consequence of removal would violate his rights  under
       Article 3.


   10. The burden of proof is on the Appellant to establish his  claim  and
       that there is a real risk that he will be subjected  to  persecution
       or serious harm.  The assessment of risk must be considered  at  the
       date of the hearing before me.


    The Appellants' Claim


   11. Since the only claim which remains before me is the protection claim
       which focusses on the position of the First Appellant, I refer below
       only to "the Appellant".  As indicated at  [1]  above,  though,  the
       Second and Third Appellants'  claims  are  dependent  on  the  First
       Appellant's claim and therefore stand or fall with his claim.


   12. The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka.  He came to the  UK  as  a
       student in 2004. His leave was extended first as a student and  then
       as a Tier 1 migrant. The  Appellant  was  the  manager  of  a  Money
       Exchange Bureau. The Appellant was arrested in  2009  alongside  the
       owner of that business ("RT") and the compliance officer ("TK")  for
       alleged money laundering.  He was convicted  on  25  March  2014  of
       converting  criminal  property   and   sentenced   to   two   years'
       imprisonment.  He was served with notice that he was  liable  to  be
       deported and then claimed asylum.


   13. The Respondent accepted that the Appellant returned to Sri Lanka  on
       22 November 2013 and returned to the UK on 14 December  2013.   That
       is relevant since it formed the basis  of  the  Appellant's  primary
       protection claim.


   14. The basis of the Appellant's  primary  protection  claim  (hereafter
       "the primary claim") is that he had taken an interest in war  crimes
       committed against Tamils during his return to Sri Lanka as a  result
       of being shown certain photographs by friends  there.   He  says  he
       arranged to obtain a CD bearing the photographs to bring back to the
       UK to expose the abuse.  As a result,  he  had  been  kidnapped  and
       detained, he says by the Sri Lankan authorities.   He  says  he  was
       detained for three days during which  he  was  beaten  and  verbally
       abused and accused of being a supporter of the LTTE.   He  was  then
       released on payment of a bribe.


   15. His subsidiary claim (hereafter referred to as such) is that  he  is
       at risk by reason  of  his  criminal  conviction  in  the  UK  which
       attracted publicity in Sri Lanka.  He would be of  interest  because
       it would be assumed that he  has  money  and  he  fears  kidnap  for
       ransom.


   16. Judge Aujla did not believe the Appellant's claim  for  the  reasons
       set out at [58] to [70]  of  the  Decision.   By  my  error  of  law
       decision, I found no  error  of  law  in  relation  to  the  Judge's
       findings about the primary claim.  His  decision  that  the  primary
       claim is not credible therefore stands.  The primary  claim  remains
       relevant however for the adverse credibility findings and the effect
       of those on the  subsidiary  claim.   It  was  in  relation  to  the
       subsidiary claim that I found an error  of  law  and  therefore  set
       aside [70] of Judge Aujla's decision.


   17. The subsidiary claim as originally presented to me was  that,  as  a
       result of the widespread reporting of the Appellant's conviction  in
       the UK, which reporting also extended to Sri  Lanka,  the  Appellant
       would be considered to be wealthy and would be at risk of kidnapping
       for ransom.  As an aside, it was also  noted  that  the  Sri  Lankan
       authorities would be aware of the Appellant's  involvement  in  this
       crime.


   18. The Appellant has produced and relies on a number of reports of  his
       conviction.  Those include a  press  release  from  HM  Revenue  and
       Customs, a report on the  internet  in  "The  Africom"  and  on  the
       website of "Asian Express" as well as reports which appeared in  the
       press in the UK.


   19. Between the error of law hearing and the hearing initially fixed for
       the re-making  of  the  decision,  the  Appellant  produced  further
       evidence.  I gave permission for this to be  adduced  in  accordance
       with the directions  given  in  my  error  of  law  decision.   That
       evidence consisted of the following:-


            . A number of e mails passing between  the  Appellant  and  his
              brother who remains in Sri Lanka dating between  January  and
              October 2016 as well as mobile  phone  records  which  report
              threats made to the family.   It  is  said  that  the  family
              reported the threats to the police;
            . A letter dated  9  January  2017  written  by  Mr  Appathuray
              Vinayagamoorthy, LLB, Ex MP, a  Sri  Lankan  Attorney-at-law,
              Notary Public and Commissioner for Oaths;
            . Press and internet articles concerning abductions and  "white
              van" disappearances for ransom and other articles  concerning
              continued  ill-treatment  of  Tamils  by   the   Sri   Lankan
              authorities.


   20. The main focus of the Appellant's subsidiary claim is now a fear  of
       the Sri Lankan authorities as a result of his conviction in the  UK.
       He says that the authorities perceive that the  motivation  for  the
       offence was to fund the LTTE.  This is exacerbated, he says, by  the
       belief of the authorities that his former employer, RT,  is  a  LTTE
       fundraiser although in oral evidence the Appellant confirmed that he
       has had no contact with RT or TK since leaving prison.


   21. The Appellant relies in this regard  not  only  on  the  reports  of
       threats made to his brother but also on  the  letter  from  the  Sri
       Lankan Attorney.  Given the  importance  of  that  evidence  to  the
       Appellant's case, I set it out in full below.
           "I am an Attorney-at-Law of the Supreme Court of Sri Lanka  with
           31 years standing in the profession and was  also  a  Member  of
           Parliament representing Jaffna constituency in  the  Sri  Lankan
           Parliament.  In  my  legal  practice,  I  have  for  many  years
           regularly represented Tamils arrested  and  detained  under  the
           Prevention of Terrorism Act 1978 and the Emergency Regulations.
           As per my records dated 14 October 2016, I can confirm that [AI]
           and [AA] sought my assistance.  They were introduced me to [sic]
           by a former client, [C].
           According to [AI] and [AA] from [place of residence]  they  have
           been receiving threats and abuses over the telephone. On one  of
           the occasions, [A]  was  physically  threatened  and  beaten  by
           unknown of persons [sic]. They filed a  complaint  at  [name  of
           police station], the local police station, however, after filing
           the complaint the verbal abuses over telephone  only  increased.
           They fear the threats were made with the connivance of  Criminal
           Investigation Department  (CID).   The  main  reference  of  the
           abuses meted out is regarding [D], [I's] son, who is in the UK.
           In my line of practise I have witnessed several  occasions  when
           the CID resort to local  nationalist  persons  attached  to  the
           ruling power to harass and intimidate people  of  Tamil  origin.
           The modus operandi in the case of [I] and her son [A] shows that
           the persons threatening them have all the information about  [I]
           and [A], including the complaint they filed with the police, the
           contents of which outsiders are impossible to have access.
           I spoke to an officer of [name of police station] on 20  October
           2016 to gather information about the matter.  The  officer  took
           my details and informed me that they would get back to me  after
           going through their records.
           Two days later, I received a call from [name of police station].
            We had a conversation in Sinhala.  He submitted that there is a
           complaint lodged by [A] about the  harassment  and  intimidation
           received by them.  However, he accused that [DA] laundered money
           in the UK to revive the LTTE in Sri Lanka.  The LTTE  has  links
           and has been involved in all notorious areas; human trafficking,
           weapons, transport heroin and money laundering.  [D] is part  of
           the organised crime cartel of the LTTE  that  engaged  in  money
           laundering for the LTTE.  He further alleged that [D] was trying
           to bring disrepute to the Sri Lanka  soldiers  who  successfully
           fought the war against terrorist organisation by  giving  untrue
           evidence about Sri Lankan soldiers.
           I was shocked after hearing the allegations made against [D] and
           asked him how they could make such serious  accusations  against
           [D].  The officer refused to speak any further about the matter.
           [D] was accused of supporting terrorism and concealed the wealth
           accumulated by criminal wrong doing.   He  will  be  apprehended
           soon after  landing  in  Sri  Lanka  according  to  the  police.
           According to the officer, [D] was intentionally working for  the
           LTTE and was active participant in the money laundering wing  of
           the LTTE.
           I conveyed all that was said to me by the officer and asked  [A]
           to seek assistance from any  politician  who  has  influence  to
           speak to the Police to solve their problems,  as  there  are  no
           legal avenues to challenge their allegations or to  prevent  the
           covert actions taken against them.  I expressed my inability  to
           assist them further in the matter."


   22. In addition to the further evidence referred to above,  Ms  Benfield
       also produced at this hearing two letters dated 13 March 2017 and  3
       May 2017 from Luton Mental Health and Wellbeing  Service  concerning
       the Appellant's mental health problems.   These  follow  on  from  a
       report of Dr Osagie Ogbeide which  was  before  Judge  Aujla.   That
       formed part of the Appellant's grounds at the error of law stage but
       I found that there was no error of law in the Judge's  treatment  of
       that report.  Whilst the Judge accepted Dr  Ogbeide's  diagnosis  of
       post-traumatic stress disorder, he did not accept the  causation  of
       that as being the Appellant's detention in Sri  Lanka,  particularly
       since the Appellant's mental health  problems  surfaced  during  his
       detention in the UK in consequence of his conviction.


   23. In relation to the more recent evidence, Ms Benfield explained  that
       the purpose of this related to the impact of the Appellant's  mental
       health problems on his oral evidence.  Since the Appellant  was  not
       cross-examined at the hearing before me, that  evidence  had  little
       bearing on the issues I have to decide. Ms Benfield submitted though
       that it continued to have relevance to the weight I should  give  to
       the earlier adverse credibility findings.


   24. Ms Benfield provided a very helpful speaking note  setting  out  the
       consistency of the Appellant's subsidiary claim with  the  case  law
       relating to Sri Lanka asylum claims. She also drew my  attention  to
       recent background evidence, in particular the  Home  Office  Country
       Information and Guidance concerning  Tamil  separatism  dated  March
       2017.  She submitted that it is plausible that the authorities would
       suspect his involvement in money laundering to  be  linked  to  LTTE
       fundraising. She submitted that this was not  simply  a  risk  which
       might eventuate but one which has arisen as confirmed by the  letter
       from Mr Vinayagamoorthy.  She submitted that  the  Appellant's  name
       will appear on a "stop list" and the Appellant will be arrested  and
       detained when he returns to  Sri  Lanka.   She  submitted  that  the
       conditions for Tamils suspected of continued LTTE involvement remain
       such that there  is  a  real  risk  of  ill-treatment  in  detention
       reaching the Article 3 ECHR threshold.


    The Respondent's Case


   25. As I note at [5] above, I adjourned a previous hearing fixed for the
       re-making of the decision so that the Respondent  could  verify  the
       letter from Mr Vinayagamoorthy as well as a document said  to  be  a
       report to the police in January 2016 made by the Appellant's  family
       in relation to the threats they have received.  As I  note  at  [6],
       the Respondent failed to file any document verification report.


   26. At the start of the hearing, Mr Duffy referred to an email  received
       in relation to the request for document  verification.   That  email
       was not physically admitted in evidence because Mr Duffy  said  that
       it was marked as confidential, no doubt  because  it  contained  the
       names of those who were to conduct  the  verification.   However,  I
       allowed Mr Duffy to read  the  email  out  and  I  treated  that  as
       sufficient evidence of the content of the email.   Ms  Benfield  did
       not object to that course.


   27. The writer of the email indicated  that  no  verification  had  been
       carried out of the Attorney's letter because letters  from  him  had
       been verified in two other cases previously  and  were  accepted  as
       being  genuine.   It  was  accepted  that  Mr   Vinayagamoorthy   is
       registered with the Sri Lankan Bar Council.  The letter is therefore
       accepted as being genuine.


   28. In relation  to  the  report  to  the  police  station,  the  writer
       indicated that the report was genuine.  However, the point was  also
       made that the report only confirmed that a complaint had  been  made
       and did  not  substantiate  the  contents  of  the  complaint.   The
       Respondent therefore accepted that the threats were reported to  the
       police but did not accept that this meant that threats had genuinely
       been made.


   29. In his submissions, Mr Duffy pointed out that Judge Aujla's decision
       stands in relation to the Appellant's primary claim.  As  such,  the
       Appellant has been found not to be  credible  in  relation  to  that
       claim.  It is not accepted that he has previously been suspected  by
       the authorities of  LTTE  involvement  or  detained  by  them.   The
       Appellant's wife was also  found  not  to  be  credible.   Mr  Duffy
       submitted that  the  adverse  credibility  findings  attach  to  the
       evidence of the police complaint and  emails  from  the  Appellant's
       brother since those had to be seen in the context of the  previously
       fabricated claim.  That evidence can be given little weight as it is
       self-serving.


   30. In relation to the subsidiary claim, Mr  Duffy  submitted  that  the
       risk arising at  the  hands  of  the  authorities  would  require  a
       perception by them that the Appellant has links to Tamil  separatism
       notwithstanding that he has no prior LTTE involvement and  has  been
       found not to have been of interest to  the  authorities  previously.
       As such, he submitted that the claim that the authorities would  now
       be interested in him simply because of the criminal  conviction  was
       not plausible.


   31. Mr Duffy accepted that there have been cases where those  committing
       fraud have been suspected by the authorities of fundraising for  the
       LTTE.  However, he said, the intelligence gathering by the  security
       services in Sri Lanka has  been  found  to  be  sophisticated.   The
       reporting including the Judge's sentencing remarks do not  make  any
       link between the money laundering and LTTE fundraising.   The  crime
       was reported to be motivated by the lifestyles  of  those  convicted
       and the proceeds were reported to have been used to buy  properties,
       cars and fund private education for  their  children.   The  Judge's
       sentencing remarks also make clear that this Appellant was  not  one
       of the ringleaders and had come late to the criminal enterprise.


   32. In relation to the risk of kidnapping by  those  seeking  to  extort
       money by ransom demands, whilst the background evidence  shows  that
       such kidnappings does occur from time to time, the  problem  is  not
       sufficiently systemic to give rise to a real risk.


    Decision and Reasons


   33. I start by noting what is not in issue before me.  First,  there  is
       no separate Article 8  claim,  the  Appellants'  claim  having  been
       rejected by Judge  Aujla  and  no  challenge  having  been  made  in
       relation to that claim. Second, the certification of the Appellant's
       protection claim  under  section  72  Nationality,  Immigration  and
       Asylum Act  2002  was  set  aside  by  Judge  Aujla.   That  is  not
       challenged by the Respondent.  Third, the Appellant's primary  claim
       to be at real risk of persecution or ill-treatment on  return  as  a
       result of events said to have occurred  in  November  2013  was  not
       found credible.  I reject Ms Benfield's submission that I should  be
       sceptical about the Judge's previous credibility findings because of
       the Appellant's mental health problems.   First,  the  Judge  had  a
       medical report setting out those  mental  health  problems  and  was
       aware of those when he reached his findings.  Second, as Ms Benfield
       herself accepted, the two documents produced at this hearing are not
       written by mental health experts; the writers  do  not  profess  any
       specialist knowledge of the Appellant's mental health  problems.  It
       is  also  relevant  to  the  Appellant's  credibility  that  he  was
       convicted of a crime involving dishonesty.  The Appellant's wife was
       also found not to be credible by Judge Aujla. For those  reasons,  I
       take into account against the Appellant that both he  and  his  wife
       have been found not  to  be  credible  in  the  past  and  that  the
       Appellant has fabricated his primary claim.


   34. I start from the premise, therefore, in relation to  the  subsidiary
       claim that the Appellant is a Tamil who  has  not  shown  any  prior
       interest in or been previously involved in the LTTE cause,  has  not
       participated in demonstrations or other activities in support of the
       LTTE in the UK and was able to return to Sri Lanka on  a  number  of
       occasions including in November 2013 without exciting  any  interest
       by the Sri Lankan authorities.  Those  visits  though  pre-date  the
       Appellant's criminal conviction.


   35. The only issue which  remains  for  me  to  determine  therefore  is
       whether the Appellant is  at  risk  as  a  result  of  his  criminal
       conviction.  I deal first with the claimed  risk  that  others  will
       kidnap him in order to obtain a  ransom  because  of  his  perceived
       wealth.  I accept it is plausible that this  might  occur  based  on
       background evidence.  However, the reports  which  are  in  evidence
       show isolated incidents.  That evidence does not demonstrate even to
       the lower standard that there is a real risk that this  will  occur.
       I therefore reject the Appellant's subsidiary claim  insofar  as  it
       relates to a risk of kidnap by non-State agents.


   36. I turn then to the  subsidiary  claim  that,  as  a  result  of  the
       Appellant's criminal conviction, the authorities will  perceive  the
       Appellant as being a fundraiser for the LTTE because of  the  nature
       of the crime committed thereby placing  the  Appellant  at  risk  of
       arrest and detention on return.  The Respondent says  that  this  is
       not plausible.  The Appellant says that this is not simply plausible
       but the  risk  has  been  shown  to  have  arisen  by  evidence,  in
       particular the letter from Mr Vinayagamoorthy.


   37. I accept that reporting of the Appellant's  criminal  conviction  is
       likely to have reached Sri Lanka by the publication  of  reports  on
       the internet.  Conversely, I do not accept as plausible that the  UK
       conviction  of  a  Tamil  without  any  known  LTTE  background   or
       involvement would in general give rise to a real risk.  Much depends
       on the individual facts of the conviction and  the  perception  that
       the reporting would generate.


   38. I accept that the reporting shows that the crime was  committed  for
       financial gain.  There is no suggestion in either the press/internet
       reports or the Judge's sentencing remarks of money  being  laundered
       for  any  organisation.   However,  I  also  accept  Ms   Benfield's
       submission that it is not simply a  matter  whether  the  crime  was
       committed to fund the LTTE but whether the authorities will perceive
       that to be the motive.  I pause to note that there is no  suggestion
       that the Appellant has actually been involved in fundraising for the
       LTTE.


   39. There is  a  suggestion  that  the  Appellant's  employer,  RT,  was
       believed by the authorities to be a fundraiser for the LTTE  and  to
       have property in Sri Lanka which was used  by  the  LTTE.   However,
       that emerges only from evidence given by  the  Appellant  orally  in
       interview which itself is said to have arisen from  questions  asked
       of him by the authorities when he was  detained  in  November  2013.
       Since I have not accepted, based on  Judge  Aujla's  findings,  that
       such detention and questioning occurred, it follows that I give that
       evidence little weight.  There is no independent reporting  that  RT
       is believed to be a LTTE fundraiser. Further, and in any event,  the
       Appellant  is  no  longer  in  contact  with  RT  and,   given   the
       sophisticated intelligence of the Sri Lankan authorities, they would
       no doubt be aware of that if that were the source of their interest.


   40. I also give little weight to the emails from the Appellant's brother
       and the complaint made to the police.   I  note  that  although  the
       Appellant's brother said that he changed  his  mobile  number  as  a
       result of threats, the Appellant's brother and mother remain  living
       in Sri Lanka apparently in the same location.  Neither is there  any
       evidence that these threats come from  the  authorities.   I  accept
       that the Appellant's brother and  mother  reported  threats  to  the
       police.  However, even if I accept that they  did  so  because  they
       were genuinely receiving threats, the fact that they reported  those
       threats to the police does not suggest to me that they believed that
       the authorities were the source of the threats.


   41. The letter from Mr Vinayagamoorthy though is in  a  quite  different
       category.  I have set out the content of that letter at [21]  above.
       As is there shown, this is not simply a letter confirming  what  the
       Appellant's relatives have said.   It  is  direct  evidence  from  a
       lawyer that he  received  information  from  the  police  that  they
       suspect the Appellant as being involved in fundraising by  the  LTTE
       because of the Appellant's criminal conviction.  The Respondent  has
       conceded that the letter is genuine.  Although the Court  of  Appeal
       in PJ (Sri Lanka) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
       [2014] EWCA Civ 1011 confirmed that there is no separate category of
       lawyer's letters  creating  any  different  evidential  presumption,
       based on Mr Vinayagamoorthy's  position  and  standing  (both  as  a
       lawyer and former MP), I give weight to the content of that document
       as showing that the Appellant is  of  interest  to  the  authorities
       because he is perceived as assisting in fundraising for the LTTE.


   42. I have also considered whether the Appellant's  claim  is  plausible
       bearing in mind the complete absence of any prior  involvement  with
       or interest in the LTTE and that he did not  previously  excite  any
       interest by the authorities on that account.


   43. The Appellant relies on the following categories in  GJ  and  others
       (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG  [2013]  UKUT  00319  (IAC)
       ("GJ") as relevant to his case:-
            "(a) Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a  threat  to
           the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because  they  are,
           or are perceived to have a significant role in relation to post-
           conflict Tamil separatism within the diaspora and/or  a  renewal
           of hostilities within Sri Lanka;
            ......
            (d)  A person whose name appears on a computerised "stop"  list
           accessible at the airport, comprising a list  of  those  against
           whom  there  is  an  extant  court  order  or  arrest   warrant.
           Individuals whose name appears on a "stop" list will be  stopped
           at the airport and handed over to  the  appropriate  Sri  Lankan
           authorities, in pursuance of such order or warrant."


   44. I begin by observing  that,  although  Ms  Benfield  relied  in  her
       submissions on risk category (d), there is  no  evidence  before  me
       that there is a Court order or arrest warrant in place  against  the
       Appellant.  Although the Appellant said in interview that  his  name
       will be on a stop list, I give that evidence little  weight  due  to
       general   concerns   about   the   Appellant's    credibility.    Mr
       Vinayagamoorthy does not say that the Appellant's name was on such a
       list and he does not assert that the police  officer  with  whom  he
       spoke said there was any arrest warrant or court order in existence.
        I do not accept therefore that the Appellant's name would appear on
       a stop list.


   45. However, the evidence in GJ is that intelligence  gathering  by  the
       Sri Lankan  authorities  is  very  sophisticated  (see  [8]  of  the
       headnote).  That this is so is confirmed  by  the  Respondent's  own
       country information (referred to at [24] above) citing from GJ.  The
       relevant passage reads as follows.


           "[2.4.9] The  Sri  Lankan  authorities'  approach  is  based  on
           sophisticated intelligence, both as  to  activities  within  Sri
           Lanka and in the diaspora. The Sri Lankan authorities know  that
           many Sri Lankan Tamils travelled abroad as economic migrants and
           also that everyone in the Northern Province had  some  level  of
           involvement with the LTTE during the civil war. In post-conflict
           Sri Lanka, an individual's past history will be relevant only to
           the extent that it is perceived by the Sri Lankan authorities as
           indicating a present risk to the unitary Sri Lankan state or the
           Sri Lankan Government' (paragraph 356 (8)).
           [2.4.10] Unlike in the  past,  returnees  who  have  a  previous
           connection with the LTTE are able to return to their communities
           without suffering ill-treatment. Civil  society  groups  on  the
           ground did not report recent issues of ill-treatment. The police
           interest, if any, is not in any previous  involvement  with  the
           LTTE, but on whether the person has committed any criminal  act.
           This  is  because  many  had  left  the  country  using   forged
           identities and the police were therefore  seeking  to  establish
           the true identity of the returning person and whether  they  are
           wanted for any criminal acts in addition to leaving the  country
           with false documents"


   46. Whilst there is no suggestion that  there  is  any  issue  with  the
       Appellant's identity, that passage supports  the  Appellant's  claim
       that he would be questioned about his immigration and other  history
       on arrival and that disclosure  of  his  criminal  conviction  would
       emerge either via that questioning  or  possibly  even  before  then
       during the returns process. I therefore accept as plausible that the
       intelligence services would be aware of the  Appellant's  return  to
       Sri Lanka even if his name does not appear on a stop list.


   47. As is made clear in GJ and as emphasised by the Court of  Appeal  in
       MP and NT (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
       [2014] EWCA Civ 829, interest by the Sri Lankan authorities is based
       not on a person's past but on present and  future  support  for  the
       LTTE.  This is encapsulated in the following passage  (dealing  with
       the Upper Tribunal's decision in GJ):


             "[50]      ....The  clear  message  of  the  Upper   Tribunal's
             guidance is that a record of past LTTE  activism  does  not  as
             such constitute a risk  factor  for  Tamils  returning  to  Sri
             Lanka, because  the  Government's  concern  is  now  only  with
             current or future threats to the integrity of Sri  Lanka  as  a
             unitary state; and that that is so even if the returnee's  past
             links with the LTTE were of the kind characterised by UNHCR  as
             'more elaborate'.  I respectfully agree with the Vice-President
             that that is a conclusion which it was entitled to  reach.   It
             is  also  clear  that  the  Tribunal  believed  that  'diaspora
             activism', actual or perceived, is the principal basis on which
             the Government of Sri Lanka is likely to treat returning Tamils
             as posing a current or future threat; and I agree that too  was
             a conclusion which it was entitled to reach.  But I do not read
             para.  356(7)(a)  of  its  determination  as  prescribing  that
             diaspora activism is the only basis on which a returning  Tamil
             might be regarded as posing such a threat and thus of being  at
             risk  on return.  Even apart from cases falling under heads (b)-
             (d) in para 356(7), there may,  though  untypically,  be  other
             cases (of which NT may be an example) where the evidence  shows
             particular grounds for concluding  that  the  Government  might
             regard  the  applicant  as  posing  a  current  threat  to  the
             integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state even in the absence of
             evidence  that  he  or  she  has  been  involved  in   diaspora
             activism."


  48. Just as it may be the case, therefore, that an individual with fairly
      extensive past links with the LTTE is no longer of interest because
      that individual has shown no signs of continuing with that support, so
      I find it plausible that an individual such as the Appellant with no
      past profile as a supporter of the LTTE might nonetheless be perceived
      by the Sri Lankan authorities as a supporter because of current
      activities.  More usually, the activities relied upon are involvement
      in demonstrations and the such like.  The Appellant has not sought to
      exaggerate his claim by placing reliance on such matters.  It is
      though plausible that a group of Tamil men convicted of an offence of
      money laundering would raise the suspicions of the Sri Lankan
      authorities about their motivation.  It is therefore plausible that
      the Appellant would become of interest to the authorities
      notwithstanding the lack of any prior interest (based on Judge Aujla's
      findings) and the lack of any prior involvement with or support for
      the LTTE.


   49.  For those reasons, I accept that the Appellant's claim is plausible
       judged against background evidence.  Placing weight as I do  on  the
       letter from Mr Vinayagamoorthy, I also accept that the Appellant has
       demonstrated that there  is  a  real  risk  in  his  case  that  the
       authorities perceive him as a person who is involved in  fundraising
       for the LTTE and that he would be of interest  on  return  for  that
       reason.  The Appellant therefore falls within the risk category  (a)
       in GJ and there is a real risk that he will be arrested and detained
       on that account.


   50. The Respondent does not dispute that, if there is a real risk that a
       Tamil individual will be of interest to the  authorities  on  return
       and will, as a result of that interest  be  arrested  and  detained,
       there is a real risk of ill-treatment contravening Article 3 ECHR.


   51. For those reasons, the Appellant has demonstrated that he has a well-
       founded fear of  persecution  or  ill-treatment  by  reason  of  the
       political opinion which will be imputed to  him by  the  Sri  Lankan
       authorities.  The  Appellant's  appeal  is  therefore   allowed   on
       protection grounds.  Since the  appeals  of  the  Second  and  Third
       Appellants are dependent on  the  First  Appellant's  appeal,  their
       appeals are also allowed.






   DECISION
   The Appellants' appeals are allowed on protection grounds.
      Signed           [pic]      Dated:  16 May 2017
      Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
                       APPENDIX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00485/2015
      PA/00487/2015
      PA/00488/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Determination Promulgated            |
|On Wednesday 28 September 2016        |                                     |
|                                      |.....................................|
|                                      |..                                   |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                  MR D K A
                                  MRS K K M
                                 MISS A T D
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Murphy, Counsel instructed by S Satha & Co
                 solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. It is appropriate to  continue  the  order.
Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any  member  of  their  family.  This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to  the  Respondent.  Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

Background

   1. The Appellants appeal against a decision of First-Tier Tribunal  Judge
      Aujla  promulgated on 28 July 2016  ("the  Decision")  dismissing  the
      Appellants' appeal against the Secretary of State's decision dated  18
      June 2015 making a deportation order against the First Appellant under
      s32 UK Borders Act 2007 and refusing their protection and human rights
      claims.  The appeals of the Second and Third Appellants are  dependent
      on the outcome of the First Appellant's  appeal  in  relation  to  the
      protection claim which is the only challenge to  the  Decision  before
      this Tribunal.  I therefore refer hereafter only to  his  case  and  I
      refer to him hereafter as "the Appellant".


   2. The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka.  He came  to  the  UK  as  a
      student in 2004. His leave was extended first as a student and then as
      a Tier 1 migrant.  The Appellant was  arrested  in  2009  for  alleged
      money laundering.  He was convicted on 25  March  2014  of  converting
      criminal property and sentenced to two years'  imprisonment.   He  was
      served with notice that he was liable to be deported and then  claimed
      asylum.


   3. The Respondent accepted that the Appellant returned to Sri Lanka on 22
      November 2013 and returned to the UK on 14  December  2013.   That  is
      relevant  since  it  forms  the  basis  of  the  Appellant's   primary
      protection claim as it is now pursued.


   4. The basis of the Appellant's primary protection claim (hereafter  "the
      primary claim") is that  he  had  taken  an  interest  in  war  crimes
      committed against Tamils during his return to Sri Lanka as a result of
      being shown certain photographs by friends there.  He says he arranged
      to obtain a CD bearing the photographs to bring  back  to  the  UK  to
      expose the abuse.  As a result, he had been kidnapped and detained, he
      says by the Sri Lankan authorities.  He says he was detained for three
      days during which he was beaten and verbally  abused  and  accused  of
      being a supporter of the LTTE.  He was then released on payment  of  a
      bribe.  His subsidiary claim (hereafter referred to as such)  is  that
      he is at risk by reason of his criminal conviction  in  the  UK  which
      attracted publicity in Sri Lanka.  He would be of interest because  it
      would be assumed that he has money and he fears kidnap for ransom.


   5. Judge Aujla did not believe the Appellant's claim for the reasons  set
      out at [58] to [70]  of  the  Decision.   He  took  into  account  the
      guidance given in GJ and others (post-civil war returnees)  Sri  Lanka
      CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).  Permission to appeal was granted by First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Brunnen on 17 August 2016  on  all  grounds.   The
      matter comes before me to  decide  whether  the  Decision  contains  a
      material error of law and, if so, to re-make the decision or remit the
      appeal for rehearing to the First-Tier Tribunal.

The grounds and submissions


   6. Ground one focusses on the Judge's treatment of the  medical  evidence
      which was in the form of a psychiatric report of  Dr  Osagie  Ogbeide.
      This was considered by  the  Judge  at  [72]  of  the  Decision.   The
      Appellant's complaint in this regard is  that  the  evidence  was  not
      considered in the round with the other  evidence  when  assessing  the
      Appellant's credibility in relation to the  primary  claim.   Instead,
      his credibility was rejected and the Judge then dismissed the  medical
      evidence on the basis that it did not assist the Appellant's  case  in
      this regard.


   7. The second ground challenges two of the reasons why  the  Judge  found
      the Appellant's primary claim not to be credible.  The first  concerns
      the fact that the Appellant's solicitor's initial letter  in  relation
      to the asylum claim did not  mention  the  Appellant's  abduction  and
      release.  The Appellant says that this was because it was his wife who
      was in contact with the solicitors and not him (as he  was  in  prison
      under criminal sentence at the relevant time).  He said his  wife  did
      not know about the details of  his  claim.   He  also  said  that  the
      solicitor had told him not to raise this element of his claim until he
      had proof of it.  The complaint made about the Decision in this regard
      is that the Judge noted the explanation given but then failed to  make
      any findings about whether that explanation was accepted or rejected.


   8. This ground also challenges the Judge's finding that  the  Appellant's
      interest in the photographs during his visit to Sri Lanka did not  sit
      comfortably with his profile.  The Judge found that this amounted to a
      "sudden" interest in politics  when  the  Appellant  had  no  previous
      involvement whether in Sri Lanka or the UK.   Mr  Murphy  argued  that
      this  insistence  on  the  suddenness  of  the  Appellant's   interest
      misunderstood the Appellant's case.  The  Appellant  is  a  Tamil  who
      lived previously in Colombo and had many Sinhalese friends.  As  such,
      he had little exposure to the plight of the Tamils  elsewhere  in  Sri
      Lanka and no interest in the situation.  It was not until he  came  to
      the UK and met and befriended other Tamils that he became  more  aware
      of what had happened to the Tamils in Sri Lanka.  He had also  watched
      the news.  When he had met his Sinhalese friends during his visit  one
      had produced photographs of the events at the end of the conflict.  He
      had seen some of the photographs before but had not seen  two  of  the
      photographs and believed that the world should see  them.   Mr  Murphy
      referred me to his notes of the  evidence  before  Judge  Aujla.   The
      Appellant had said that he wanted to give the pictures  to  Channel  4
      news.


   9. Mr Murphy submitted that this was not a  case  where  the  Appellant's
      interest in politics was "sudden".  He had set out in his  answers  at
      interview and in his witness evidence  that  he  was  not  politically
      involved before the incident in 2013 but he had watched the  news  and
      taken an interest in Sri Lankan matters.


  10. The third ground concerns the subsidiary claim and  the  risk  to  the
      Appellant as someone who has been convicted of  a  crime  involving  a
      substantial amount of money which had become known in Sri  Lanka.   It
      was asserted that he would be at risk as someone known to  have  money
      and would  be  likely  to  be  kidnapped  for  that  reason.   In  the
      permission grant, Judge Brunnen noted that  there  was  no  indication
      that the Appellant had put his case to Judge Aujla on this basis.   Mr
      Murphy pointed me to his skeleton argument  for  the  hearing  in  the
      First-tier Tribunal and to the reference to the authorities' awareness
      of his involvement in a money laundering crime.  It is  also  referred
      to at [38] of the Decision.  The Judge noted at [36] of  the  Decision
      that a HMRC twitter had mentioned the criminal conviction and  it  was
      the Appellant's case that this would have come to the attention of the
      authorities.


  11. In response, Mr Tarlow relied on the Respondent's rule 24 notice.   In
      relation to the first ground, he submitted that the assertion that the
      Judge had  "put  the  cart  before  the  horse"  in  relation  to  the
      psychiatric  evidence  was  based  only  on  the  positioning  of  the
      reference to that viz-a-viz the credibility findings.  It did not mean
      that the Judge had considered it in the wrong order.  In the  rule  24
      notice, the Respondent refers to what was said by the Court of  Appeal
      in S v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1153
      (referring to HE (DRC Credibility  and  Psychiatric  Reports)  DRC  CG
      [2004] UKAIT 0032).  It is not for a doctor to assess credibility.   A
      doctor can offer a view of consistency of symptoms with the  patient's
      account but will generally, for good reason, accept  that  account  at
      face value.  As such, a report has more limited weight when  it  comes
      to judging credibility.  Mr Tarlow submitted that it was open  to  the
      Judge to find that the report could not assist him in relation to  the
      cause of the Appellant's mental state because the psychiatrist himself
      could not determine the cause.


  12. Mr Tarlow accepted that the Judge had not apparently made a finding in
      relation to the subsidiary claim relying  on  the  Appellant's  wealth
      which is set out at [49] of the Decision.  He submitted  however  that
      this was not a material failing bearing in mind the other reasons  for
      doubting that the authorities had any interest in the  Appellant.   In
      that  regard,  he  submitted  that  the  findings  challenged  by  the
      Appellant's ground two were open to the Judge on the evidence.


  13. In reply, Mr Murphy submitted that, in light of Mr Tarlow's concession
      that there was no finding on the Appellant's case regarding  the  risk
      to him on account of his perceived wealth arising  from  the  criminal
      conviction, I could not be satisfied that  this  was  not  a  material
      error because it could, on its own, give rise to a real risk.


  14. Both representatives were agreed that, if I found a material error  of
      law, I should remit  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
      challenge is to the Judge's findings on  credibility.   As  such,  the
      Appellant should be entitled to a further hearing at first instance to
      consider the evidence properly.  Both did agree however that if I were
      to find an error only in relation to ground three, I could retain  the
      appeal in the Upper Tribunal since the evidence in  relation  to  this
      risk was limited and the  issue  could  be  determined  at  a  resumed
      hearing with further submissions.


    Discussion and conclusions


  15. I begin with consideration of the psychiatrist's report.   Dr  Ogbeide
      records the Appellant's history as recounted to him.  Based  on  that,
      his observations of the Appellant and applying diagnostic criteria, he
      reaches the conclusion that  the  Appellant  has  "a  moderate  degree
      depressive disorder with somatic symptoms  and  post-traumatic  stress
      disorder". His prognosis for the  future  is  said  to  be  good  with
      appropriate intervention.   He says at [10.1.3] that the psychological
      effects of trauma which the Appellant exhibits are typical for victims
      of trauma and gives an opinion that "there is  a  direct  causal  link
      between [the  Appellant's]  current  mental  health  difficulties  and
      traumatic experiences resulting  from  his  abduction  in  Sri  Lanka"
      [10.1.4].  He observes that the nature of the illness is what he would
      expect in terms of natural progression from the time of the trauma  to
      the development of symptoms.  I note  that  the  psychiatrist  records
      that the first mention of symptoms of depression was on 29 April  2014
      when he was seen in HMP Wandsworth where he was detained in connection
      with his criminal matter.  At [10.2.1] of the report Dr Ogbeide  again
      opines that the Appellant's mental health difficulties began from  his
      traumatic experiences in Sri Lanka.  This appears to be based  on  the
      account given to him by the Appellant.


  16. The Judge dealt with this element of  the  evidence  at  [72]  of  the
      Decision, having found at [68] that the Appellant  was  not  credible.
      In relation to the report he says this:-
           "I have also considered the  psychiatric  report.   I  note  the
           opinion of the psychiatrist that  the  Appellant  was  suffering
           from  PTSD.   However,  the  report  could   not   assist   with
           identifying the real cause of the PTSD.  I have found  that  the
           Appellant was not abducted or ill treated in Sri Lanka.  I  note
           that the Appellant was seen by mental health services whilst  he
           was in prison and there is  good  reason  to  believe  that  any
           mental health problems he had developed whilst he was in prison.
            I have no reason  to  believe  that  any  medication  that  the
           Appellant required would not  be  available  in  Sri  Lanka.   I
           therefore find that the psychiatric report  did  not  assist  me
           much."
           [my emphasis]


  17. I make it clear at the outset that my  decision  in  relation  to  the
      error of law claimed in relation to the treatment of the report is not
      based on where the findings sit within  the  Decision.   Ideally,  the
      consideration of the report would precede the findings on  credibility
      but that is not essential provided it can be shown that the report has
      been taken into account before reaching the findings  on  credibility.
      I also find unobjectionable the Judge's view that the report  did  not
      assist much in relation to credibility.  Whilst Dr Ogbeide opines that
      the Appellant's symptoms are consistent with the trauma he  claims  to
      have suffered and that the progression from the trauma to symptoms  is
      consistent in terms of timing, it is the case that the  Appellant  did
      not develop those symptoms until a few months after his  return  at  a
      time when he was in custody for his criminal offence.  However, I find
      there is an error of law highlighted in the passage cited above  [72].
      In that sentence, the Judge incorporates the  credibility  finding  he
      reached previously at [68] of the Decision.  That suggests that he had
      closed his mind at this point to the report providing  any  assistance
      in relation to credibility.  He did not consider this evidence  before
      reaching the credibility findings.  Ultimately, however, consideration
      of this report in the context  of  the  overall  credibility  findings
      might not lead to  any  different  result  if  the  other  credibility
      findings on the primary claim cannot be impugned.  I therefore turn to
      consider the second ground of challenge before  reaching  my  decision
      whether the error of law in this regard is material.


  18. The second ground concerns the Judge's finding  that  the  Appellant's
      primary claim based on events in December 2013 is not credible for two
      reasons.  The first is that the Appellant did not mention these events
      when he first made his claim for asylum and the  second  is  that  his
      account of taking an interest in war crimes is not consistent with his
      previous lack of interest in politics.   As  to  the  first  of  those
      reasons, Mr Murphy points to the reasons given by  the  Appellant  for
      the failure to mention the events earlier; in essence because  it  was
      his wife who was liaising with the solicitors and he had not told  his
      wife of the events. Mr Murphy submitted  that  there  was  no  finding
      whether that was accepted.  That is not the case. The Judge  found  at
      [63] that there was no "credible explanation" [my  emphasis]  for  not
      raising this part of his case earlier and  that  this  had  been  done
      simply to bolster his case [62].  Mr Murphy's submission  in  relation
      to the second part of this challenge is that the  Appellant's  account
      of how he had become involved with the Tamil  cause  was  a  perfectly
      plausible explanation.  As someone who had not  been  exposed  to  the
      situation of Tamils before he came to the  UK,  he  had  developed  an
      interest in their plight as a result of meeting Tamils in  the  UK  to
      the  extent  that  he  wanted  to  gain  publicity  for  their  cause.
      Although his solicitors did not mention the events at the outset,  the
      Appellant had given a good deal of information about  his  arrest  and
      detention in his  statement  and  in  response  to  the  questions  at
      interview.   Mr  Murphy  complains  that  the  categorisation  of  the
      Appellant's political interest as "sudden" was not open to  the  Judge
      on the evidence.


  19. I deal first with the Appellant's failure to  mention  the  events  in
      December 2013 when he first made his claim.  The Judge had before  him
      the reasons why the Appellant said that the solicitor's letter had not
      encompassed those events because his wife had been  the  one  liaising
      with the solicitor and because his solicitor had advised  him  not  to
      raise the primary claim until he had evidence  of  it.   However,  the
      Judge was entitled to find that explanation not to  be  credible.   In
      relation to  that  latter  aspect,  there  is  no  evidence  from  the
      solicitor concerned.  I  note  that  the  Appellant  continues  to  be
      represented by the same firm and it would be very surprising  if  they
      did not produce a statement to support  the  Appellant's  position  if
      that is what occurred.  It is also difficult to  see  how  they  could
      continue to represent the Appellant in such circumstances. In relation
      to the former reason, the Judge was entitled to find that  explanation
      also not to be credible. That is particularly so where the notice that
      the Respondent was considering deportation was sent to  the  Appellant
      himself (see letter of 11 July 2014 [AB1/58-60]).  It follows that, in
      order for the solicitors to respond to that letter, the Appellant must
      himself have provided that letter and  accompanying  questionnaire  to
      his solicitors.  His explanation also lacks credence on the basis that
      the solicitor's letter  refers  in  terms  to  their  client's  signed
      authority and  the  completed  questionnaire  which  accompanied  that
      letter [AB1/61-83].  The questionnaire is very  clearly  completed  by
      the Appellant himself.  His signature appears in two places  (Q25  and
      at the end of the form).  Answers are given in the first  person  such
      as at Q15 where the Appellant says that he owns his house.  Where  the
      Appellant is asked about the reasons why deportation would breach  the
      ECHR or the Refugee  Convention,  he  states  "see  solicitor's  cover
      letter".  It is also inconsistent with the Appellant's own statement -
      at [21] he  says  that  his  solicitor  helped  him  to  complete  the
      deportation questionnaire and  explained  his  circumstances  and  the
      reasons why he should not  be  sent  back  to  Sri  Lanka.   In  those
      circumstances, it was open on the evidence for the Judge to find  that
      the explanation given for the omission was not credible.


  20.  Although the Appellant's explanation for why he had  become  involved
      in supporting the Tamil cause may be plausible, it remains the case as
      recorded at [58] that he had not shown  any  support  for  that  cause
      while in the UK, for example  by  taking  part  in  demonstrations  or
      fundraising or other activities.  Although the Appellant's own account
      might be better described as a developing rather than sudden interest,
      the Judge was entitled to take the view  that  it  was  in  reality  a
      sudden one and to categorise it as such when finding that his  primary
      claim was inconsistent with someone of the Appellant's profile.


  21. For those reasons, I find that  there  is  no  error  in  the  Judge's
      findings  concerning  what  the  Appellant  claimed  had  occurred  in
      December 2013.  He was entitled to find  the  Appellant's  explanation
      both as to the timing of the primary claim and the substance  of  that
      claim not credible.


  22. It follows from my finding in relation to this ground, that I  do  not
      find that the error in relation to ground one  is  material.   I  have
      noted at [17] above,  that  the  Judge's  finding  that  Dr  Ogbeide's
      opinion  could  not  assist  much  in  relation  to   credibility   is
      unobjectionable.  He could give an opinion that the cause of the  PTSD
      is consistent  with  the  Appellant's  account.   However,  given  the
      Appellant's criminal  conviction  which  occurred  after  the  claimed
      events  and  before  his  symptoms  began  and  the  imprisonment   in
      consequence,  there  is  an  equally  plausible  explanation  for  the
      Appellant's symptoms as the Judge found (and was  entitled  to  find).
      In light of my finding that the Judge was entitled not to believe  the
      Appellant's account upon which the psychiatrist's view is premised for
      other reasons, the Judge's finding that Dr Ogbeide's opinion could not
      assist in determining the cause of the PTSD is one  to  which  he  was
      entitled.  Accordingly, the error based on the Judge's failure to take
      that  opinion  into  account  when  forming   his   conclusion   about
      credibility is not material.


  23. I turn finally to  ground  three  which  relates  to  the  Appellant's
      alternative, subsidiary claim that he will  be  at  risk  because  the
      details of his conviction will be public knowledge in Sri Lanka and he
      will be at  risk  of  kidnapping  for  monetary  gain  either  by  the
      authorities or, more probably, by  non-State  agents.   When  granting
      permission, Judge Brunnen indicated that it did not  appear  that  the
      Appellant's case was put on this basis before the  Judge.   Mr  Murphy
      directed my attention to [36] of the Decision where it is  clear  that
      the Respondent addressed the Appellant's case on this basis and it  is
      also clear from the solicitor's letter  of  5  August  2014  that  the
      Appellant put forward a case on this basis.


  24. Although the skeleton arguments before the  Judge  do  not  appear  to
      focus  on  this  subsidiary  claim,  the  witness  statements  of  the
      Appellant and his wife do contain some evidence  in  support  of  this
      claim.  It is not dependent on  the  credibility  of  the  Appellant's
      account in relation to the primary claim.   Although  the  Judge  does
      reach a finding at [70] of the Decision about  the  subsidiary  claim,
      that does not include a  consideration  of  or  any  findings  on  the
      evidence at [22] to [24] and [28] of the Appellant's statement and  at
      [10] of the Appellant's wife's statement.  This evidence is  supported
      in vague terms by correspondence from the Appellant's  family  in  Sri
      Lanka who say they have been visited by men who  have  made  financial
      claims  apparently  in  reliance  on  reports   of   the   Appellant's
      conviction.  Ultimately this may not affect the outcome of the appeal,
      since, insofar as it is asserted that the risk arises  from  non-State
      agents, the issue of sufficiency of protection may well arise in order
      to determine whether the risk is a real one.  However, it is  possible
      that, on the evidence, a real  risk  could  be  found  based  on  this
      subsidiary claim.  Accordingly, I  find  that  the  error  of  law  in
      relation to ground three is material.


  25. As noted above at [14], both representatives accepted that if I  found
      that the material error was confined to ground three then  the  appeal
      could be retained in the Upper Tribunal.  Since I  have  so  found,  I
      have  given  directions  below  for  a  resumed  hearing  before  this
      Tribunal.


   DECISION

   I am satisfied that the Decision contains a  material  error  of  law  on
   ground three for the reasons given at [24] above. The finding at [70]  of
   the decision of Judge Aujla promulgated on 28 July 2016 is set  aside.  I
   make the following directions for  the  resumed  hearing  on  this  issue
   before the Upper Tribunal:-

   1. The Appellant shall file with the Tribunal and serve on the Respondent
      no later than 28 days from the date when this decision is  promulgated
      any further evidence on which he relies in support of his case on  the
      subsidiary claim. He shall also by the same  date  file  and  serve  a
      skeleton argument dealing with the evidence on this issue.

   2. The Respondent shall file with the Tribunal and serve on the Appellant
      no later than 28 days from the date of service  of  the  evidence  and
      skeleton argument at [1] above a skeleton argument  in  reply  to  the
      Appellant's skeleton argument.

   3. The resumed hearing of this appeal to deal with the  subsidiary  claim
      shall be listed on the first available date after  56  days  from  the
      date when this decision is promulgated.


      Signed           [pic]      Dated:  27 October 2016

      Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
                       APPENDIX: ADJOURNMENT DECISION

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00485/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On Wednesday 11 January 2017                  |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                                  MR D K A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Benfield, Counsel, instructed by Theva & Co
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                     ADJOURNMENT DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

      1. This appeal was listed before me following my error of law decision
         promulgated on 27 October 2016 ("the Decision") setting  aside  one
         paragraph of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  of  Judge  Aujla
         promulgated on 28 July 2016.  The setting aside of  that  paragraph
         had the effect of leaving one element of the Appellant's protection
         claim remaining for redetermination, namely  the  risk  to  him  on
         return to Sri Lanka as a result  of  his  criminal  conviction  for
         money laundering in the UK.


      2. In the Decision, I gave directions for the filing  and  service  of
         further evidence by the Appellant relating  to  this  issue  within
         twenty-eight days from the promulgation of the Decision.   Although
         that evidence was filed with the Tribunal within time, it  was  not
         sent to the Respondent.  I accept that Mr Tarlow had not  therefore
         seen that evidence prior to the hearing date.   The  bundle  served
         also included the skeleton argument which I directed be  served  at
         the same time.  The timing of the  Respondent's  skeleton  argument
         was linked to service of the Appellant's skeleton argument.  Whilst
         I accept Ms Benfield's submission that the  Respondent  could  have
         checked with the Tribunal or the Appellant's solicitor whether  the
         direction had been complied  with  rather  than  not  submitting  a
         skeleton  argument  at  all,  the  onus  is  on   the   Appellant's
         representatives to serve the documents on  the  Respondent.   Their
         failure to do so amounts to a failure to comply with directions.


      3. That is in any event not the reason why an adjournment  is  sought.
         It appears that the Appellant, having become dissatisfied with  his
         previous  representatives,  changed  solicitors  on  or  about   20
         December 2016.  There is a  notice  of  that  date  indicating  the
         change.


      4. The new  solicitors  wrote  to  the  Tribunal  on  4  January  2017
         indicating that they wished to submit additional documents for  the
         hearing.  Those were not enclosed with  the  letter.   Indeed,  the
         principal document which the Appellant seeks  to  adduce  is  dated
         some five days later (9 January 2017)  and  is  a  letter  from  an
         Attorney in Sri Lanka.  Ms Benfield applied for permission to admit
         the further documents (sent to the Tribunal under cover of a letter
         dated 10 January 2017 although received only in copy by me from  Ms
         Benfield on the morning of the hearing and at the same time  by  Mr
         Tarlow).


      5. As indicated above, the principal document  is  a  letter  from  an
         Attorney in Sri Lanka.  He says that he has been instructed by  the
         Appellant's family since October 2016 and  made  enquiries  of  the
         local police in that month which leads to a statement  of  risk  on
         the further basis that it is said that the Appellant  is  suspected
         by the Sri Lankan authorities of fund raising for  the  LTTE  as  a
         result of his criminal conviction.   Ms  Benfield  submits,  and  I
         accept, that  the  document  does  therefore  have  some  potential
         significance to the issue which  remains  for  me  to  decide.   Ms
         Benfield indicated that she did not know why the document  was  not
         produced earlier since the Appellant  had  asked  for  it  earlier.
         However, she thought it likely that this was due to failure of  the
         previous firm to follow it up and  it  was  only  as  a  result  of
         chasing by the new solicitors that the document was sent (two  days
         before the hearing).  It had therefore been  produced  as  soon  as
         possible following receipt.


      6. Mr Tarlow did not object to  the  admission  of  the  document  but
         indicated that if I was prepared to admit it,  he  applied  for  an
         adjournment.  The basis for the application is that the  Respondent
         wishes to have the document verified. Ms  Benfield  quite  properly
         did not oppose that application.  She also asked though that if the
         Respondent were having that document verified, she  should  at  the
         same time have verified another document which  the  Appellant  had
         produced namely a record of complaint made to  the  police  by  the
         Appellant's family on 9 January 2016.  Mr Tarlow indicated that  he
         saw no difficulty with that request.


      7. Having accepted that the letter from the Attorney is  of  potential
         significance to the  issue  which  remains  for  me  to  decide,  I
         indicated that I would give permission to admit the documents  sent
         under cover of the letter of 10 January 2017 notwithstanding  their
         late  submission.   I  also  indicated  that  I  would  grant   the
         adjournment sought to enable that document to be verified  and  for
         further evidence to be produced on both sides together with updated
         skeleton arguments.  I have given directions to that effect  below.




      8. I  therefore  grant  permission  to  the  Appellant  to  admit  the
         documents sent under cover of the letter dated 10 January 2017.   I
         grant the adjournment  sought  of  the  resumed  hearing  with  the
         following directions:-
           1) By no later than 4pm on Friday 10 March 2017, the  Respondent
              is to file with the Tribunal and  serve  on  the  Appellant's
              solicitors  (Theva  &  Co)  the  verification  report(s)   in
              relation to the letter from the Attorney-at-law in Sri  Lanka
              dated 9 January 2017 and the document from the police station
              in Sri Lanka dated 9 January  2016  recording  the  complaint
              made to the police.  She  is  also  to  file  and  serve  any
              further evidence on which she relies  arising  out  of  those
              documents and/or relating to the protection claim as now made
              by the Appellant.
           2) By no later than 4pm on Friday 7 April 2017, the  Appellant's
              solicitors shall file with the  Tribunal  and  serve  on  the
              Respondent  any  further  evidence  on  which  they  rely  in
              response to the evidence produced by the Respondent and/or in
              relation to the protection claim now made.  By the same date,
              they shall file and serve a  skeleton  argument  setting  out
              their  legal  arguments  in  relation  to  the  risk  to  the
              Appellant arising from his criminal conviction in the  UK  on
              the basis that this is now put.
           3) By no later than 4 pm on Friday 21 April 2017, the Respondent
              is to file with the Tribunal and serve  on  the  Appellant  a
              skeleton argument in response  to  the  Appellant's  skeleton
              argument at (2) above.
           4) The resumed hearing is to be relisted on the first  available
              date after Monday 1 May 2017 with a time  estimate  of  three
              hours.
Signed      [pic]Date        11 January 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

