
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00274/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Justice Centre            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 September 2018                          |On 15 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     RD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Jegerajah, instructed by Greater London
                    Solicitors Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, RD, who was born in 1989 is  a  female  citizen  of  Sri
    Lanka. The appellant entered the United  Kingdom  February  2011  as  a
    student.  She overstayed her visa  and  subsequently  returned  to  Sri
    Lanka. Thereafter, she returned  to  the  United  Kingdom  on  a  valid
    entrepreneur visa on 29 April 2013.  On 23  August  2016,  she  claimed
    asylum.   By  a  decision  dated  2  December  2017,  the   appellant's
    application to refuse by the Secretary of State.  She appealed  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Graham) which, in a decision promulgated  on
    2 March 2018, dismissed the appeal.  The appellant  now  appeals,  with
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

    Section 8: 2004 Act

 2. The judge began her assessment of  credibility  with  her  findings  on
    Section 8 of the 2004 Act. [31]. She  found  that  the  appellant  had,
    without adequate explanation, delayed claiming asylum.  The grounds  of
    appeal purport to give an explanation of the appellant's conduct but  I
    do not see how  this  explanation  undermines  in  anyway  the  judge's
    findings.  The appellant claims that she made contact with  her  family
    to claim funds for her next visa application to the United Kingdom  and
    was then  told  about  her  father's  "most  frequent  arrest  and  the
    authority's renewed  interest  in  him."   The  judge  considered  this
    explanation  and  gave  clear  reasons  for  rejecting  it.  [31].  The
    evidential basis for this rejection appears to be  accurate.  I  reject
    the submission that the judge made the finding on Section 8  assessment
    and then,  without  further  examination  of  the  remaining  evidence,
    concluded that the appellant is not credible.  The judge's  finding  on
    the question of delay  in  claiming  asylum  is  only  one  of  several
    findings which were open to the Tribunal on the evidence and which  the
    judge supports with clear reasoning.

Medical Evidence

 3. I am satisfied, having read the decision carefully, that the judge took
    the medical evidence properly into account before making  any  findings
    (Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ 367.   The  judge  found  that  there  was  an
    inconsistency between the  evidence  given  by  the  appellant  to  the
    medical expert appellant that she prefers, as  a  consequence,  of  her
    past experiences, to be alone  and  that  she  avoids  putting  herself
    social situations which she findings stressful and the appellant's  own
    evidence that she arranges charity dances.  The appellant says that her
    dances are a form of therapy which help her deal with  past  trauma.  I
    find that it was open  to  the  judge  to  find  that  the  appellant's
    evidence was inconsistent and to give little weight to the  appellant's
    explanation. Setting the medical evidence in the  context  of  all  the
    evidence, the judge did not err in law by attaching  little  weight  to
    the medical evidence for the reasons he has given. Further,  the  judge
    has taken the  medical  evidence  into  account  when  considering  the
    records  of  the  appellant's  evidence  in  the  form  of  interviews,
    statements  and  oral  evidence.  He  has,  in  my   opinion,   reached
    sustainable findings of fact in respect  of  those  items  of  evidence
    which, in turn, have led him to consider the appellant as an unreliable
    witness. In the light of  his  findings,  the  judge  did  not  err  by
    refraining from treating the as a vulnerable witness.

The appellant's father and uncle

 4. I accept Mr McVeety's submission that the appellant has no claim for
    protection based on her own characteristics or past conduct in Sri
    Lanka or sur place. The judge has assessed the role the uncle and
    father played in the appellant's account of past events and concluded
    that the appellant's relationship with those family members did not
    expose her to risk. In reaching that finding, it was open to the judge
    to have regard to the apparent anomaly that it was claimed that only
    the appellant and not her sister who had been exposed to risk on a
    account of the activities of the uncle and father. The appellant has
    not explained that why her sister had safely remained in Sri Lanka when
    it was necessary for the appellant seek international protection
    abroad. Further, the judge may have wrongly recorded that the
    appellant's sister is a refugee in India. She is, in fact, a student.
    However, the appellant has failed to explain why that misunderstanding
    should undermine the judge's analysis. I note that the judge has also
    made findings regarding claim that the father left Sri Lanka to travel
    to India whilst on court bail.  The judge's assessment that the
    "appellant's account of how her father was able to leave the country is
    irreconcilable" with material provided by the British High Commission
    was plainly open to him.

Certified Court Documents from Sri Lanka

 5. Mr McVeety acknowledged that the judge may have misunderstood  by  what
    means the court documents from Sri Lanka  had  reached  the  appellant.
    However, any error was not, in my opinion, material to the  outcome  of
    the judge's analysis of the evidence or the outcome of the  appeal.  It
    is clear that the judge [at 40] assessed court evidence in the  context
    of all the evidence of  the  case;  he  has  not  simply  rejected  any
    evidence on the mistaken basis that it had not arrived in  the  correct
    envelope.

Article 8 ECHR

 6. The judge has provided a  brief  but,  given  the  facts,  an  adequate
    examination of the appellant's representations in respect of Article  8
    [48 - 50].

Conclusion

 7. The judge's decision was not flawed by error  of  law  either  for  the
    reasons stated in the grounds of appeal or at all.  The judge has given
    good reasons for concluding that the appellant is not at real  risk  on
    return to Sri Lanka on account  of  the  activities  of  her  uncle  or
    father.  Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 12 December 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 12 December 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
