
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/00506/2017
                                                               PA/00510/2017
                                                               PA/00513/2017
                                                               PA/00516/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 20th August 2018                      |On 27h February 2019               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              (1) Savinder [A]
                              (2) Jaswinder [A]
                              (3) Balvinder [A]
                               (4) Kartar [A]
                       (ANONYMITY direction NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Bates (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr J Greer (Counsel), instructed by Legal Justice
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is an appeal against the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge O.
R. Williams, promulgated on 24th November 2017, following a hearing at
Manchester on 20th October 2017.  In the determination, the judge allowed
the appeal of the Appellants, whereupon the Respondent, Secretary of State,
subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to the
Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellants

The Appellants comprise a family of a mother (the principal Appellant) and
her two children, together with the paternal grandmother (who is the fourth
Appellant).  All are citizens of Afghanistan.  They were born respectively
on 1st January 1953, on 1st January 1998, 1st January 1989 and 1st January
1934.

The Grant of Permission

Permission to appeal was granted by the Upper Tribunal on 26th June 2018 on
the basis that the Appellants disputed nationality by the Respondent,
Secretary of State. The Appellants had all claimed to be citizens of
Afghanistan.  In the grant of permission, it was said that the decision of
the judge was arguably in error because of the judge's findings on the
Appellants' language (whereby the parents spoke Dari but the children only
spoke Punjabi), may wrongly have led the Judge to conclude that the
Respondent was wrong to have found they were Afghan nationals, as the
Appellants could actually have relocated elsewhere away from Afghanistan.
Second, the Appellants' attendance at the Afghan Embassy and applications
for birth certificates confirming they were Afghans was questionable, given
that the procedure for the acquisition of birth certificate was an
application made Online, rather than a physical appearance at the Embassy.

A Rule 24 response was entered to the effect that the decision granting
permission was very brief and not clear.  The language spoken in
Afghanistan is Pushtu and Dari.  The Appellants' two youngest members only
spoke Punjabi.  Yet, the Respondent's own guidance (at paragraph 4.2.5) on
Afghan Sikhs, states that:

"The Wall Street Journal noted the following in an article dated January
2015 'Afghanistan's Sikhs and Hindus stay in small, tight-knit communities
and participate in many of the same religious rituals held in a temple both
faiths use.  At home they speak mainly Punjabi, the language of Sikhism's
religious texts that is native to the Indian subcontinent...  These days,
they [Sikhs and Hindus] are known for the medicinal herb shops that many of
them own.'  ..."

Second, the Rule 24 response stated that the judge had found that the birth
certificates issued by the Afghan Embassy were authentic.  If the
Respondent, Secretary of State, now wanted to prove that they were not
genuine, then they should have instructed the National Document Fraud Unit
to have the documents tested.  This is the normal course of action when a
caseworker suspects that the document submitted is fraudulent.  This had
not been done.  The burden in showing that the documents provided were not
genuine fell upon the Respondent, Secretary of State, and this burden had
not been discharged.

Third, the Respondent did not challenge the fact that the evidence of Raj
[A] (at paragraph 16 of the determination) was accepted as genuine.  The
judge had found him to be credible.  In fact, the Respondent Secretary of
State, had granted Raj [A] refugee status.  He was the eldest son of the
family.  The Appellant had been able to show, through DNA testing, that the
relationship was indeed as claimed.  The Respondent had not explained why,
if Raj [A] was accepted as the child of the first Appellant, Savinder [A],
as an Afghan national, why she would not also be treated as an Afghan
citizen either.

Accordingly, it was stated in the Rule 24 response that apart from the
birth certificates the judge had found (at paragraph 17) that the questions
answered in the asylum interview by the Appellants were consistent with the
country guidance information and the appeals had been properly allowed.

Submissions

At the hearing before me on 20th August 2018, Mr Bates, appearing on behalf
of the Respondent, Secretary of State, stated that this was really a
'reasons challenge' before this Tribunal.  The question was whether there
had been "adequate reasons".  The judge had accepted (at paragraph 15) that
only two of the Appellants spoke the language of Afghanistan whilst the
remaining two spoke only Punjabi.  The judge found that this was the result
of the fact that they received no formal education.  However, this was in
error.  The elders in the family spoke Dari.  It was reasonable to conclude
that the younger family members would also do so.  Second, Judge Williams
had failed to adequately reconcile the evidence provided to him in regards
to the application process for Afghani birth certificates at the Embassy in
London with his finding that it was reasonably likely that the Appellants
attended there and genuinely obtained them.  He had referred (at paragraph
20) to "minor discrepancies" in the evidence relating to the procedure.
However, he had failed to note that all applications are made Online to the
Afghan Embassy in London and therefore the suggestion that the Appellants
had in person attended there to procure these birth certificates, such as
to render them reliable, was misconceived.  Third, Mr Bates submitted that
the judge was wrong to have said that the answers given in the asylum
interview were consistent with the country guidance information (paragraph
17) and, by virtue of that mere fact, that the evidence was credible
because the judge was not an expert in this respect.  Finally, Mr Bates
stated that although he did not have the Presenting Officer's notes on the
day, what he had was a post-decision note taken by the Presenting Officer
and this note was the basis for the submissions that had been made.

For his part, Mr Greer submitted that there was no error.  What this was,
was a simple disagreement with the decision reached by the judge.  First,
the reference to the "language" aspect of the case was simply an attempt to
re-argue the case.  It was never the Secretary of State's case at the
outset that the Appellants were from India or from any other country (see
paragraphs 11 to 12 of the Refusal Letter).  What the refusal letter stated
was that, "he speaks Punjabi and that is not spoken in Afghanistan ...".
Clearly, on the contrary, what this suggested was that the Appellants were
indeed from Afghanistan, to the extent that the elders spoke Dari, which is
the national language of Afghanistan. Second, the documents from the Afghan
Embassy in London were reliable and it was up to the Respondent, Secretary
of State, to show why they were not reliable.  The fact that the normal
procedure was to make an application Online did not mean to say that the
Afghan Embassy would not respond to an inquiry made by people who
physically entered upon the premises and sought documentation in the manner
requested.  It was for the Respondent, Secretary of State, to prove
otherwise.

Mr Greer went on to say that the judge in this case had given five distinct
reasons, which had been properly set out in a manner that was easy to
follow.  There was not only one reason for allowing this appeal.  The birth
certificates had been filed and copies sent in the right manner.  The
Secretary of State could have made enquiries.  She did not do so.  She
could not simply say that the documents cannot be relied upon.  Finally, if
there is an error, it was not material.  This is because Raj [A] is the
eldest son of the principal Appellant, and he has been granted full refugee
status in the UK, as an Afghan national, on the very basis that the present
Appellants sought protection themselves.  There simply was no consistency
in the way in which the Respondent was approaching these appeals.

In reply, Mr Bates submitted that the Secretary of State did not need to
specify the country from where it was suspected the Appellants originated
and lived.  It was enough to say that they did not come from Afghanistan.
Second, even if five reasons were given, if some of these fell away, the
judge could not there have said that the remaining ones were materially
relevant to the eventual outcome of the appeal.

No Error of Law

I am satisfied that the making of the decision does not amount to an error
of law (see Section 12(1) of TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the
decision.  This is a case where there is a country guidance decision.  This
is the case of TG and others (Afghan Sikhs persecuted) Afghanistan CG
[2015] UKUT 595.  It is well-established that if the Secretary of State, or
any party, wishes to resile from a country guidance case, which ordinarily
must be followed, then "unless very strong grounds supported by cogent
evidence, are adduced, justifying their not doing so" the country guidance
prevails.

The basis upon which permission has been sought is a novel basis indeed.
It involves an inverse argument.  To suggest that, simply because the
elders of the family speak the national language, namely Dari, but the
young members do not, that therefore the conclusion must fall to be made
that, the Appellants do not come from Afghanistan, but may well do from
another country, ignores the fundamental nature of the plight of this
particular community in Afghanistan.

As the Rule 24 response makes it quite clear, the Wall Street Journal has
reported, a matter that is widely known, and recognised in TG and others
itself, namely that "Sikhs and Hindus stay in small, tight-knit communities
and participate in many of the same religious rituals held in a temple both
faiths use" and that "at home they speak mainly Punjabi".  It would have
been otherwise indeed if the parents and elders in this case spoke Punjabi,
and no Dari.

Second, and no less significantly, it had never been the case of the
Respondent, Secretary of State, when compiling the Refusal Letter, that the
use of the Punjabi language, which was accepted as not being spoken in
Afghanistan, would be of significance to the extent that it was suggestive
of the Appellants coming from a country other than Afghanistan, where the
parents spoke Dari.

Third, the evidence of Raj [A], which is given as a second reason for
allowing the appeal, was one that was accepted by the judge, on the basis
that he was an Afghan national and of Sikh faith.  His relationship to the
Appellants, as a son of the first Appellant, was clearly established by DNA
evidence.  He named the Appellants in his screening interview.  The judge
was clear that, "I was satisfied that he was a witness of truth in his
description of how he fled Afghanistan in 2013 with his pregnant wife"
(paragraph 16).

Fourth, insofar as the issue of language was raised, it was entirely open
to Judge Williams to say that the Appellants had given credible evidence
that they did not receive "a formal education (but rather sometimes
attended the Gurdwara) - it is reasonably likely that at times they were
taught in Punjabi" (paragraph 13).  Moreover, the fact that the evidence
that was given by the Appellants was consistent with country guidance
information, and the fact that they were all consistent in respect of their
religious orientation, meant that the judge was entitled, on the lower
standard, to be satisfied in the way that he was.  Mr Bates was on thin
grounds in arguing that there was a criticism to be made of the judge's
reference to "minor discrepancies in the evidence" (paragraph 20).  Mr
Bates argued that it would have been all right if the judge had referred to
the birth certificates from the embassy staff bearing "what appeared to be
an original stamp" rather than "an original stamp and signature from the
consular section of the embassy" (paragraph 20).  There is no rule of law
that a judge cannot conclude, upon sight of the documentation before him,
that a document is or is not genuine.  If it is not genuine, it is for the
Respondent, Secretary of State, to so prove.

But, most importantly, the finding that is compelling in the judge's
determination is one that appears at paragraph 25, where the judge
considers "risk on return", because here he makes it clear that:

"It is reasonably likely that the Appellants would be a target; the women
are likely to be targeted when shopping (TG (a) or when seeking to worship
(TG (c)).  I have no reason to doubt the fact that the family worship at a
Gurdwara as practising Sikhs and as such due to this level of religious
devotion they are likely to be subjected to harm/threats whilst accessing
the Gurdwara (TG (c))" (see paragraph 25).

This was indeed the very issue that is being highlighted in the Afghan
cases following the decision in TG and others.  This is a matter that he
could properly have regard to.  In TG and others there was evidence from Dr
Giustozzi (see paragraph 15 of TG) to the effect that:

"The Sikhs are easy targets for abuse given their minority status.  It is
difficult to resist the Muslim majority.  Mistreatment and societal
discrimination against Sikhs continues to be reported.  Harassment of adult
Sikhs and Hindus occurs, particularly at the bazaar, and Sikh children
commonly are caught up in fights between themselves and Muslims.  Attempts
are made to forcibly convert Sikhs from their religion to become Muslims."

The final decision given by Judge Williams was also critical, which was
that, "I have no reason to doubt that they have no family members/support
system in place in Afghanistan to rely upon" (paragraph 26).  Here again,
the judge referred to the case of TG in highlighting the significance of
this evidence.

All in all, therefore, the challenge falls far below what would be probably
expected in a case such as this and I reject the challenge by the
Respondent, Secretary of State.

There has been a delay in sending out this Determination to the parties
concerned, because although it was dictated on the day of the Hearing, and
typed up shortly thereafter, it appears to have been held up in the system,
before promulgation.

Decision

There is no material error of law in the original judge's decision.  The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity order made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 25th February 2019


