

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/00001/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at HMCTS Employment Tribunal Liverpool  |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17 September 2018                          |On 25 September 2018         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN

                                   Between

                                    FEEC
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Patel, Counsel, instructed by GMIAU
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1     This is an appeal against the decision of  Judge  of  the  First  tier
      Tribunal O R Williams dated 20 June 2018, dismissing  the  appellant's
      appeal against the decision of the respondent dated 14  December  2017
      refusing her human rights and protection claim.

2     The appellant is a citizen of El Salvador who prior to 2017 had  lived
      in the USA for a prolonged period  with  Temporary  Protection  Status
      ('TPS'), which has been granted to citizens of El Salvador  from  time
      to time for reasons of political turmoil  or  environmental  disaster.
      For reasons which I set out below, her TPS  residency  in  USA  is  no
      longer relevant.

3     The appellant had returned to El Salvador in or around May  2017  with
      her husband, who is a citizen of Guatemala,  and  who  had  previously
      been residing in the USA unlawfully. The appellant  has  two  children
      who are citizens of the USA. After a relatively short period  of  time
      in El Salvador, they left with their two children and travelled to the
      United Kingdom and claimed protection.

4     The appellant's claim for protection from serious harm in El  Salvador
      was based on her fear of gangs. The respondent refused the appellant's
      application for protection for reasons set out in a decision dated  14
      December 2017.  Amongst the reasons given is the following:

           "31 As considered  above  your  claim  has  not  been  accepted.
           However further consideration has been given to  your  claim  at
           its highest. This means that it is not accepted  that  you  will
           face the risk of persecution or real risk  of  serious  harm  on
           return to El Salvador because the option of relocation  to  with
           (sic) your family to Guatemala where  you  (sic)  husband  is  a
           citizen (AIR  41).  Or  returning  to  the  US  where  you  have
           temporary status (AIR 27 -  30)  and  seeking  to  resolve  your
           husband's immigration status through the  appropriate  channels.
           Both of these options are considered to be entirely reasonable."

5     After the numbered paragraphs within the respondent's decision  letter
      is a section entitled 'Right to appeal' and 'Removal from  the  United
      Kingdom'.  The respondent states there:

           "You do not have leave to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
           therefore can be removed to El Salvador. We  may  review  via  a
           transit point in an EU member state.

           ...

           If you do not appeal and do not have leave to remain  in  United
           Kingdom you can be removed to El Salvador.  We  may  review  via
           transit point in an EU member state."

6     When the appeal came before the  judge,  he  was  satisfied  that  the
      appellant was at risk of serious harm for a refugee convention reason,
      in El Salvador, for reasons set out at [19]-[ 32].  However, the judge
      stated as follows at [33] onwards:

           "Risk in Guatemala/naturalization by marriage

           33 It is not reasonably likely that the appellant and her family
           face a risk of persecution in Guatemala. It is reasonably likely
           that the appellant/family  could  apply  for  naturalization  in
           Guatemala. I reach that conclusion for the following reasons [34
           - 36]"

7     The judge's  observations  at  [34]  discuss  potential  dangers  from
      organised crime in the area of  San  Jeronimo,  Guatemala,  where  the
      appellant's husband originated.

8     The judge continued:

           "35 Secondly, the family have previously travelled to  Guatemala
           to settle (Q 54); no satisfactory evidence has been provided  as
           to why they could not  again  return  and  live  away  from  San
           Jeronimo - and the danger outlined  [34],  in  safety  in,  say,
           Guatemala City.

           36.  Thirdly, the appellant has not  provided  any  satisfactory
           evidence as to why the family  could  not  return  to  Guatemala
           where the  appellant's  husband  is  a  citizen  and  where  the
           appellant could apply for naturalization by  marriage  (applying
           KK (ii) - is not of that nationality but is entitled to  acquire
           it).  And applying MA Ethiopia  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
           appellant has acted with bona fides  and  taken  all  reasonably
           practical steps to seek to obtain  the  requisite  documents  to
           enable her to return to Guatemala,  such  as  by  attending  the
           Guatemala Embassy and making an application for naturalization."



9     The judge also found at [37] that it was reasonably  likely  that  the
      appellant could apply for naturalization in  the  USA,  reaching  that
      conclusion for reasons set out at [38]:

           "38. Firstly, again applying MA (Ethiopia) I  am  not  satisfied
           that the appellant has acted  with  bona  fides  and  taken  all
           reasonably practical steps  to  seek  to  obtain  the  requisite
           documents to enable her to return to the USA where the appellant
           had  temporary  protection  status  and  her  children  have  US
           citizenship, such as by attending  the  embassy  and  making  an
           application."

10    The appeal was dismissed.

11    The appellant appeals to the  Upper  Tribunal  in  grounds  of  appeal
      dated 4 July 2018 arguing, in summary that the judge had erred in  law
      in:

      (i)   failing to have adequate regard  to  evidence  relating  to  the
           potential risk of harm  to  the  appellant  and  her  family  in
           Guatemala;

      (ii)  failing to have adequate regard to evidence as to why the family
           could not return to Guatemala


      (iii) failing, when opining that the  appellant  may  be  entitled  to
           Guatemalan citizenship, to consider whether such an  application
           had to be  made  in  country,  whether  there  was  any  minimum
           residence requirement for entitlement to  such  nationality,  or
           whether she would be obliged to revoke any other nationality;

      (iv)  failing, when considering the appellant's proposed residency  in
           the USA, to have adequate regard to expert  evidence  that  upon
           the family leaving the USA, the appellant's Temporary Protection
           Status would no longer be valid.

12    Permission to appeal was granted on 19 July 2018  on  the  basis  that
      such grounds were arguable.

      Discussion

13    In preparation for this matter, I caused directions to be  emailed  to
      the parties on the morning of Friday 16.9.18, in  the  following  form
      (correcting here a slight paragraph numbering issue in the direction):



           "The parties are hereby directed  to  provide,  if  possible,  a
           written skeleton  argument  emailed  to  Deputy  Tribunal  Judge
           O'Ryan at (email given), by 4.00pm 16.9.18 (or whenever possible
           thereafter) addressing the following issues in  the  appeal.  If
           time does not permit a written skeleton argument to be prepared,
           the Tribunal  will  expect  the  parties'  oral  submissions  to
           address the issues.

           1     The appellant does not appear  to  presently  possess  any
                 nationality other than that of El Salvador. Notwithstanding
                 the fact that at paragraph 31 of  the  refusal  letter  the
                 respondent asserts that the appellant  has  the  option  of
                 relocating with her family to Guatemala,  or  returning  to
                 the  US  where  the  respondent  asserted  she  still  held
                 temporary status, what is  the  legal  consequence  to  the
                 appellant's   appeal   under   section   82,   Nationality,
                 Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  of  the  fact  that  the
                 respondent appears to intend to remove the  appellant  only
                 to El Salvador (refusal letter, page 12 of  14)?  No  other
                 removal destination appears to be proposed. Please refer to
                 relevant authority.

           2     If and insofar as the respondent advances  her  case  that
                 the appellant is not entitled to  international  protection
                 on the basis that, applying KK Korea, headnote para 1,  she
                 is "of" or "has" Guatemalan  or  US  nationality,  and  the
                 respondent advances the case  that  the  appellant  (i)  is
                 (already) of one or both of those nationalities;   or  (ii)
                 is not of those nationalities,  but is entitled to  acquire
                 one or both of those nationalities, whose burden is  it  to
                 establish, as a matter of law, that the appellant is of, or
                 has such nationality? Please refer to relevant authority.

           3     Was the appellant to be treated as  being  of,  or  having
                 Guatemalan or US nationality, or was  she  in  fact  to  be
                 considered as a person, as per KK Korea headnote para  1(a)
                 (iii), to be not of those nationalities, but that  she  may
                 be able to acquire one or both of those  nationalities?  If
                 the appellant in fact fell into this third  category,  does
                 MA (Ethiopia) have any application?

           4     What evidence was there before the First-tier Tribunal  as
                 to the provisions of the nationality or residency  laws  of
                 either Guatemala or the USA?

           5     What evidence was there before the First-tier Tribunal  as
                 to the temporary protection status granted to  citizens  of
                 El Salvador in the USA?"

14    Ms Patel has provided  a  short  skeleton  argument  addressing  those
      issues and I am grateful to her for provided that  document  at  short
      notice. Mr Whitwell had not been able to provide a  written  response,
      but, again, given the short notice, no criticism can be placed at  his
      door for that. However, he said that he was in a position  to  provide
      oral submissions on the points raised.

15    I heard oral submissions from the parties.

      Discussion

16    I find that the judge  materially  erred  in  law  in  dismissing  the
      appeal in a number of respects.

17    Article  1A(2)  of  the  Refugee  Convention  provides  that  for  the
      purposes of the  Convention, the term "refugee"  shall  apply  to  any
      person who:

           "... owing to well founded fear of being persecuted for  reasons
           of race,  religion,  nationality,  membership  of  a  particular
           social group or political opinion, is outside the country of his
           nationality and is unable or, owing to such fear,  is  unwilling
           to avail himself of the protection of that country; or who,  not
           having a nationality and being outside the country of his former
           habitual residence as a result of such  events,  is  unable  or,
           owing to such fear, is unwilling to return to it.

           In the case of a person who has more than one  nationality,  the
           term "the country of his nationality" shall  mean  each  of  the
           countries of which he is a national, and a person shall  not  be
           deemed to be lacking  the  protection  of  the  country  of  his
           nationality if, without any valid reason based  on  well-founded
           fear, he has not availed himself of the protection of one of the
           countries of which he is a national."

18    A further fundamental question in determining whether a person  is  to
      be treated as a refugee is to consider where it is  proposed  they  be
      removed upon removal from the United Kingdom.

19    In the present case, the respondent's decision letter  of  4  December
      2017 states that it  is  the  respondent's  intention  to  remove  the
      appellant to El Salvador. Irrespective of  whether  or  not  appellant
      possesses any other nationality, I find that the appellant is entitled
      to international protection on that  basis.  The  appellant  has  been
      found to face a real risk of serious harm  in  El  Salvador,  and  the
      respondent proposes to remove her there. Irrespective of  whether  the
      appellant is 'of', or 'has'  another  nationality,  I  find  that  the
      respondent's proposal to remove her to El  Salvador  entitled  her  to
      have her appeal allowed without more at that juncture, and  the  judge
      erred in law in failing to so find.

20    However, if I am wrong in law in making  such  a  finding,  I  further
      find that insofar as the judge has found within his decision that  the
      appellant is 'of', of 'has' nationality of  Guatemala or the  USA,  he
      errs in law.

21    Relevant here is the headnote in KK  and  others  (Nationality:  North
      Korea) Korea CG [2011] UKUT 92:

           "1 Law

           (a) For the purposes of determining whether a person is "of"  or
           "has" a nationality within the meaning of Article 1A(2)  of  the
           Refugee Convention, it  is  convenient  to  distinguish  between
           cases where a person (I) is (already) of that nationality;  (ii)
           is not of that nationality but is entitled to  acquire  it;  and
           (iii) is not of that nationality but may be able to acquire it.

           (b) Cases within (Ii and (ii) are cases where the person is "of"
           or "has" the nationality in question;  cases  within  (iii)  are
           not.

           (c)  For  these  purposes  there  is  no  separate  concept   of
           "effective"  nationality;  the  issue  is  the  availability  of
           protection in the country in question.

           (d) Nationality of any State is a matter for that  State's  law,
           constitution and (to a limited extent) practice, proof of any of
           which is by evidence, the assessment of which is for  the  court
           deciding the protection claim.

           (e) As eligibility for Refugee Convention protection  is  not  a
           matter of choice, evidence going to  a  person's  status  within
           cases (I) and (ii) has  to  be  on  "best  efforts"  basis,  and
           evidence of the attitude of the State in question  to  a  person
           who seeks reasons for not being removed to that State may be  of
           very limited relevance."

22    See also, within KK (Korea):

           "4 The phrasing of the  references  to  nationality  in  Article
           1A(2) is in the present tense: "has more than one  nationality";
           "countries of which he is a national". It may  be  necessary  to
           draw clear distinctions between three possible  situations.  The
           first is where  a  person  has  nationality  of  more  than  one
           country: that is to  say  each  of  the  countries  in  question
           recognises him as a national. The second is where  a  person  is
           entitled to nationality of a second country: that is to say that
           recognition of his nationality will depend on an application  by
           him,  but  on  the  facts  his  nationality  is  a   matter   of
           entitlement, not of discretion. The third is where a person  may
           be able to obtain nationality of a second country:  that  is  to
           say, where it cannot be said that, on application, he  would  be
           recognised  as  a  national,  but  that  he  might  be   granted
           nationality. The difference between the  first  and  the  second
           situation is of status, not of documentation. A person may be  a
           national of a country that has  not  yet  issued  him  with  any
           documentation  evidencing  that  nationality.  Such   a   person
           exemplifies the first situation, not the second.
           ...
           79. At the beginning of this determination we drew attention  to
           three possible scenarios in the interpretation of  the  multiple
           nationality  provisions  in  Article  1A(2)   of   the   Refugee
           Convention. A person may have the nationality in question; or he
           may not have it but be entitled to have  it;  or  he  may  be  a
           potential  beneficiary  of  a  discretion  to  grant   him   the
           nationality in question. The appellants fall  within  the  first
           category in relation to South Korea, and  it  is  therefore  not
           strictly necessary to consider the others. In the light  of  the
           submissions we heard, however, it is right  to  give  our  views
           briefly. We have little doubt that, where a person's acquisition
           of nationality depends on the exercise of a  discretion  by  the
           State whose nationality  he  seeks  to  acquire,  he  cannot  be
           regarded without  more  as  for  the  purposes  of  the  Refugee
           Convention having the nationality in question.

           80. If support for that view is required, it can be found in the
           Israel Law of Return Cases, MZXLT, NAGV and Katkova. The Law  of
           Return, passed by the Knesset in 1950, gave all Jews a right  to
           emigrate to Israel, but does not make even those Jews  who  seek
           to settle in Israel nationals of Israel by that very act:  there
           are provisions initially for the grant of visas and then for the
           determination of whether  nationality  is  to  be  granted.  The
           finding of McKeown J in Katkova was that

                 "the Law of Return confers a wide discretion on the Israeli
                 Minister  of  the  Interior  to  reject  applications   for
                 citizenship".

           As a result, courts have found (though not  in  every  case,  as
           discussion in Katkova makes clear) that a person who may be able
           to obtain nationality of Israel under the Law of Return  is  not
           to be regarded as being a national of Israel. Similarly, we  can
           see no general basis for treating  persons  as  nationals  of  a
           state of which they are not presently nationals,  and  of  which
           they have presently no entitlement to nationality."

23    Further, the headnote of MA  (Disputed  Nationality)  Ethiopia  [2008]
      UKAIT 00032 provides:

           "In any case of disputed nationality the first  question  to  be
           considered should be: 'Is the person de jure a national  of  the
           country  concerned?'.  This  question  is  to  be  answered   by
           examining  whether  the  person  fulfils  the  nationality   law
           requirements of his or her country. Matters such as the text  of
           nationality laws, expert evidence, relevant  documentation,  the
           appellant's own testimony, agreement  between  the  parties  and
           Foreign  Office  letters  may  all   legitimately   inform   the
           assessment. In deciding the  answer  to  be  given,  it  may  be
           relevant to examine evidence of  what  the  authorities  in  the
           appellant's country of origin have done in respect of his or her
           nationality.

           If it is concluded that the person is de jure a national of  the
           country concerned, then the next question to  be  considered  is
           purely  factual,  i.e.  'Is  it  reasonably  likely   that   the
           authorities of the state concerned will accept  the  person,  if
           returned, as one of its own nationals?'"

24    Also relevant is the case of MA (Ethiopia) v Secretary  of  State  for
      the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 289 (the same appellant as  in  MA
      (Disputed Nationality) Ethiopia [2008] UKAIT 00032). MA was a national
      of Ethiopia and was of Eritrean origin. She had left  Ethiopia  on  an
      Ethiopian passport in her name [77].   Although  she  was  de  jure  a
      national  of  Ethiopia,  i.e.  she  evidently  satisfied   the   legal
      requirements for entitlement to Ethiopian nationality, she argued that
      would not in practice be afforded the rights of a  national,  and  one
      way in which that denial of nationality would be made manifest was  by
      denying her the right to return. In that context, the Court of  Appeal
      held:

           "49 However, this is a highly unusual case in  which  it  became
           apparent during the hearing before  the  AIT  that  the  outcome
           depended upon whether the Ethiopian authorities would allow  the
           appellant to return to Ethiopia. I do not accept the appellant's
           submission that the AIT simply had to determine this question to
           the usual standard of proof. It is  a  question  which  can,  at
           least in this case, be put to the test. There is no  reason  why
           the appellant should not herself make a  formal  application  to
           the embassy to seek to obtain the  relevant  documents.  If  she
           were refused, or she came up against a brick wall and there  was
           a failure to respond to the request within a  reasonable  period
           such that a refusal could properly be inferred, the issue  would
           arise why she had been refused. Again, reasons  might  be  given
           for the refusal. Speculation by  the  AIT  about  the  embassy's
           likely response, and reliance on  expert  evidence  designed  to
           assist them to speculate in a more informed  manner  about  that
           question, would not be necessary.

           50. In my judgment, where the essential issue before the AIT  is
           whether someone will or  will  not  be  returned,  the  Tribunal
           should in the normal case require the applicant to act bona fide
           and take all reasonably practicable steps to seek to obtain  the
           requisite documents to enable her to return. There may be  cases
           where it would be unreasonable  to  require  this,  such  as  if
           disclosure of identity might  put  the  applicant  at  risk,  or
           perhaps third parties, such as relatives of  the  applicant  who
           may be at risk in the  home  state  if  it  is  known  that  the
           applicant has claimed asylum. That is not  this  case,  however.
           There is no reason why the appellant should  not  herself  visit
           the embassy to seek to obtain the relevant papers. Indeed, as  I
           have said, she did so but wrongly told the staff there that  she
           was Eritrean."

25    In the present appeal there was  no  evidence  of  the  provisions  of
      Guatemalan nationality law before the  judge.  The  respondent's  case
      was, as set out at [31], quoted above, that  the  appellant  had  'the
      option of relocation to (sic) with your family to Guatemala where  you
      (sic) husband is a citizen". The  respondent  does  not  even  make  a
      positive assertion that the appellant is  'of',  or  'has'  Guatemalan
      citizenship, or even 'may be able to acquire it', and certainly not by
      reference to any provision of Guatemalan nationality law.

26    Neither party has been able to  identify  any  relevant  authority  to
      answer the question posed at point 2 of my  directions,  above,  ie  ,
      whose burden is it  to  establish,  as  a  matter  of  law,  that  the
      appellant is 'of', or 'has' a particular nationality.  Even  accepting
      that  an  applicant  for  protection  has  the   overall   burden   of
      establishing that they are entitled to international protection  under
      the Refugee Convention, it would be unreasonable in my view to  expect
      an applicant in the appellant's  position  to  raise  for  herself  an
      argument that she has potential  entitlement  to  nationality  of  two
      countries in addition to the nationality of her country of origin, and
      then to demonstrate by evidence and argument that she is not 'of',  or
      does not 'have' such nationalities.  While  the  burden  of  proof  in
      principle rests on the applicant, the duty to ascertain  and  evaluate
      all the relevant  facts  is  shared  between  the  applicant  and  the
      examiner (UNHCR Handbook, para 196).

27    In the present case, the respondent has done nothing whatever  to  put
      before the Tribunal any material which suggests as  a  matter  of  law
      that the appellant has, prima facie, de jure entitlement to Guatemalan
      citizenship. There can be no assumption, I find, that  merely  because
      the appellant has a Guatemalan spouse, and  that  she  has  previously
      entered Guatemala, that  that  will  result  in  her  being  'of',  or
      'having' Guatemalan nationality.

28    There was therefore no  evidential  basis  for  the  judge's  apparent
      finding at [36] that the appellant fell into category 1(a)(ii) of  the
      headnote of KK Korea, and was a person who 'is not of that nationality
      but is entitled to acquire it'.

29    There was not even any evidence to suggest that  the  appellant  might
      fall into the category set out in the headnote at paragraph  1(a)(iii)
      of KK Korea, i.e. that she was not 'of' that nationality  but  may  be
      able to  acquire  it.  Even  if  evidence  had  established  that  the
      appellant might, at the discretion of the Guatemalan  authorities,  be
      granted Guatemalan citizenship, it is clear from the  head  note,  and
      paragraphs [4], [79] and [80] of KK Korea that  there  is  no  general
      basis for treating such persons as nationals of a state of which  they
      are not presently nationals, and  of  which  they  have  presently  no
      entitlement to nationality. No issue of  the  appellant  making  'best
      efforts' arose (see KK Korea headnote 1(e)).

30    I therefore find that the judge materially erred in law  in  appearing
      to find  at  [33]  to  [35]  that  the  appellant  was  of  Guatemalan
      nationality.

31    Mr. Whitwell helpfully clarifies to  me  today  that  insofar  as  the
      judge dismissed the appeal on the alternate basis that  he  found  the
      appellant could relocate to the USA, where she could have the  benefit
      of TPS or apply for citizenship there, this amounted to  an  error  of
      law, on the basis that the judge had failed  to  have  regard  to  the
      country expert report before him which demonstrated that upon  leaving
      the USA, the appellant would no  longer  be  treated  as  having  TPS.
      Similarly, he accepted that there was no evidence that  the  appellant
      could re-enter the USA to obtain TPS, or, be granted  US  citizenship.
      My observations above in relation to the lack of any  evidence  of  je
      jure entitlement to Guatemalan citizenship apply equally to  potential
      US citizenship.

32    I therefore find that  there  were  material  errors  of  law  in  the
      judge's decision, and I set it aside.

      Remaking

33    There was a tentative suggestion on the  part  of  Mr.  Whitwell  that
      further evidence on the issue of Guatemalan citizenship should be  put
      before either this Tribunal or the First tier Tribunal (if the  matter
      were remitted) in order to remake the decision under  appeal.

34    I decline to adjourn the appeal, if and insofar as  Mr.  Whitwell  was
      requesting that I do so. The respondent's case in  his  letter  of  14
      December 2017  was  opaque  at  best  from  the  outset.  It  was  not
      positively asserted by the respondent that the appellant  is  'of'  or
      'has' Guatemalan citizenship and if (and it was still  not  positively
      asserted by Mr Whitwell that this was the  case)  the  respondent  now
      seeks to assert that  the  appellant  is  'of',  or  'has'  Guatemalan
      citizenship, no effort has previously been taken during the course  of
      these proceedings through the First-tier or Upper Tribunal to  make  a
      positive assertion on those lines,  or  to  provide  any  evidence  to
      support such a proposition.

35    The appellant is it real risk of serious harm in her only  country  of
      nationality, El Salvador. The respondent intends to remove her to that
      country, which would amount  to  a  breach  of  the  United  Kingdom's
      obligations under the refugee convention, and the  appellant's  appeal
      succeeds on grounds under section 84(1)(a)  NIAA 2002.

      Decision

      The judge's decision involved the making of a material error of law.

      I set the decision aside.

      I remake the decision by allowing the appellant's  appeal  on  refugee
      grounds.


Signed:                                            Date: 21.9.18
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

This  appeal  concerns  a  protection  claim  and  the  interests  of  minor
children. Unless and until a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellants and to the respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:                                            Date: 21.9.18

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan
