
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/00357/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 January 2017                   |On 26 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     TK
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the claimant: Ms B Nunhoo, instructed by Kulendran
For the appellant:     Mr S Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence promulgated 29.11.16, allowing on  asylum,
    humanitarian protection, and human rights grounds the claimant's appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State, dated 8.1.16, to refuse
    her protection claim.

 2. The Judge heard the appeal on 2.11.16.

 3. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Murray  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    22.12.16.

 4. Thus the matter came before me on 20.1.17 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 5. In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that the decision of Judge Lawrence should be set aside.

 6. Briefly summarised, the claimant's case was that she  and  her  husband
    were members of a political party and ardent supporters  of  the  LTTE,
    such that they gave refuge to wounded LTTE combatants who had fled  Sri
    Lanka.  In  2010  first  her  husband  and  then  she   was   arrested,
    interrogated and mistreated by torture, including by being burnt with a
    cigarette butt. She also claims that she was raped. Bail was secured by
    bribery and she and her husband were released after signing a document.
    They did not surrender to bail but went into hiding until  arrangements
    were made for them to flee India. She fears that if returned  to  India
    she would be returned to prison and again mistreated.

 7. It is clear from a reading of the decision and in particular from  [28]
    that Judge Lawrence found both the claimant and her witnesses credible.
    At [30] the judge found the evidence of  physical  injuries  consistent
    with her account, and concluded that she had been  arrested,  detained,
    tortured, raped, sentenced to imprisonment, and that her  release  from
    prison was secured by bribery.

 8. The judge was satisfied that if returned to India the claimant would be
    detained in conditions which breach international norms and  is  likely
    to be sexually assaulted or raped in custody. The judge concluded  that
    she qualifies as a refugee in need  of  international  protection,  and
    cannot benefit from internal relocation. I find that the judge  made  a
    careful and detailed assessment of the  evidence  and  gave  clear  and
    cogent reasons for the conclusions drawn.

 9. The grounds of appeal complain that the judge  ignored  and  failed  to
    take into account in assessing the claimant's credibility, pursuant  to
    section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants,  etc.)
    Act 2004, of the the significant delay of  some  5  years  between  her
    arrival in the UK in 2010, on the basis of a 6-month  visit  visa,  and
    her claim for asylum made in March 2015, only after she was encountered
    by Immigration Officers and  served  with  a  notice  of  liability  to
    removal as an overstayer. It is submitted that this failure  undermines
    the overall credibility  assessment.  Allied  to  this  ground  is  the
    failure to take into account that despite allegedly being wanted by the
    authorities, the claimant went to the British High Commission to submit
    her biometrics for her visit visa, and that she left India on  her  own
    passport.

10. I accept that the judge failed to refer to the  delay  when  or  before
    assessing credibility, although it is clear that he was  aware  of  the
    fact of the delay, which is mentioned in the  decision.  I  reject  the
    submission of Ms Nunhoo that the judge expressly took  the  delay  into
    account at [29] of the decision; I cannot read that into [29]. However,
    it transpires that the claimant was asked about the  delay  during  the
    appeal hearing and as part of her evidence it was clear  that  she  was
    reluctant, for obvious reasons, to talk about the rape that took  place
    whilst she was in prison. That is certainly alluded to  at  [29],  with
    the judge referring to the  stigma  he  accepts  she  felt,  and  which
    appears to have been the reason why her husband abandoned  her  some  2
    months after arriving in the UK.

11. Although delay was not expressly taken  into  account  in  the  overall
    assessment of credibility, and accepting that the Tribunal was required
    to take account of that delay as potentially  damaging  the  claimant's
    credibility, I find that the error cannot be material. Given the extent
    to which the judge accepted virtually every  part  of  the  appellant's
    case, it cannot be that even with taking full account of the  delay  in
    claiming asylum as damaging to her credibility, the section  8  matters
    could have resulted in any different  outcome.  If,  for  example,  the
    judge had  reached  the  finding  he  did  on  credibility  as  to  the
    claimant's account, as well as that of her witnesses,  and  noting  the
    expert evidence fully supported her account, but then stated because of
    the section  8  delay  delay  considerations  the  account  had  to  be
    rejected, it would have been perverse and irrational. On the  facts  of
    this case, I cannot see that even taking full account of the five  year
    delay  as  damaging  the  claimant's  credibility,  and  ignoring   any
    reluctance to talk about the  distressing  events  such  as  rape,  any
    different conclusion as to the core claim could have been  reached.  In
    the circumstances, I reach  the  conclusion  that  the  error  was  not
    material.

12. A further and potentially more significant ground of appeal is that  it
    is alleged that the judge  failed  to  make  findings  as  to  why  the
    claimant would still be at risk some 5 years or more after the  claimed
    events, and why the State of India would have any  continuing  interest
    in her, save for a passing reference to an anonymous  phone  call,  the
    significance of which is said to be unclear.

13. However, a simple consideration of the accepted  facts  fully  explains
    why the judge accepted that  she  would  be  at  risk  on  return.  The
    claimant was not  merely  released  from  prison  on  completion  of  a
    sentence, but was released  on  bail,  which  was  itself  obtained  by
    bribery. Being on bail implies that the  claimant  would  have  had  an
    obligation to return to court or prison at some point  in  the  future.
    She avoided that criminal legal process  by  fleeing  the  country.  It
    follows that on return to India she is liable to be returned to  prison
    and further prosecuted for jumping bail. There may also be some adverse
    consequences arising from obtaining her release through corruption.

14. The judge addressed prison conditions in India from [11] onwards of the
    decision, referring to the Home Office COIS report, which in turn cites
    a 2013 US State Department report describing poor prison conditions  in
    India, which do  not  meet  international  standards,  and  that  there
    continues  to  be  a  serious  problem  of  custodial  rape  of  female
    detainees. The claimant asserts that not only  was  she  raped  by  two
    policemen, but that afterwards they put  a  stick  up  her  vagina.  On
    examination of the claimant's genital area, the expert witness observed
    direct trauma which could be due to traumatic  sexual  intercourse  and
    was thus consistent with the claimant's account.

15. In the circumstances, I find that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has
    given clear, cogent reasons justifying why the claimant would still  be
    at risk on return, even 5  or  more  years  after  fleeing  India.  The
    evidence is that she is likely to remain of  adverse  interest  to  the
    authorities and that if imprisoned, she is at real risk of mistreatment
    or a real risk of serious harm.

16. It follows that the grounds  of  appeal  fail  to  identify  sufficient
    material error of law in the making of the decision to require it to be
    set aside. Neither can it be said that the  decision  was  perverse  or
    irrational.

17. If satisfied to the lower standard of proof that the claimant qualified
    for refugee status, it was unnecessary for the judge to also allow  the
    appeal on humanitarian protection and human rights grounds. However, it
    make no material different to the outcome or consequences  of  allowing
    the appeal.

Conclusions:

18. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should
    be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  asylum
                    grounds stands and the appeal of  the  claimant  remains
                    allowed.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated        23 August 2021


Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
Rules 2014.
Given the circumstances, I continue the anonymity order.




Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: No fee is payable and thus no fee award can be made.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated        23 August 2021
