
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
PA/00264/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                     |       Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 22nd May 2017                      |       On 31st May 2017               |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   mr S.U.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Diwncyz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss Hulse, Counsel

Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal. As a protection
claim, it is appropriate to continue that direction.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of State. Mr.  S.U.
    is the Respondent.  However for the sake of clarity I  shall  refer  to
    the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal; the  Secretary
    of State as "the Respondent" and Mr S.U. as "the Appellant".

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born 29th September  1980.   He
    is married.  His wife, who is a dependent upon his  claim,  is  also  a
    citizen of Sri Lanka. The Appellant and his wife have a young  daughter
    born in the United Kingdom.

 3. The Appellant originally entered the UK  as  a  student  in  2010.   He
    remained in the UK and was granted an extension to  his  original  visa
    for post study leave valid to December  2015.   On  13th  May  2014  he
    returned to Sri Lanka in  order  to  marry  his  wife.   Following  the
    wedding he returned to the UK on 26th May 2014.  His wife  remained  in
    Sri Lanka arriving in the UK at a later date.

 4. On 16th January 2015 the Appellant applied outside the Rules for  leave
    to remain indefinitely.  This  was  refused  on  26th  April  2015  and
    thereafter he claimed asylum citing mistreatment by the authorities  in
    Sri Lanka on account of his Tamil ethnicity and because the authorities
    suspected him of involvement with the LTTE.  The Appellant claimed that
    when he was working in a first aid camp for a  voluntary  organisation,
    he aided the escape of three wounded LTTE members.  He helped the three
    escape for humanitarian reasons and because one of the escapees was  an
    old classmate.  In addition his wife was mistreated by the  authorities
    when they came looking for him after he left Sri Lanka to return to the
    UK.

 5. The Respondent did not accept the claim and refused it  by  a  decision
    dated 23rd December 2015.  The Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 6. His appeal was heard by the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Andonian)  on
    25th November 2016 and by a decision promulgated on 21st December 2016,
    it was allowed.

 7. Application for permission to appeal the FtT's decision was  lodged  by
    the Respondent and permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Chohan.   The  permission  grant  which  refers  to  the   grounds   of
    application set out that permission was sought because:

       . the judge failed to make adequate findings of fact and give  proper
         reasons for his decision; and

       . the judge failed  to  give  proper  consideration  to  the  country
         guidance case of GJ (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013]
         UKUT 319 (IAC). Permission having been  granted,  the  matter  came
         before me in the Upper Tribunal to determine whether  the  decision
         of the First-tier Tribunal contains such error of law requiring  it
         to be set aside and remade.



UT Hearing

 8. Before me Mr Diwncyz appeared for the Secretary of State and Miss Hulse
    for  the  Appellant.   Mr  Diwncyz  referred  to  the  grounds  seeking
    permission.  He submitted that  the  FtT  had  failed  to  make  proper
    findings  of  fact  on  the  central  issue,  which  was  whether   the
    Appellant's claim that he was suspected by the Sri  Lankan  authorities
    of being involved with the LTTE was a credible one.  The  Secretary  of
    State had set out in the Reasons for Refusal  letter  detailed  reasons
    why the claim was not made out.  The FtT  had  simply  not  dealt  with
    these points.

 9. Further there had been no proper consideration of the country  guidance
    case of GJ  and  Others.  These  were  material  errors  requiring  the
    decision to be set aside and remade with a proper consideration of  the
    evidence.

10. Miss Hulse on behalf of the Appellant said that she accepted  that  the
    decision was succinct but said that it addressed both issues complained
    of by the Respondent.  She referred to [30] and said it is  clear  that
    the  judge,  by  referencing  the  medical   evidence   including   the
    psychiatric report, accepted that the Appellant had  a  fear  of  being
    returned to Sri Lanka. The medical evidence supported his case.

11. She then referred to [28] and submitted  firstly  that  the  judge  had
    recognised that the Appellant was relying on GJ and Others but that  he
    was also relying on  paragraph  50  of  NT  (no  citation  in  the  FtT
    decision).  She submitted that the judge  had  kept  in  mind  evidence
    which was before  him  that  the  Appellant  had  engaged  in  diaspora
    activity by attending demonstrations against the Sri Lankan Government.
     I asked her to take me to that part of the FtT's  decision  where  the
    judge discussed and made  findings  that  the  Appellant  had  attended
    demonstrations in the UK. (Miss Hulse  had  appeared  at  the  original
    hearing before the FtT).  She accepted that she was unable to point  to
    clear findings of fact in the decision concerning  demonstrations  that
    the Appellant claimed to have attended in the  UK.   This  was  despite
    evidence being led at the FtT hearing.

12. Finally, Miss Hulse referred to [31] and [32] of the decision and  said
    that the judge had acknowledged that the Appellant's wife  was  tearful
    when recounting her claim of being raped and that he  had  to  rise  to
    allow her to recompose.  She submitted that the judge  noted  that  the
    Appellant himself was in tears when recounting the beatings and pain he
    had sustained.  She said that, in noting this, the judge made it  clear
    that he accepted the  Appellant's  account  as  credible.   Whilst  she
    accepted  that  the  decision  was  succinct,  nevertheless  it  was  a
    sustainable one.


Consideration of Error of Law

13. I find I am satisfied that the decision of the FtT contains an error of
    law requiring it to be set aside and remade.  It is  correct  that  the
    judge sets out in a considerable amount of detail, the Appellant's case
    as given in oral evidence before him [7] to [15].  He also sets out the
    Appellant's immigration history and details of the medical evidence put
    forward on the Appellant's behalf. There was a good  deal  of  evidence
    which required analysis.

14. There then follows in the decision a  heading  entitled  "Conclusions".
    Under that heading the judge simply once more spends several paragraphs
    reiterating parts of the Appellant's case, the burden of proof, and the
    S.8 issue.

15. It is not until the end of the decision  at  [31]  that  there  is  any
    reasoning which could be said to arrive at a conclusion. It amounts  to
    this, the judge saying in one sentence that the evidence in cases  such
    as this has to be looked at holistically.  He then notes the  demeanour
    of the Appellant (and his wife) when giving evidence and simply sums up
    the appeal at [32] with the words:

         "Having regard to  all  the  circumstances  of  the  case  and  the
         objective evidence I believe the appellant's (sic) have discharged
         the burden of proof incumbent upon them on the lower standard."

16. This decision I find falls far short of that required to show that  the
    judge has dealt with the issues raised by the Respondent. The judge has
    simply accepted the Appellant's credibility without showing the pathway
    by which he has reached that conclusion. This has led to a  failure  to
    acknowledge and grapple with the  central  issue  which  was  that  the
    Respondent did not accept the Appellant's claim that he  was  suspected
    of being involved with the LTTE in Sri Lanka.

17. Added to this and interrelated to the central  issue  it  is  incumbent
    upon a Tribunal dealing with an appeal such as this one to have careful
    regard to the guidance issued by the Upper Tribunal in the relevant  CG
    case law in order to evaluate the risk on  return.   I  see  no  proper
    consideration or application of  GJ.   The  only  reference  to  GJ  is
    contained in [28] and amounts to two lines saying:

          "the Appellant relied on GJ and Others and the  head  notes  there
         provided.  He also relied on MP and NT and paragraph 50 (sic)."

18. Furthermore it was part of the Appellant's case seemingly that  he  had
    been involved in demonstrations in the UK, and potentially  this  would
    mean that he came to the  notice  of  the  Sri  Lankan  Authorities  on
    return.  Miss Hulse said  this  evidence  was  put  before  the  judge.
    However there is no finding made on this  evidence,  merely  a  passing
    reference in [26].  This reinforces my conclusion that  the  judge  has
    not demonstrated that he has proper regard to the relevant case law.

19. For the foregoing reasons I find that there are material errors of  law
    in the judge's decision allowing the Appellant's appeal.  The  decision
    is set aside in its entirety. It will have to be  remade.   Because  of
    the nature and  extent  of  judicial  fact-finding  necessary  for  the
    decision to be remade, I find it is appropriate to remit  the  case  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.  The fresh hearing should be  before  a  judge
    other than Judge Andonian.



Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed.  The matter is now  remitted  to
the First-tier Tribunal for the decision to be remade (not Judge  Andonian).



Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     28 May 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     28 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts






